                     Stay on Track for the PMP(R) E xam with



                      200 Prep Questions




This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged.

Items (questions with answering options) from this document may be copied and discussed in public forums
and Internet discussion groups as long as the source is correctly stated. In such case please inform the author
to allow his contribution to the discussion, if necessary.

Visit www.oliverlehmann.com and find many more free sample questions to prepare for the PMP exam.

Feedback is welcome at oliver@oliverlehmann.com.

Document version: 3.0
    This prep test was written by:

            Oliver F. Lehmann, MSc., PMP, PSM

            Email:    oliver@oliverlehmann.com


    and


            Antje Lehmann-Benz, M.A., PMP, PMI-ACP, PSM

            Email:    antje@oliverlehmann.com




    Questions are based on:
              PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition
              PMP(R) Examination Content Outline


    Language aids:
              PMI offers language aids to the real exam in
              ten languages.
              A German and an Italian language aid for this
              prep test are available for free
              download here.
              If you wish to develop a language aid in your own language, don't hesitate to
              contact us and ask for support. Language aid development is a great exercise if
              you want to get prepared for the PMP exam.




    This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
    out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
    sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


2                           (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
                                                Preface




Contents                                                                                  Page

     Questions                                                                                    5

     Answers and References                                                                     99



This document is intended to help you prepare yourself for the PMP(R) (Project Management Professional) exam,
offered by PMI(R) (the Project Management Institute). In order to pass this preparation test, you should correctly
answer 150 out of 200 questions in 4 hours, like in the real exam.

This document includes 200 PMP1 prep test items (questions & answers). Each question has one best answer.

The process of item generation and review for this prep test tightly follows the description in the PMP Credential
Handbook2, page 15, published by PMI.


         Try to answer all questions in 4 hours.

                 Start time:              :              + 3:30 hours = finish time:              :
            Required result:           150                            Your test result



Answers to the questions can be found from page 99 onwards.




     1
      PMP, PMI and PMBOK are marks of the Project Management Institute, Newtown Square, PA, USA, which are regis-
     tered in the USA and in other nations. PMI has not reviewed this document for appropriateness.
     2
       Download at https://www.pmi.org/-/media/pmi/documents/public/pdf/certifications/project-management-profes-
     sional-handbook.pdf.


This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                         (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                    3
                                                 Questions


           1.     Being assigned as a project manager, you noticed during project execution that
                  conflicts arise in the team on both technical and interpersonal levels. What is an
                  appropriate way of handling conflicts?1

                  o Conflicts distract the team and disrupt the work rhythm. You should always
                     smooth them when they surface.

                  o A conflict should be handled in a meeting so that the entire team can
                     participate in finding a solution.

                  o Conflicts should be addressed early and usually in private, using a direct,
                     collaborative approach.

                  o You should use your coercive power to quickly resolve conflicts and then focus
                     on goal achievement.



           2.     What is the purpose of a project charter? 2

                  o To formally authorize a project or a phase and document initial requirements
                     which satisfy the stakeholder's needs and expectations.

                  o To document how the project will be planned, executed, monitored/controlled,
                     and closed.

                  o To link the project, which is going to be planned, executed, and
                     monitored/controlled to the ongoing work of the organization.

                  o To describe the process of performing the work defined in the project
                     management plan in order to achieve the project's objectives.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                     5
           3.     The concept of (the) _________ states that changes related to one
                  requirement--scope, time, or cost--will at least influence one other element.3

                  o Three-point estimation
                  o Triple constraint
                  o Three wise men
                  o Three needs theory


           4.     Your organization is considering to run a project which will entail an investment
                  of $1,000,000. The product from the project is forecasted to create revenues of
                  $250,000 in the first year after the end of the project and of $420,000 in each of
                  the two following years.

                  What is true for the net present value of the project over the three years cycle at
                  a discount rate of 10%?4

                  o The net present value is positive, which makes the project attractive.
                  o The net present value is positive, which makes the project unattractive.
                  o The net present value is negative, which makes the project attractive.
                  o The net present value is negative, which makes the project unattractive.


           5.     What does the term best practice often refer to?5

                  o A standardized set of deliverables, like plans, reports, and checklists.
                  o A set of tools and techniques that a project manager should master.
                  o The concept of state of the art applied to project management.
                  o A specific sequence of work, described in terms of soft logic.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 6                              (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           6.     The communications management plan is a document which includes descriptions
                  of6

                  o Project level performance reports
                  o Activity level status reports
                  o Stakeholder communication requirements
                  o Project benefit analysis results


           7.     _________ are usually not a manifestation of unique organizational cultures and
                  styles.7

                  o Shared visions, values, norms, beliefs, and expectations
                  o Individual traits and attitudes of co-workers
                  o Views of authority relationships
                  o Policies, methods, and procedures


           8.     Which of the following is generally not regarded as an element of active
                  listening?8

                  o Making eye contact
                  o Paraphrasing
                  o Interpreting the information
                  o Interrupting when appropriate




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                     7
           9.     You were able to obtain measuring equipment with very high accuracy and
                  precision. You used it to make a sequence of measurements directly at a
                  production process output and depicted the results on the following control chart.

                                                                             USL



                     X




                                                                             LSL
                                                                         t

                  Which statement is the best conclusion from these results? 9

                  o The process has high precision but low accuracy. It should be adjusted.
                  o The process has high precision but low accuracy. It should be improved.
                  o The process has high accuracy but low precision. It should be adjusted.
                  o The process has high accuracy but low precision. It should be improved.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 8                              (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           10.    As the project manager, you decided to arrange a team meeting to identify and
                  analyze lessons learned from quality control with stakeholders. What should you
                  do with them?10

                  o Document them and make them part of the historical database for the project
                     and the performing organization.

                  o Discuss them with management and make sure that they remain otherwise
                     confidential

                  o Publish them in the corporate newsletter.
                  o Follow your strategic decisions, independent from lessons learned. These
                     decisions have been made and should be implemented whatever the outcomes
                     are.



           11.    Which of the following documents is not used as input for the validate scope
                  process? 11

                  o The project management plan, containing the scope baseline consisting of the
                     project scope statement and its associated WBS and WBS dictionary.

                  o The verified deliverables, completed and checked for correctness by the
                     Control quality process.

                  o The requirements traceability matrix, linking requirements to their origin and
                     tracing them throughout the project lifecycle.

                  o The RACI matrix, describing accountabilities in case of product rejection.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                     9
           12.    How should change management be planned for?12

                  o Changes are generally not predictable, therefore planning for change
                     management cannot be reasonable.

                  o Planning for change management should be done while the various change
                     control processes are being applied.

                  o Change management can be planned in a set of management plans or a
                     specific change management plan.

                  o Changes are a sign of bad planning. One should avoid changes during a
                     project, thus eliminating the need to manage them.



           13.    According to Bruce Tuckman, what are the stages of team development?13

                  o Honeymoon, rejection, regression, acceptance, re-entry
                  o Forming, storming, norming, performing
                  o Tell, sell, consult, join
                  o Direct, support, coach, delegate




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 10                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           14.    What is not a reason for companies to organize lessons learned?14

                  o Lessons learned databases are an essential element of the organizational
                     process assets.

                  o Lessons learned should focus on identifying those accountable for errors and
                     failures.

                  o Lessons learned sessions should bring about recommendations to improve
                     future performance on projects.

                  o Phase-end lessons learned sessions provide a good team building exercise for
                     project staff members.



           15.    How does a project management team stay in touch with the work and the
                  attitudes of project team members?15

                  o By observation and communication
                  o Using closed questions during team meetings
                  o Through third-party assessments
                  o Through the team members' functional managers


           16.    Which document is developed along the risk management processes from identify
                  risks through plan and implement risk responses to monitor risks?16

                  o List of risk triggers
                  o Risk register
                  o Risk mitigation
                  o Decision tree


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   11
           17.    A customer is requiring a minor scope change and expects you to do this without
                  delays and additional costs. You believe that you have adequate authorization to
                  make the decision by yourself, but you are not quite sure.

                  What should be your next steps?17

                  o A requested change is always an opportunity to get more money paid by the
                     customer and to secretly solve schedule and quality problems. You should
                     make some reasonable estimates on time, costs, risks etc. and then add a nice
                     margin on top of that to calculate the new price.

                  o Customer satisfaction is your top priority. The customer gives you an
                     opportunity to increase their satisfaction, which you should use to the
                     maximum benefit. Most project managers have contingencies to cover risks;
                     these can be used to pay the additional costs.

                  o Before making a decision you should have a look at the customer's parking lot.
                     If you find there many expensive, new models, it is likely that you can use the
                     requested change to increase the profit from the contract. Otherwise you
                     should reject the request.

                  o Handle the request according to the integrated change control processes
                     described in your management plans. Then make a decision together with the
                     appropriate change control body, whether the increased customer satisfaction
                     will be worth the extra costs, work, risks etc.



           18.    A facilitator should...18

                  o ...be in full control of the discussion and its outcomes.
                  o ...always take notes by herself.
                  o ...avoid a flip chart parking lot.
                  o ...give guidance as required without interfering.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 12                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           19.    As the project manager in a software project which is currently initiated, you
                  want to assess high-level risks. What should you do?19

                  o Develop the project charter and a risk management plan to start identifying
                     risks based on those and other documents.

                  o Identify and analyze risk events using qualitative and quantitative techniques.
                  o Develop contingency plans and fallback plans in case the original plan proves
                     wrong.

                  o Discuss the risks documented in your Risk register with the project key
                     stakeholders.



           20.    In most jurisdictions, a legally required order of formal statements establishing a
                  contract is:20

                  o Invitation to treat, offer, PO
                  o Inquiry, bid, order
                  o Offer, acceptance
                  o MoU, LoI, final agreement


           21.    What should managers consider before conducting a performance evaluation
                  interview with a project team member? 21

                  o Which management fallacies can most easily be delegated to the worker?
                  o How can discussion of the manager's leadership style be avoided?
                  o Has the employee been provided with sufficient instructions and work tools?
                  o How can dispute related to unsatisfactory performance be avoided?


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   13
           22.    Which statement describes best handling of assumptions during the initiating
                  processes?22

                  o It is the responsibility of the sales person in charge to identify all risks related
                     to a customer project.

                  o Managing and organizing assumptions means avoiding risks right from the
                     start of the project.

                  o Organizational, environmental and external assumptions should be addressed
                     by the project charter.

                  o Risks are a sign of uncertainty. Avoiding all uncertainties means that a project
                     should have no risks at all.



           23.    A WBS dictionary is a document which...23

                  o ... describes technical terms used for scope management.
                  o ... describes the details for each component in the WBS.
                  o ... translates essential WBS terms for global project teams.
                  o ... helps translate functional into technical requirements.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 14                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           24.    You are in the process of contacting sellers to obtain bids and proposals. You
                  found out that it might become a time-consuming procedure to ensure that the
                  sellers get a clear and common understanding of the procurement process and of
                  the needs of your project. Which technique may help you save time?24

                  o Bidder conferences
                  o Advertising
                  o Qualified sellers list
                  o Four-eyes meetings


           25.    As a project manager, when should you especially consider cultural differences?25

                  o When you break down scope to create a work breakdown structure (WBS).
                  o When you assign a human resources to do the work in a schedule activity.
                  o When you develop acceptance criteria for work results to be achieved by the
                     team members.

                  o When you decide upon recognition and awards during team development.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   15
           26.    At the beginning of project execution, you notice different opinions between team
                  members relating to project work and deliverables and to the level of overall
                  complexity. What should you do right now?26

                  o Give your team members some time to develop a common understanding of
                     the project scope and product scope. Upcoming interface problems may be
                     resolved later.

                  o Use the risk management processes to identify and assess risks caused by
                     misunderstandings and develop a plan with measures in order to respond to
                     them.

                  o Organize meetings to identify and resolve misunderstandings between team
                     members in order to avoid interface problems, disintegration and costly
                     rework early in the project.

                  o Use interviews in private with each individual team member to inform them of
                     your expectations and your requirements in an atmosphere of confidence.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 16                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           27.    You have just taken over as manager of a project that will create many benefits
                  for the performing organization, but you sense a high level of resistance in
                  various stakeholders right from the start. What is the most appropriate action to
                  resolve the problem?27

                  o Develop a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) which clearly shows the
                     responsibility of each stakeholder for the various project activities and who
                     needs to be consulted and informed.

                  o Develop an organization diagram, which places each of the stakeholders at an
                     appropriate position inside the project and allows for certain lines of
                     communication while disallowing others.

                  o Schedule a meeting with these stakeholders to present the project, discuss
                     and establish ground rules, ensure their involvement and identify initial
                     personal and organizational issues.

                  o Do not talk to these stakeholders too much at this time, instead create faits
                     accomplis, which will later force the stakeholders to support the project due to
                     a lack of alternatives for them.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   17
           28.    You are in the process of planning a project and found that stakeholders often
                  have varying objectives and requirements. This makes it hard to come up with a
                  plan with which all objectives will be met. What is probably most helpful to
                  ensure common understanding?28

                  o Ask the project stakeholders to build focus groups in order to discuss and
                     remedy conflicting interests.

                  o Create an exhaustive document describing your point of view and ask
                     stakeholders to review it.

                  o Let each stakeholder write a statement of work, merge the documents to a
                     project scope statement.

                  o Use your authorization as the project manager to clearly prioritize the different
                     objectives.



           29.    Projects frequently do not meet customer expectations for which of the following
                  reasons? 29

                  o Poor risk management by the contractor running the project
                  o Poor technical ability of the contractor running the project for the customer
                  o Technical inability and poor risk management by the contractor
                  o Unclear scope definition by the customer for whom the project is performed




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 18                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           30.    What is typical for critical path project management?30

                  o Forward and backward pass analysis
                  o Level-of-effort activities
                  o Management of security protocols
                  o Management of resource over-allocations


           31.    You are the project manager for the development of a new type of power plant.
                  Your project is making fast progress, and it is getting nearer to the day of
                  product acceptance. Which technique will be most important for product
                  acceptance?31

                  o Inspection
                  o Quality audit
                  o Impact analysis
                  o Team review


           32.    What are the cost types in modern quality management?32

                  o Costs of good quality - costs of bad quality
                  o Planning costs - assurance costs - control costs
                  o Planning costs - doing costs - checking costs - acting costs
                  o Prevention costs - appraisal costs - failure costs




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   19
           33.    During the execution of a project to build a complex defense system, your team
                  has run into a deep crisis.

                  The project's goal and objectives have been challenging right from the start, but
                  now you have discovered that your team members have become increasingly
                  unaware of them. Being busy solving detail problems, they often fail to
                  understand the overall requirements. Then they develop solutions which resolve
                  issues in their area of limited responsibility, while causing new problems at the
                  interfaces with other system components.

                  Meanwhile, the team members show signs of growing frustration, and time is
                  running away. How can you help your team in this situation? 33

                  o Accompany your team members along a sequence of maturity levels from
                     dependence through independence to interdependence.

                  o Ignore the low-level issues and focus on achieving the overall requirements,
                     details can be sorted out during test and handover.

                  o If everybody simply does their jobs, then there should be no problem. Make
                     sure that team members are fully aware of their accountability.

                  o Problems of this dimension have their origin in fundamental personal
                     incompatibilities between team members. You should replace them all.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 20                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           34.    For a project, the following earned value data have been assessed:

                  AC:       $        4,000,000
                  CV:       $        -500,000
                  SPI:               1.12
                  BaC:      $        9,650,000

                  What is the earned value of the project? 34

                  o $3,000,000
                  o $3,500,000
                  o $4,480,000
                  o $5,650,000




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                                (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   21
           35.    During execution in a project to build a major road bridge, your team found a
                  major flaw in the technical drawings. On an ad-hoc base, they had to find and
                  implement a workaround to avoid delays and mitigate technical problems. What
                  should you do next?35

                  o Meticulously document the problem and the workaround to create a requested
                     change to the project management plan, which will then be passed to the
                     body responsible for the change control decision.

                  o The workaround was performed on a technical level only. As long as it does
                     not influence the function of the bridge or the organizational configuration of
                     the project, a change request will not be necessary.

                  o A retroactive formal change request side is not reasonable. Create some
                     additional documents describing the workaround and sign them by yourself,
                     you can present them during the next regular CCB meeting.

                  o It is normal in projects that during project execution inconsistencies arise
                     between planning documents and actual implementation. This is no problem
                     as long as the functional status of the product is maintained.



           36.    You recently took over the assignment for a project. The project charter has been
                  developed. What is an appropriate next step for you?36

                  o Develop the risk register.
                  o Develop the project milestone schedule.
                  o Develop management plans.
                  o Get approval for the project management plan.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 22                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           37.    You scheduled a kick-off meeting in order to announce the start of your project,
                  present the plan and develop consensus on it. Another topic will be explanation of
                  each team member's role. In addition, you planned some time for discussions.

                  You published the agenda of the kick-off meeting some weeks ago to all invited
                  attendees.

                  Now, short term before the event, you receive various cancellations by team
                  members, who say that they cannot join the meeting. But they will be with you
                  when project work will start.37

                  o The kick-off meeting is secondary, you are happy if the team members will do
                     their jobs.

                  o You should insist on the presence of the team members to the appointed date.
                  o If you force team members' presence, they would anyway be distracted by
                     their current problems.

                  o It is probably a good idea to reschedule the meeting to a day, when all team
                     members can attend.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   23
           38.    During a meeting, a discussion came up: To which degree does your project have
                  to be compliant to the processes enumerated in the PMBOK(R) Guide? What should
                  be the guiding principle to answer this question? 38

                  o The processes are meant as rough guidelines to which a team should only
                     adhere if there is enough consensus.

                  o The more processes the project team follows, the better the project's
                     performance will be.

                  o The project manager must follow all 49 processes for project management
                     without alterations.

                  o The project team must select appropriate processes required to meet the
                     project requirements.



           39.    Product acceptance criteria should be laid down in which document?39

                  o Project scope statement
                  o Work breakdown structure
                  o Resource assignments
                  o Project scope management plan


           40.    The cost baseline is developed during which process?40

                  o Perform integrated change control
                  o Estimate costs
                  o Develop schedule
                  o Determine budget



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 24                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           41.    During project execution you found out that work is often not performed at the
                  right time and in the right order. Deliverables are made by one team member
                  that cannot be processed by another one. This already leads to timely rework and
                  bad morale among team members.

                  Which project management tool is most appropriate to deal with problems like
                  this?41

                  o Organization chart
                  o RACI matrix
                  o Communications management plan
                  o Work authorization system


           42.    Your management is applying the 10 percent solution: It has requested that you
                  reduce the budget for the project which you are currently initiating by 10%. What
                  will this probably mean for your project? 42

                  o If the budget is cut by 10%, then the project will have an accompanying
                     degradation of quality by 10%.

                  o If the project budget is an honest one, then a reduction in budget must be
                     accompanied by a trade-off in either time or performance.

                  o A 10% reduction in budget will be accompanied by a loss of performance much
                     less than the target reduction in cost.

                  o Most projects have "padded" estimates, and the budgetary reduction will force
                     out the padding from the project.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   25
           43.    While applying procurement management processes in your project, you
                  identified the need to gain a more objective understanding of sellers' capabilities
                  in order to rank proposals and develop a negotiating sequence.

                  Which technique may help avoid bias and subjective decisions best?43

                  o Bidder conference
                  o Weighting system
                  o Oral contract
                  o Letter of intent


           44.    During code inspection in a major software development project, a project
                  management team identified frequent occurrences of critical programming errors.
                  These errors are scattered across the code and occur without a discernible
                  pattern.
                  Which tool is most likely to help the team identify areas of error concentration in
                  order to develop a prioritized response strategy?44

                  o Check sheet
                  o Influence diagram
                  o Decision tree
                  o Process decision program chart




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 26                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           45.    The term baseline is used in both disciplines project management and
                  configuration management. Which statement is not true?45

                  o Baselines in system configurations are often also referred to as deltas.
                  o In configuration management, baselines are used to control change.
                  o Project management baselines are used for performance measurement.
                  o In project management, baselines help assess variance and trends.


           46.    In a project, a cost incentive contract has been awarded to a contractor with the
                  following parameters:

                     Target cost:                                    $1,000,000
                     Target contractor fee:                            $100,000
                     Cost benefit sharing ratio:                       80%/20%
                     Price ceiling:                                  $1,200,000

                  What is the point of total assumption (PTA, breakpoint) of the project?46

                  o $1,000,000
                  o $1,100,000
                  o $1,125,000
                  o $1,200,000




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   27
           47.    The scope baseline includes____.47

                  o The various management plans of the project
                  o Schedule baseline and cost baseline
                  o Product configuration ID and statement of work
                  o WBS dictionary, WBS, scope statement


           48.    During human resource planning you identified that your team members are not
                  sufficiently qualified for their tasks. Which may be an appropriate solution to this
                  problem?48

                  o Reduce level of effort
                  o Develop a training plan
                  o Plan quality audits
                  o Plan quality inspections


           49.    What is typical for high-context cultures?49

                  o Technical means for communications can focus on transfer of spoken and
                     written language.

                  o Communication is preferred which avoids passing over a great deal of
                     additional information.

                  o A message has little meaning without an understanding of the surrounding
                     context.

                  o To understand a message, no information on history or personal opinions                       is
                     needed.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 28                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           50.    In general, processes of configuration management do not include...50

                  o ...identification and documentation of system or item characteristics.
                  o ...controlling changes to these characteristics in an integrative fashion.
                  o ...documenting and auditing changes and the implementation status.
                  o ...assigning responsibilities for change control and documentation.


           51.    The ________ is a document which describes how the project management team
                  will implement the performing organization's quality policy. 51

                  o Quality assurance plan
                  o Quality management plan
                  o Quality commitment
                  o Quality audit


           52.    What do you expect when you are submitting an invitation for bid to sellers?52

                  o Offers which will differ significantly in solution approach and price.
                  o Offers which are similar enough to allow a selection based on price.
                  o Offers which are not primarily written to win against competition.
                  o General information on a seller's ability to provide the goods or services.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   29
           53.    What is important for quality auditors?53

                  o They must be in-house personnel.
                  o They must be external-party staff.
                  o They must be mandated by the auditee.
                  o They must be properly trained.


           54.    What is best used to calculate the profit from an internal project?54

                  o Discounted net revenues from the product over n years minus project costs for
                     internal charges

                  o Discounted net savings from the product over n years minus project costs for
                     internal charges

                  o The economic value added (EVA) to the organization taking into account taxes
                     and capital costs

                  o The reduction in total cost of ownership (TCO) of the current product
                     compared with its predecessor product




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 30                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           55.    You are running a major project with four sub-projects. Each of the sub-project
                  managers has developed a risk management plan, identified many risks,
                  analyzed them and planned for risk response.

                  It is now two months later. What should you not do?55

                  o Ensure that they handle all risks to save you from project level risk control.
                  o Make sure that the sub project managers monitor their project work for new
                     and changing risks.

                  o Make sure that the sub project managers keep track of the identified risks and
                     those on the watch list.

                  o Make sure that the sub-project managers monitor trigger conditions for
                     contingency plans.



           56.    What is true for statistical sampling?56

                  o Statistical sampling can be used to verify for each individual item in a lot,
                     whether it can be accepted or must be rejected.

                  o Attribute sampling means collection of quantitative data showing the level of
                     conformity for each item of a sample.

                  o Variables sampling includes collection of quantitative data on the degree of
                     conformity for each item of a sample.

                  o Statistical sampling is commonly used in quality assurance to examine if items
                     of a lot conform to quality standards.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   31
                                                                                                 57
           57.    Geert Hofstede's cultural dimension of individualism refers to...

                  o ...the degree of dependence relationships between individuals.
                  o ...the significance of the person versus that of the group.
                  o ...the identification with the gender role of an individual.
                  o ...the tolerance for ambiguity or uncertainty in the workplace.


           58.    What is not true for change requests?58

                  o Change requests should always be handled in a controlled and integrative
                     fashion.

                  o Change requests surpassing the formal change control processes can lead to
                     scope creep.

                  o Professionally managed, change requests can help improving a project and
                     resolving emerging problems.

                  o Change requests are always a sign of bad planning and should therefore be
                     avoided.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 32                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           59.    You recently assigned staff members to activities, estimated work and scheduled
                  your project. You then created the following resource histogram for your staff:




                     100%




                       0%
                                                                             Project weeks
                  What does this diagram tell you?         59



                  o The project can probably not be finished as scheduled.
                  o You may be able to finish the project early by reassigning work.
                  o You should avoid network logic diagramming for scheduling.
                  o You may run into problems with dual reporting relationships.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   33
           60.    A project manager's PDM network schedule gets audited by a scheduling expert.
                  The expert tells the project manager to focus more on nodes with "path
                  convergence", also known as "sinks". What is the person referring to?60

                  o Nodes in a WBS, where several branches are brought back together.
                  o Nodes in a conditional network diagram, at which it becomes deterministic.
                  o Nodes in a decision tree, showing various branches with the same chance.
                  o Nodes in a network logic diagram which have multiple predecessors.


           61.    The members of your project team have been assigned to your project with
                  general availability levels of 50%.

                  Yesterday, they reported to you that significant variances occurred during project
                  execution. You have noted that the team members have been spending less than
                  50% of their time working on your project. Your project schedule is about to
                  become heavily delayed, and deadlines are in jeopardy. What should you do?61

                  o Talk to your sponsor and try to get more resources assigned on similar
                     conditions as the existing ones.

                  o Talk with functional managers. Negotiate clear and written assignments with
                     reliable scheduling priorities.

                  o Ignore the difficulties, adjust your schedule and negotiate new deadlines
                     according to the slower progress.

                  o Focus on internal charges. Make sure that your project is not getting charged
                     for more than the actual work.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 34                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           62.    What is the meaning of the acronym CSOW?62

                  o A statement of work that is part of a contingency plan; it is commonly linked
                     with Contingency reserves.

                  o A statement of work that has been formally agreed upon by both parties and is
                     therefore part of a contract.

                  o A statement of work that is currently valid; this contrasts with the scope
                     baseline, a formerly valid SOW.

                  o A statement of work on project level that cumulates statements of work on
                     cost account level



           63.    You monitored figures on cost and planned/earned value for each individual
                  project week until the data date at the end of the sixth week. What is the status
                  of this project at this date?


                    Pro-        Actual        Earned        Planned
                    ject        costs          value         value
                    week
                     1         $65,000        $61,000       $67,000
                     2         $85,000        $79,000       $89,000
                     3        $100,000       $102,000      $110,000
                     4        $125,000       $124,000      $121,000
                     5        $135,000       $133,000      $139,000
                                                                                63
                     6        $125,000       $120,000      $131,000

                  o The project is ahead of schedule and over budget.
                  o The project is ahead of schedule and under budget.
                  o The project is behind schedule and over budget.
                  o The project is behind schedule and under budget.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   35
           64.    Crashing describes a technique to speed up a project by...64

                  o ...reallocating existing resources or assigning additional resources to the
                     project.

                  o ...overlapping activities which were originally planned to be done in sequence.
                  o ...reducing the number of features of the product in order to reduce
                     development work.

                  o ...reducing the duration estimates for activities to increase the pressure applied
                     to the staff.



           65.    During risk identification sessions, you and your team identified more than 150
                  risks for your project. You are afraid that evaluating each of these risks
                  quantitatively will cost you an enormous amount of time, while not all of them
                  are really relevant and important enough to justify such a measure. What should
                  you do next?65

                  o Identify risk triggers where possible. Analyze only those risks quantitatively for
                     which no trigger could be found.

                  o Use qualitative risk analysis in order to prioritize risks for further action, such
                     as quantitative risk analysis.

                  o Assess the probability of each risk qualitatively and further analyze only those
                     risks with high probability.

                  o Assess the potential impact of each risk qualitatively and further analyze only
                     those risks with high impact.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 36                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           66.    During execution of a project, you observe that the performance of some of your
                  team members is dropping, while others are doing a consistently good job. This
                  is endangering overall project progress. What should you try first to bring the
                  team as a whole back to performance?66

                  o Organize a team meeting and discuss openly the bad performance of the weak
                     team members. Try to find a joint solution during the meeting.

                  o Introduce a competitive incentive system with a bonus for the 20% of your
                     team which is performing better than the other 80%.

                  o Do not interfere, but give the team some time to organize and to sort the
                     problem out themselves.

                  o Research causes for bad performance, solicit systematic feedback and search
                     for solutions based on that.



           67.    Your management announced that they want to put you on a stretch assignment.
                  In this situation, you should consider that... 67

                  o ...a stretch assignment is going beyond your qualifications right from the start.
                     Whatever your education, knowledge and skills are, you cannot fail personally.
                     Congratulations.

                  o ...key stakeholders must have timely and complete information regarding your
                     qualifications to make decisions regarding your suitability for the assignment.

                  o ...stretch assignments bear an increased risk of failure, and this is rarely
                     outweighed by the learning and development experience expected to come
                     with the assignment.

                  o ...you should avoid the increased hassle coming with the assignment. It will
                     not be enough for you to simply satisfy requirements and achieve objectives.
                     You will have to learn a lot.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   37
           68.    Following the cultural approach of the corporation for which you are starting to
                  manage a project, you are guiding your project team through the first life-cycle
                  phase of conceptualization. Your next step is to call for a team meeting to let
                  ideas emerge in an unrestricted creative process. What exactly should that look
                  like?68

                  o You write down the ideas of team members and structure them into categories
                     of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats during the session.

                  o You creatively gather thoughts and ideas without any discussion or frowning.
                     These ideas are only filtered and structured after the end of the brainstorming
                     session.

                  o Your team members wear hats with different colors, each of which stands for a
                     way of thinking. Each member discusses topics from the viewpoint of their
                     thinking.

                  o You try to eradicate deviating ideas and concepts of team members during the
                     meeting, so that the entire project team follows your principles.



           69.    In configuration management, which of the following is necessary to maintain the
                  integrity of baselines?69

                  o Analyzing variances by comparing baseline information with actual project
                     data.

                  o Releasing only approved changes for incorporation into products or services.
                  o Ensuring that team members adhere to a code of ethical conduct and
                     behavior.

                  o Ensuring transparency across all project management processes and activities.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 38                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           70.    Which statement describes best the purpose of the communications management
                  plan?70

                  o The project management plan is a subsidiary document of the overall
                     communications management plan.

                  o The communications management plan describes rules of behavior and respect
                     for communications in cross-cultural teams.

                  o The communications management plan describes the information delivery
                     needs including format and level of detail.

                  o The communications management plan focuses on the use of communications
                     technologies by the project management team



           71.    Which is not a point used for three-point estimation?71

                  o Optimistic estimate
                  o Most likely estimate
                  o Budget estimate
                  o Pessimistic estimate


           72.    Which of the following are not common barriers to project team building?72

                  o Differing outlooks, priorities, and interests
                  o Role conflicts
                  o Excessive team member commitment
                  o Unclear project objectives/outcomes



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   39
           73.    During project planning, you are presented with the following diagram that
                  depicts a cumulative likelihood distribution for the duration of a project:

                                                            Deadline
                    100%




                       0%

                                                                          Duration
                  What kind of conclusion can you draw from the information depicted in it? 73

                  o The likeliness that the project will finish exactly at the date marked with
                     "Deadline" is 80%.

                  o The likeliness that the project team will exceed the date marked with
                     "Deadline" is at 80%.

                  o If the project team will meet the deadline, project costs will be 80% of the
                     budgeted costs.

                  o The likeliness that the project team will meet the deadline or will finish earlier
                     is at 80%.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 40                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           74.    While executing a project, you sense a slightly negative attitude in your team.
                  Which type of document do you now need, among others, to better understand
                  and then be able to improve the situation?74

                  o Project charter
                  o Team performance assessments
                  o Cost baseline
                  o Statement of work


           75.    The sales representative of your company recently contacted you. You made
                  some estimates on direct costs for an offer on a firm fixed-price contract.
                  According to company policies, indirect costs (overheads) are to be calculated as
                  a percentage of the direct costs, the sum of both cost types caused him to
                  calculate a far too high price. How should you not react?75

                  o You reduce your direct cost estimates by reducing the amount of work and the
                     rates allocated to them. This allows a reduction of the overhead costs and a
                     lower price.

                  o Calculating overheads as a percentage of direct costs is just a model to
                     simplify calculations. A more specific analysis of these costs may lead to a
                     more realistic project price.

                  o Cost estimates are quantitative assessments of the probable costs required to
                     complete project work. These are made by the project team. It is the sales
                     person's job to make the price.

                  o You make the sales person aware that a reduction of direct costs may reduce
                     the numbers for overhead cost allocation, but will not influence the actual
                     overheads.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   41
           76.    A project charter is a document that...76

                  o ...describes both the project scope and the product scope at detail level.
                  o ...authorizes the project and the use of organizational resources to meet
                     project requirements.

                  o ...breaks down the project scope over several steps to describe the project on
                     work package level.

                  o ...describes all activities which are necessary to create the project deliverables.


           77.    You identified a technical risk in your project and assigned a contingency for that.
                  Planning contingency reserves is part of which risk response strategy? 77

                  o Active risk mitigation
                  o Passive risk avoidance
                  o Passive risk acceptance
                  o Active risk acceptance


           78.    Which concept of locating team members can help them best to enhance their
                  performance as a team?78

                  o Co-location
                  o Cross-functional dispersion
                  o Virtual e-teams
                  o Global team dispersion




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 42                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           79.    Which statement on constructive changes is false?79

                  o Constructive changes are contract changes which are construed from actions
                     taken by either party, not from a change document.

                  o Changes in projects under contract are called constructive changes if they
                     yield benefits for both parties.

                  o Constructive changes are a frequent cause of disputes and claims of one
                     contract party against the other.

                  o Field changes should be meticulously documented to avoid an interpretation as
                     constructive change.



           80.    You are assigned as a project manager for an internal project. During cost
                  planning and budgeting you discovered that there are peak times of costs during
                  the project and other times when costs are fairly low. What could this mean for
                  the project?80

                  o The fiscal budget mechanism which is used by the performing organization
                     may not allow for cost peaks in your project, and you may have to level out
                     expenditures over time.

                  o You can silently create budget contingencies during low-cost periods and re-
                     use them later during those periods when you have to cover peak levels in
                     project costs.

                  o You may find another project manager with a project that has a different
                     rhythm of high and low costs. Then, you may be able to move budget during
                     one project's low cost periods to the other project.

                  o You are a project manager and work with a lifecycle budget for your project.
                     Fiscal budgets are a matter of the functional organization, and you generally
                     do not have to care about them.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   43
           81.    You are going to take over a new project as the project manager in an enterprise
                  unknown to you. What should you investigate during the chartering process? 81

                  o Enterprise environmental factors
                  o Project management plan
                  o Project risk register
                  o Team performance reports


           82.    A project was budgeted at $1,000,000. Meanwhile, the project is executed, and
                  the following current figures have been assessed:

                  PV:       $500,000
                  EV:       $450,000
                  AC:       $550,000

                  Assuming that the cost variance was caused by one-time cost drivers, which are
                  no more effective, what estimate at completion (EaC) can you derive from these
                  figures? 82

                  o $900,000
                  o $1,000,000
                  o $1,100,000
                  o $1,222,222




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 44                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           83.    An organization is considering various contract types in order to motivate sellers
                  and to ensure preferential treatment. What should they consider before deciding
                  to use an award fee contract? 83

                  o Payment of an award fee would be linked to the achievement of objective
                     performance criteria.

                  o Any unresolved dispute over the payment of an award fee would be subject to
                     remedy in court.

                  o Payment of an award fee would be agreed upon by both the customer and the
                     contractor.

                  o Payment of an award fee is decided upon by the customer based on the
                     degree of satisfaction.



           84.    What is least important when it comes to archiving project records? 84

                  o A well-designed records management system
                  o Integration of the archive with business software
                  o Updated records reflecting final results
                  o Easy availability of information for future use


           85.    _______ are not necessarily used to establish the cost baseline of a project.85

                  o Schedule activity or work package cost estimates
                  o The work breakdown structure and the WBS dictionary
                  o The project schedule and the resource management plan
                  o The risk breakdown structure and the risk report


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   45
           86.    You took over a customer project for your company. From the inputs available,
                  including contract, statement of work and project charter, you have developed a
                  project management plan.

                  You already presented that plan in a meeting with key stakeholders including
                  your project sponsor and some representatives from the customer organization.
                  During the meeting you sensed a high level of dissatisfaction by the customer
                  executives, who signaled that the project might not produce the results that their
                  company had expected. In your understanding, all necessary actions have been
                  planned to meet the customer's requirements.

                  What should you do next?86

                  o Request a written statement from the customer detailing the requirements
                     which they believe are not addressed by your plan. Use this statement to
                     update the project plan.

                  o Arrange meetings with the customer to identify their needs, wants and
                     expectations for the project. Then create a narrative Scope statement from
                     this information to document the agreed upon project scope.

                  o Request a formal meeting on top executive level to get the misunderstandings
                     sorted out, then arrange a change request, re-plan your project where
                     necessary and go ahead with the project work.

                  o Do not over-react. Performed according to your plan, the project will produce
                     a convincing product for the customer. As soon as the executives will see it,
                     they will probably change their opinion and accept it.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 46                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           87.    A project was assessed and the following earned value data have been found:

                  PV:       $750,000
                  EV:       $750,000
                  AC:       $900,000

                  What is the burn rate of the project?87

                  o 1.20
                  o 1.10
                  o 1.00
                  o 0.83


           88.    What is not true for project deliverables?88

                  o Project deliverables should be identified, described and agreed upon as early
                     in the project as possible.

                  o Project deliverables may be products, capabilities for services or other kinds of
                     results.

                  o Once project deliverables have been identified, their description should not be
                     changed any more.

                  o The acceptance process for deliverables and how rejection will be addressed
                     should be described in the contract.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                                (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   47
           89.    Your project, performed for a customer, is coming to an end. The customer has
                  been contractually granted a three years warranty period for the product of the
                  project. What should you do first?89

                  o Hand all relevant documentation over to the organizational unit responsible for
                     handling the warranty.

                  o There is no additional work to be done. The contract should describe all
                     processes in sufficient detail.

                  o Changes on the product can affect warranty clauses. Ensure that these clauses
                     are aligned with the final specifications.

                  o According to many legislations, you cannot formally close a project before the
                     end of the warranty period.



           90.    Being the project manager in a high-risk electronics project with a lot of new
                  technologies, you developed a risk management plan and identified risks which
                  you documented in a risk register. Then, the risks were analyzed and response
                  was planned.

                  During risk control meetings, it gets obvious that the documents you created are
                  not very helpful. What have you probably done wrong?90

                  o You failed to use an RBS.
                  o You did the first processes alone.
                  o You did not identify Triggers.
                  o You did not calculate EMVs.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 48                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           91.    Which is generally not regarded as one of the three categories of culture that
                  managers should master? 91

                  o National culture
                  o Organizational culture
                  o Project culture
                  o Functional culture


           92.    Post-mortem analysis after scheduled finish date of a project shows a CPI of 0.8
                  and an SPI of 1.25. What is a plausible explanation for that?92

                  o The project was terminated early. At that time, it was over budget and ahead
                     of schedule.

                  o The project has produced additional deliverables which were originally not
                     required.

                  o The project has evidently been finished under budget and behind of schedule.
                  o The project has evidently been finished over budget and ahead of schedule.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   49
           93.    Some colleagues told you that they are planning, executing, monitoring and
                  controlling a project by use of milestones only with durations between 1 and 4
                  weeks. What do you think?93

                  o The approach is erroneous. A milestone is a significant point with zero duration
                     to highlight achievements.

                  o It is a good approach as long as the milestones reflect fixed or imposed dates
                     during the project lifecycle only.

                  o It is a good approach if the milestones are used for reviews between
                     consecutive project phases only.

                  o It is a good approach because it saves from progress measurement on
                     activities and work packages.



           94.    Together with your team, you applied three-point estimation on a critical path
                  which consists of two activities.

                  The following duration uncertainties are all calculated assuming a 3sigma
                  confidence interval.

                  The duration uncertainty--defined as pessimistic minus optimistic estimate--of
                  the first activity is 18 days; the second estimate has an uncertainty of 24 days.
                  Applying the PERT formula for paths (beta distribution), what is the duration
                  uncertainty of the entire path? 94

                  o 21 days
                  o 30 days
                  o 42 days
                  o No statement is possible from the information given.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 50                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           95.    You are just leaving a meeting during which you have been assigned as the
                  manager of a project to build a sub-station that is part of a major electric power
                  distribution system. The decision to run the project has been made before your
                  assignment and without your involvement. Some basic decisions on deliverables,
                  staffing, budgeting and on the completion date have already been made as well.
                  What should you do first?95

                  o Obtain a project charter which links the project to the strategy and ongoing
                     work of the organization and documents the initial decisions.

                  o Create a project schedule for your project which shows all major milestones
                     and deadlines linked with them. Then try to obtain approval for the schedule.

                  o Start developing a detailed risk register which includes identified risks with
                     their qualitative and quantitative assessments and a response plan.

                  o Start the quality assurance process by developing test procedures for the final
                     deliverable and defining metrics against which the tests will be performed.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   51
           96.    What is the purpose of the following diagram?




                                                                                       96


                  o Describing the influence of extreme weather conditions on progress and on the
                     achievement of project objectives.

                  o Comparing the relative importance of variables that have a high degree of
                     uncertainty with those that are more stable.

                  o Evaluating team performance and identifying team members with low
                     productivity and work effectiveness.

                  o Evaluating the degree to which project work and deliverables conform to the
                     expectations of key stakeholders.



           97.    Which is not a goal in both project management and quality management?97

                  o Prevention over inspection
                  o Customer satisfaction
                  o Management responsibility
                  o Triple constraint


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 52                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           98.    You created a baseline of your system configuration and added several changes
                  to that as amendments. Meanwhile you are afraid that the big number of Deltas
                  may cause inconsistencies and make you unable to understand the current
                  system configuration. What should you do? 98

                  o Proclaim a design freeze.
                  o Go on with amendments.
                  o Revise the baseline.
                  o Create an entirely new configuration.


           99.    A request, demand or assertion of a contract partner for consideration,
                  compensation or payment under a legally binding contract, such as a disputed
                  change, is often referred to as a____.99

                  o Claim
                  o Trial
                  o Refinement
                  o Audit


           100. Projects may be initiated by all of the following except____.100

                  o the project team
                  o a sponsor
                  o a PMO
                  o a portfolio review board



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   53
           101. During planning processes, you used Monte Carlo simulation to quantitatively
                assess cost and schedule risks of your project. During risk control, you repeat the
                technique, and it leads to different results. What should not be the reason for
                that?101

                  o Some assumptions during planning have meanwhile become fact-based
                     knowledge, so that the risks related to them have vanished or have become
                     certain problems.

                  o New risks may have been identified. These influence the input data used for
                     Monte Carlo simulation in a way which was not predictable at the time when
                     the simulation was run.

                  o Some constraints have been identified originally, but their influence on the
                     project was unclear when the simulation was run for the first time. By now,
                     the team understands these constraints much better and has been able to
                     adjust the simulation.

                  o Some dummy activities in the network logic have an element of uncertainty,
                     which gets bigger over time. While the project proceeds, it gets even harder to
                     predict how the team members assigned to them will perform.



           102. As a project manager you can assign any one of two team members to a highly
                coveted task. Both are equally capable, but one of them is a member of your in-
                group. To the other one, you have far more distance.

                  How should you behave? 102

                  o You disclose the situation to stakeholders and solicit a joint decision.
                  o You take the person not in your in-group to avoid misunderstandings.
                  o Chose the in-group person. The trustful relation will benefit the project.
                  o You delegate the decision to a third team member to avoid the conflict.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 54                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           103. You need a batch of 100 identical valves which will be custom made for your
                project to build a food processing plant. There is a risk of deterioration of victuals
                during processing; therefore you placed requirements on the quality of the raw
                materials for the valves, which will make production very costly.

                  Unfortunately, in order to test the valves against these requirements, you would
                  have to destroy them. And you have no experience with the vendors at all. What
                  should you do? 103

                  o Do 0% inspection. You have to trust the selected supplier that they will use
                     the materials according to your specification.

                  o Negotiate a contract over more than 100 items and perform acceptance
                     sampling for the surplus of the batch on delivery.

                  o Require the seller to supply the valves together with appropriate certificates
                     from their raw materials suppliers.

                  o Do 100% inspection on delivery to your premises, then order another batch of
                     100 valves.



           104. Which statement is false? Progressive elaboration of project scope... 104

                  o ...is a characteristic of projects that accompanies the concepts of temporary
                     and unique.

                  o ... means developing in steps. It not should be confused with scope creep.
                  o ...signals a weak spot in the scope definition process, caused by incomplete
                     contracts and specifications.

                  o ...when properly managed, integrates elaboration of project and deliverable
                     specifications.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   55
           105. You are managing an internationally dispersed project team. The members of
                your team have different cultural backgrounds and primary languages, but all are
                educated and able to communicate eloquently in English. You should nevertheless
                bear in mind that...105

                  o ...there are cultural differences. You should write one code of conduct for each
                     nationality. You should then limit access to these codes.

                  o ...you may have to accept that team members from one country may not be
                     prepared to work with colleagues from certain other countries.

                  o ...spoken communications can cause misunderstandings you may not find in
                     written communications. These may be hard to identify.

                  o ...certain groups will be happy to stay awake over night to join telephone and
                     video conferences during other members' working time.



           106. When finishing a project, which factors that influence customer satisfaction the
                most should you be aware of? 106

                  o Attractive price of the project and low running costs of the product
                  o Friendly project manager and effective after-project service
                  o Efficiency of the project and skills of the project manager
                  o Conformance to requirements of the project and fitness for use of the
                     deliverables




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 56                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           107. When identifying the basis of the business need for a project all of the following
                can be considered except____,107

                  o regular plant maintenance
                  o market demands
                  o technological advances
                  o legal requirements


           108. Your project exceeded costs in the past caused by an underestimation of
                resource costs in the cost baseline:

                  PV: $1,200,000, EV: $1,000,000, AC: $1,200,000

                  You expect the underestimation to influence the future as much as it did in the
                  past.

                  If the value of the remaining work (BAC - EV) is at $1,000,000, what should be
                  your new EAC (estimate at completion)?108

                  o $1,800,000
                  o $2,000,000
                  o $2,200,000
                  o $2,400,000




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   57
           109. What is true for the process of scope validation?109

                  o Insufficient documentation is not a reason to reject deliverables, as long as in
                     all other respects they are built according to specifications agreed upon.

                  o The project team members must achieve acceptance of the deliverables. This
                     process is coordinated and documented by the project management team.

                  o It is the project management team's responsibility to obtain stakeholder's
                     formal acceptance of the completed project scope and deliverables.

                  o Formal acceptance will finally reconcile all inconsistencies among deliverables
                     and documents that where caused by bad change control and scope creep.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 58                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           110. You finished your project for a customer to implement a business software
                solution. All deliverables have been handed over and are already in use by the
                company. There is a minor last payment to be made by the customer on contract
                closure. You believe that it is now getting time to finally close the contract with
                the customer and then administratively close down the project.

                  You approached the customer this morning and found that they are reluctant to
                  finally close the contract. But you do not exactly understand why. What should
                  you not do?110

                  o Update all documents related to the project and the product so that they
                     reflect the final specifications and the status of both the project and the
                     product. Organize them in a fashion for easy access.

                  o Focus on your next project and leave the customer the time to get familiar
                     with the software. They will come back to you anyway after some weeks to
                     terminate the contract and make the last payment.

                  o Based on the contract and all documents which are relevant for the formal
                     relationship with the customer, write a close-out report describing what was
                     contractually required and what was obtained.

                  o Make sure that there are no active purchase orders against the contract or any
                     other pending obligations, requests or claims from either party which need to
                     be resolved. Then insist on formal contract closure.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   59
           111. At the end of an internal project, you find several key stakeholders including the
                sponsor reluctant to finally accept all deliverables and then close the project.
                What should not be your next step in this situation?111

                  o Identify any open issues and get them solved. Then be firm on formal closure.
                  o Formally close the project. Stakeholders will find a way by themselves to sort
                     things out.

                  o Identify and openly discuss personal rationales underlying the reluctance.
                  o Invite earnest feedback from all sides and try to identify misunderstandings.


           112. A project manager reported the following earned value data:

                  PV:       $12,400,000
                  EV:       $14,500,000
                  AC:       $14,500,000

                  What does this mean?112

                  o The project is over budget and on schedule.
                  o The project is under budget and on schedule
                  o The project is on budget, but behind schedule.
                  o The project is on budget and ahead of schedule.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 60                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           113. Your project had a cost overrun in the past and you tried to obtain funding on top
                of the original budget at completion (BAC). Management has told you that they
                cannot make additional funding available. You have to increase cost performance
                so that the project will be finished with costs not exceeding the original BAC.
                Which metric describes the future performance to meet this objective?113

                  o TCPI calculated as BAC / CPI
                  o TCPI calculated as (BAC-EV) / (EAC - AC)
                  o TCPI calculated as (BAC-EV) / (BAC-AC)
                  o TCPI cannot be calculated in this situation.


           114. When running a project as a project manager, what should you focus on during
                the executing processes?114

                  o Doing project work
                  o Coordinating people and resources
                  o Ensuring accountability for errors
                  o Avoid third-party influence




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   61
           115. A review of your project team member's most recent performance reports shows
                a major drop in output. Which is the best approach to raise team productivity in a
                project?115

                  o Increase the frequency of team review meetings and status reports.
                  o Increase the pressure on each team member to adhere to deadlines.
                  o Post a special reward for the best performing team member.
                  o Improve feelings of trust and cohesiveness among team members.


           116. A project customer and a contractor agreed on regular quality audits during
                execution by a third party audit team, which is working on an assignment for the
                customer.

                  What should the contractor have prepared for the audits?116

                  o Work results
                  o Measurements and test results
                  o Quality documentation
                  o Contract-related correspondence


           117. While planning a project, you are defining activities. Which of the following is not
                a result of that process?117

                  o Activity list
                  o Work breakdown structure
                  o Activity attributes
                  o Milestone list



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 62                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           118. What should you focus on when managing the stakeholders of your project? 118

                  o Ensure the order of phases.
                  o Address issues.
                  o Identify the stakeholders.
                  o Ensure stakeholder value.


           119. What should not be your thoughts when you are organizing documents as lessons
                learned?119

                  o Devise the lessons learned documentation in a wording which is easy to
                     understand for a reader who is not familiar with the project.

                  o Lessons learned must detail how certain groups or persons caused failures and
                     delays, especially if they are inside the own organization.

                  o Writing lessons learned should be an exercise enhancing your personal
                     learning experience. Make sure you grasp what you are writing down.

                  o Keep lessons learned documents at a place where they are easy to access and
                     to retrieve for those who may later need the information.



           120. You are identifying key stakeholders for your project. Which of the following
                groups is least likely to be included?120

                  o Project manager and project team
                  o Customer and users
                  o Sponsor
                  o Media representatives


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   63
           121. _______ is normally not a method of RoI (return on investment) analysis.121

                  o Net present value projection
                  o Sunk cost analysis
                  o Simple payback calculation
                  o Internal rate of return


           122. What is the most important benefit of a 360 degree review? 122

                  o The reviewed person will regard the assessment process as fair and
                     developmental.

                  o Assessments from different perspectives leave no weak spot of a person
                     unaddressed.

                  o Managers will be assessed by their subordinates, enforcing a more
                     participative style.

                  o One can use a simple standard questionnaire to gather data from the
                     reviewers.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 64                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           123. You are using a phase gate approach for your project. What do you need to
                consider?123

                  o The order of phases must be strictly consecutive without overlapping in order
                     to allow for gates.

                  o Gates are often called kill points, when they are used to eliminate weak team
                     members.

                  o Phase gates are often used to verify entry criteria of a previous phase and exit
                     criteria of the next one.

                  o Approaching phase gates early is a common signal that project planning has
                     been poor.



           124. Post mortem earned value analysis of a project showed the following data:

                  SPI: 0.78
                  CPI: 1.00

                  What is this telling you? 124

                  o The entire work of the project has been finished behind schedule and on
                     budget.

                  o The entire work of the project has been finished ahead of schedule and on
                     budget.

                  o The project has been terminated before completion. At that time it was behind
                     schedule and on budget

                  o The project has been terminated before completion. At that time it was ahead
                     of schedule and on budget.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   65
           125. A project has undergone a major scope change, which increased cost and work
                levels. What does this mean for earned value data? 125

                  o The cost baseline will be updated and the new baseline will be the basis for
                     future earned value analysis.

                  o As baselines should generally not be adjusted, the project is due to exceed its
                     budget from now on.

                  o There are several reasons to change a baseline, but not scope changes. The
                     project will exceed its budget.

                  o Earned value analysis becomes useless after a scope change, the technique
                     should not be used any more.



           126. Which statement describes best the meaning of leadership?126

                  o Ensuring predictability in an uncertain environment
                  o Sustaining an ongoing business over a long period of time
                  o Adhering to publicized standards and procedures
                  o Developing a vision and strategy and motivating people

                                                                                                           127
           127. As a project manager, you must demonstrate transparency regarding...

                  o ...confidential information.
                  o ...proprietary information.
                  o ...distribution of unproven information and gossip.
                  o ...your decision-making processes.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 66                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
                                                                           128
           128. Who should always issue the project charter?

                  o A person internal to the project organization
                  o A project initiator or sponsor
                  o A low-level manager of the performing organization
                  o A high-level manager of the performing organization


           129. You are planning quality management for your project. How can a process
                flowchart help you? 129

                  o It may help identify outliers.
                  o It may help understand the COQ in a process.
                  o It may help spot accountable staff.
                  o It may help react later.


           130. A difference between a statement of work and a scope statement is:130

                  o The statement of work is prepared by the customer while the scope statement
                     is developed by the project management team.

                  o The statement of work focuses on physical or technical matters, while the
                     project scope statement focuses on a functional view.

                  o The project scope statement is in most projects developed before the
                     statement of work is written.

                  o A project scope statement can become a contract document; a statement of
                     work cannot.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   67
           131. You are the manager of a project for a company that is known to make heavy
                use of extrinsic motivators in order to boost morale and team performance. What
                does that mean? The motivators used...131

                  o ...are tailored to the needs of individual team members.
                  o ...are incentives such as rewards, gifts, or money.
                  o ...are derived from within individual team members.
                  o ...include the improvement of hygiene factors of the work environment.


           132. You are currently finishing a project under contract to develop and build some
                machining equipment for a customer. Your organization took over the obligation
                to solve certain problems if they come up during a contractual warranty period of
                one year after start of production.

                  What do you not have to consider during the warranty period? 132

                  o Parts which were marked as-is must be held available for free replacement in
                     case of failure.

                  o Incoming problems reported to the team must be handled immediately and
                     with high priority.

                  o Some team members must be held available during the warranty period in
                     case that they have to solve problems.

                  o At the end of the warranty period, the responsibility for the equipment will be
                     turned over to the customer




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 68                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           133. When should a time and material contract with a contractor been chosen instead
                of a fixed price contract?133

                  o When cost risks for the customer should be limited but not schedule risks.
                  o When project scope includes the progressive elaboration of the scope of
                     deliverables.

                  o When subcontractors are being used and the customer will reimburse their
                     invoices.

                  o When only a limited amount of money can be made available to fund the
                     project.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                                (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   69
           134. You are the manager of a major project to develop a system of barriers to
                prevent a seaside city from flooding. Together with your team you created a code
                of conduct stating that the change control board must be immediately notified of
                gifts when the value exceeds $90. The same applies to invitations when the value
                exceeds $150.

                  Today, a contractor executive sent you an invitation for a night at an opera with
                  a value of $95. It is a one-time event and you tried to obtain tickets by yourself
                  without success. The person told you that he would so much wish to join you, but
                  he will not be available on that day, and he could get hold of only one ticket
                  anyway.

                  What do you have to do? 134

                  o You are allowed to accept invitations with a value of up to $150, so there
                     should be no problem.

                  o One may regard the ticket as a gift, but it is just at the limit: You do not have
                     to notify the CCB.

                  o The ticket is a gift and over of the limit. You have to notify the CCB who will
                     make the decision.

                  o You are the project manager. The rules are in place to strengthen your
                     position. They do not apply to you.



           135. What is not a major benefit of co-locating team members from different cultures
                in one place instead of having a team dispersed over many countries? 135

                  o Short distance to the customer markets
                  o Reduced burden from travelling and international meetings
                  o Enhanced communications and a sense of community
                  o Identical working hours without time zone difference



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 70                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           136. You are running a project to develop the production process for a future
                electronic component. Evaluating some first test batches, you found out that the
                precision is generally very good, but that you have some irregular outliers in a
                completely unpredictable pattern. What should you do?136

                  o Ignore the outliers; they are not relevant as long as the yield from the
                     production is sufficiently high.

                  o Try to increase the accuracy of the process by adjustments, thus reducing the
                     number of outliers.

                  o Inform the designated production manager of your observations and ask him
                     to take care after handover.

                  o Research outliers, they may give you important insights into problems which
                     may trouble later production.



           137. As a leader, how should you deem ethical conduct?137

                  o You should ensure ethical conduct throughout the team by use of means
                     including recognition and awards and in tight cooperation with the team
                     members' line managers.

                  o Ethical conduct is all right as long as it does not impact the achievement of
                     objectives and does not damage the performing organization's immediate
                     options for profits.

                  o You are the role model for the team. Your personal integrity demonstrates the
                     desired skills, behavior, and attitudes whose adoption may benefit team
                     members.

                  o There are often dilemma situations in business. Then you may have to
                     suspend your integrity and do what is appropriate. There may be long term
                     negative effects, but these are not your responsibility




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   71
           138. You have recently been named as the manager of a new project under contract.
                The sponsor of the project gave you the contract signed by the customer and a
                statement of work. He asked you to go on with initiation. Which document should
                you develop next? 138

                  o Project management plan
                  o Milestone schedule
                  o Project charter
                  o Scope statement


           139. You are defining evaluation criteria for your project. The procurement item is
                readily available from a number of acceptable sellers. Which criterion can you
                focus on in such a situation?139

                  o Seller's management approach
                  o Price offered by the seller
                  o Seller's financial capacity
                  o Understanding of your need


           140. When is passive risk acceptance an appropriate approach?140

                  o When the likeliness of risk occurrence is very low.
                  o When the risk occurrence is hard to identify.
                  o When it is best to deal with a risk as it occurs.
                  o When the risk cannot be assessed or analyzed.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 72                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           141. You are running a project to engineer and implement a set of business processes
                and a software solution for customer relationship management. The project
                involves a big number of performing organizationsa major corporation and
                many suppliers of different sizes.

                  During the project you observed a restraining effect of differences between the
                  companies' corporate cultures. This leads to different expectations on how such a
                  project should be handled and to frequent misunderstandings between
                  stakeholders. Another effect is a growing degree of distrust and skepticism.

                  What should you try first to integrate the diverse stakeholder groups? 141

                  o Focus on project work. As a project manager you should not get distracted by
                     big egos.

                  o Let the problems grow further until they are obvious for all. Then escalate
                     them.

                  o Develop a joint quality policy for the project and seek commitment by all
                     organizations.

                  o Analyze probability and impact of the risks linked with the situation and plan
                     how to respond to them.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   73
           142.     During execution of your project you have observed that a team member is
                    getting isolated by other team members. Which is a wrong approach in such a
                    situation?142

                  o The interpersonal relationships between team members are their private issue.
                     You should not interfere.

                  o You should apply team building measures to improve the team's effectiveness.
                  o You should try to get feedback from the isolated team member to understand
                     the situation.

                  o You should try to get feedback from the other team members to understand
                     the situation.



           143. In an organization, project managers report directly to the head of a project
                management office (PMO). In this case, which statement is probably not true?143

                  o The head of the project management office can strengthen the matrix as a
                     manager of project managers.

                  o The project management office will actually be responsible for direct
                     management of the projects.

                  o Projects will be run by the functional organization and project managers
                     expedite change control.

                  o It will be easier for the PMO to ensure that the organizational process assets
                     provided are used.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 74                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           144. What is the five whys method used for? 144

                  o Root cause analysis
                  o Identification of random causes
                  o Identification of special causes
                  o Identification of causes of conflicts


           145. The use of scarce resources must be decided upon with functional managers
                before it causes delays in your project. Which is probably your most important
                skill right now?145

                  o Planning
                  o Negotiating
                  o Facilitating
                  o Documenting


           146. Which question is not appropriate for a weighting system to evaluate seller's
                performance according to weighted criteria? 146

                  o What is the yearly investment in development of personnel per year and
                     employee?

                  o How many reference customers have been verified by the seller in the specific
                     field?

                  o What financial status and reputation in the market place could be assessed?
                  o Has a CV of the prospective project manager been sent with the proposal?



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   75
           147. Which is not an example of a correctly handled contract closure procedure?147

                  o Early termination of a contract because of a repudiatory breach
                  o Settling and finally closing the contract agreement
                  o Product verification by stakeholders and administrative closure
                  o Early termination of a contract because of an immaterial breach


           148. You gathered a lot of knowledge on project management in your business life.
                What is an appropriate use for that? 148

                  o Share your knowledge with the professional community in form of books,
                     articles, lectures, seminars etc.

                  o It is your knowledge, and it has a high market value. You may consider it your
                     intellectual property, which you keep secret.

                  o There are better project managers somewhere in this world. They should help
                     developing the professional community.

                  o Your job is managing projects for your customers. You should not worry about
                     other project managers.



           149. Respect is... 149

                  o ...a duty to show a high regard for oneself, others, and the resources
                     entrusted.

                  o ...a limitation to trust, confidence and performance excellence through
                     cooperation.

                  o ...accepting a level of information which may lead to disrespectful behavior.
                  o ...limited to respecting the physical and intellectual property rights of others.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 76                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           150. During a post-mortem meeting, discussion arises about who has to take
                responsibility for some major failures. It has become obvious that the attendees
                of the meeting will not come to a jointly accepted conclusion.

                  What is not an appropriate strategy for such a situation?150

                  o Separate the people from the problem
                  o Focus on interests, not positions
                  o Insist on objective criteria and standards
                  o Suspend the discussion and schedule another meeting


           151. Understanding cultural key similarities and differences is especially important
                for... 151

                  o ...globally dispersed, cross-cultural and virtual teams.
                  o ...culturally homogeneous, co-located teams.
                  o ...project sub-teams and work cells.
                  o ...teams under high budget and schedule pressure.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   77
           152. Your project team is on its way to finish work on the project, while you have the
                impression that a staff member is already negotiating the next assignment in
                another project. You are afraid that the person may come under pressure to start
                working on the other job before she has finished her work for your project. Her
                task is very complex, and it would be hard for someone else to take up the
                partial results and finish them.

                  What action is most likely to resolve the situation?152

                  o Have a private meeting with the person and discuss your observations. Make
                     the person aware of the contract and of the legal consequences of unfinished
                     work.

                  o Have a meeting with the entire team and discuss the person's expected early
                     leave. Use team dynamics to buy in the commitment from the person to finish
                     work orderly.

                  o Use your network of project managers to find another assignment for the
                     person which allows for smooth transition and does not conflict with your
                     needs.

                  o Ignore your observations and let the team member do her job. It is quite
                     uncommon that staff drops work for a project before it is completely finished.



           153. When control charts are used, outliers are...153

                  o ...singular measurements outside the bandwidth between an upper and lower
                     control limit.

                  o ...a typical result of a rare random cause which is difficult to replicate and to
                     verify.

                  o ...insignificant results, often measurement errors, the causes of which should
                     not be further investigated.

                  o ...measurements inconsistent with a run of 7 results over or under a mean
                     value.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 78                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           154. You are running a project which was budgeted based on some rough order of
                magnitude (ROM) estimates with a precision of -50% /+100%. Meanwhile, with
                new estimates made on detail level and some work already finished, you found
                out that these estimates were consistently too low and the budget will not be
                sufficient to successfully run and finish the project. What should you do? 154

                  o You shouldn't worry too much, It is quite normal that early estimates are too
                     optimistic, later estimates are too pessimistic and the project costs will finally
                     settle somewhere in between. So relax!

                  o Bring the issue to your sponsor and discuss how this should be handled.
                     Together with the sponsor adhere to the guidelines which describe how
                     budgets will be reviewed and refined.

                  o Try to reduce scope or quality in areas where it cannot create difficulties for
                     you and the team. Finally, it is not your responsibility that an insufficient
                     budget has been created for the project.

                  o Find a contractor who can run the project for you. Set the budget as a price
                     limit during the bidding process and accept only firm fixed price (FFP) offers
                     which do not exceed this price.



           155. Which is typically not specified in a document referred to as activity attributes?155

                  o The person executing the work in a schedule activity
                  o Schedule activity identifiers, codes and descriptions
                  o Schedule activity predecessors and successors
                  o The cost baseline assigned to the schedule activity




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   79
           156. In a country with high level of violence in public, a local police officer requires a
                private money transfer to ensure the safety of your team. How do you react?156

                  o You regard this as bribery or at least as palm greasing and do not pay.
                  o You do not pay, but follow the chain of command and solicit a decision.
                  o You regard it as a facilitation payment and pay the person.
                  o You regard the situation as a gray area and pay through an agent.


           157. Which is not a type of project review meeting?157

                  o Team review meetings
                  o Project status meetings
                  o Executive management review meetings
                  o Customer review meetings


           158. You are performing integrated change control. Which of the following will not be
                part of what you do?158

                  o Reviewing and approving change requests
                  o Maintaining the integrity of baselines
                  o Performing milestone trend analysis (MTA)
                  o Documenting the allover impact of requested changes




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 80                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           159. You are project manager for a strategic project with a multi-million dollars value
                assigned by a company that is listed at a US stock exchange.

                  Recent Earned Value Analysis after app. 25% completion told you that your
                  project has a CPI of 0.76. What should you do right now?159

                  o The variance is a signal of a sound project which is well under budget. There is
                     no need for action.

                  o A project that much under budget may be a problem for negotiating future
                     budgets. Try to spend money somewhere else.

                  o You should immediately inform your management, which should then assess
                     whether this CPI constitutes a material financial issue.

                  o It is still early in the project and data are yet inaccurate. Wait a while and
                     allow numbers from the project to stabilize.



           160. A management point in a work breakdown structure (WBS) used to consolidate
                and process work package data and forward the results to the project manager is
                called160

                  o Control account
                  o Chart of accounts
                  o Control limit
                  o Account limit




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   81
           161. In project management, work authorization is normally not... 161

                  o ...a permission written by the project manager to begin work on a specific
                     activity.

                  o ...a permission written by the project manager to begin work on a specific work
                     package.

                  o ...a written direction used by a project manager to ensure work is done
                     properly and correctly.

                  o ...a document issued by a sponsor authorizing the project manager to apply
                     resources to project activities.



           162. When you perform quality assurance in your project, which technique could you
                typically use?162

                  o Code review
                  o Quality audit
                  o Inspection
                  o Scope verification


           163. The _______ can be used to assess outlays and funding requirements. 163

                  o Cost assignment matrix
                  o Cost baseline
                  o Cost variance analysis
                  o Control account plan




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 82                              (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           164. Which technique has been applied to develop the following diagram? 164

                                                                                                                           17%     0%
                                                                                            1.1 Optimistic costs
                                                                                                                    -$123,000.00   -$123,000.00


                                                                                  FALSE
                                                    1 Use existing staff                   -$169,220.00
                                                                                  $0.00

                                                                                                                           66%     0%
                                                                                            1.2 Most likely costs
                                                                                                                    -$158,000.00   -$158,000.00


                                                                                                                           17%     0%
                                                                                            1.3 Pessimistic costs
                                                                                                                    -$259,000.00   -$259,000.00

             Make or buy?   Implementation costs   -$149,500.00
                                                                                                                           50%     50%
                                                                                            2.1 Optimistic costs
                                                                                                                     -$35,000.00   -$85,000.00
                                                                                   TRUE
                                                    2 Hire new staff                       -$99,500.00
                                                                             -$50,000.00
                                                                                                                           50%     50%
                                                                                            2.2 Pessimistic costs
                                                                                                                    -$164,000.00   -$214,000.00


                                                                                                                           33%     0%
                                                                                            3.1 Optimistic costs
                                                                                                                    -$120,000.00   -$140,000.00
                                                                                  FALSE
                                                    3 Use contractor staff                 -$207,100.00
                                                                             -$20,000.00
                                                                                                                           67%     0%
                                                                                            3.2 Pessimistic costs
                                                                                                                    -$250,000.00   -$270,000.00




                   o Decision tree
                   o P/I matrix
                   o Strategic scoring
                   o Risk breakdown structure




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                                   (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                                                  83
           165. Your organization has the choice between several internal projects it could run.
                In order to select projects, the organization assessed their strategic importance,
                investment requirements, and expected cash inflow from the projects' products,
                services and results. What should the organization assess in addition? 165

                  o The probability of changes to strategic goals.
                  o The frequency of changes to strategic goals.
                  o The assessments done should be sufficient.
                  o The probability of the expected cash inflows.


           166. Which of the following is not a forecasting method? 166

                  o Scenario building
                  o Simulation
                  o Time series method
                  o Variance analysis


           167. Processes of configuration management commonly include all of the following
                except:167

                  o Configuration identification
                  o Configuration status accounting
                  o Configuration chartering
                  o Configuration audit




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 84                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           168. A project manager tracks the work of team members using a network logic
                diagram. Which effect will the presence of an actual finish date have on the
                calculation of float for the finished activity?168

                  o Finished activities have only float left when they have been completed on
                     schedule.

                  o Calculating free float and total float is generally not reasonable for finished
                     activities.

                  o When an activity has been finished, total float gets often converted to become
                     free float.

                  o When an activity has been finished, float gets often converted to become
                     slack.



           169. Your project work has generally been finished and you want to commence a solid
                closing process for the project. What must have been attained to begin this
                process? 169

                  o The deliverables of the project must have been accepted.
                  o The organizational process assets must have been updated.
                  o The final product, service or result transition must have been finished.
                  o Lessons learned must have been organized into a data base.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   85
           170. The situational leadership model as defined by Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard
                consists of the stages____.170

                  o Must-be requirements, one-dimensional requirements, attractive requirements
                  o Telling, selling, participating, delegating
                  o Direct style, instrumental style, relational style
                  o Acquisition stage, learning stage, performance stage, exhaustion stage


           171. A Pareto chart helps focusing on...171

                  o ...causes which create a repeating and often seasonal pattern of problems.
                  o ...the minority of causes, which create the majority of problems and defects.
                  o ...special causes of process variations which should be investigated to avoid
                     type 1 errors.

                  o ...the standard deviation of process variation which should not be investigated.


           172. When should the project schedule be developed? 172

                  o As early into the project as possible. A committed schedule should be there
                     before any initiating or planning processes are applied for the project.

                  o During initiating. The definite project schedule should be developed
                     concurrently with the project contract (if applicable) and the project charter.

                  o Scheduling should be avoided. Agile approaches with a backlog and a weekly
                     to 4-weekly meeting cycle are sufficient for modern project management.

                  o When most planning processes from time, scope, and procurement
                     management have been finished. These will then be iterated when necessary.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 86                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           173. What is wrong in this diagram?


                                                                      PV
                                               Data
                    $                          date


                                                             EV
                                          AC




                                                                    Project weeks     173


                  o The data date must be accurately between weeks.
                  o AC cannot be higher than PV when EV is lower.
                  o EV cannot be assessed beyond the data date.
                  o PV cannot be assessed beyond the data date.


           174. What is the purpose of control limits?174

                  o Identifying "rule of seven" patterns in control charts.
                  o Increasing process quality from 3 to 6.
                  o Specifying the range of acceptable results.
                  o Identifying whether the process is in control or not.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   87
           175. What is not the main purpose of a final project report?175

                  o Preparing acceptance of the final product, service or result.
                  o Making stakeholders aware that the project has been closed out.
                  o Acknowledging what has been done and achieved by all contributors.
                  o If a project has been cancelled before completion: Explaining the causes.


           176. You are managing a project that bears a risk to either permanently damage or
                strongly improve the reputation of the performing organization with its customer
                base. You decide to call a meeting with the organization's management to make
                them aware of the issue and discuss possible options. Which risk response
                strategy are you applying?176

                  o Active acceptance
                  o Transfer
                  o Passive acceptance
                  o Escalate


           177. A project manager has developed various risk response strategies for a high-risk
                project. When presenting some of the results, she emphasizes the importance of
                putting the responses into action instead of leaving them documented as a plan
                that might get forgotten. Which process is she most likely referring to? 177

                  o Plan risk management
                  o Implement risk responses
                  o Monitor risks
                  o Plan risk responses



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 88                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           178. For a project to replace an older ERP software with a more modern tool in an
                organization, you have identified a number of risks. You have documented them
                in a detailed list. A manger from executive level has asked you now to
                summarize the overall project risk exposure with appropriate metrics, as well as
                individual high-level risks along with a quick presentation of responses with their
                pros and cons. Which document is probably required by the person in this
                situation?178

                  o Risk register
                  o Risk management plan
                  o Risk report
                  o Risk traceability matrix


           179. In order to prepare yourself for a new project assignment that requires adaptive
                methods, you have developed a plan for how to tailor the project management
                approach using a combination of some agile principles with other, more
                predictive techniques. Regarding your own personal development, which aspect
                of the PMI talent triangle did you particularly address?179

                  o Strategic & Business
                  o Leadership
                  o Technical
                  o None of the above




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   89
           180. The organization for which you are currently managing an IT infrastructure
                project has informed you that they have hired an agile coach who is now
                available to help with several projects, including yours. In a meeting to get to
                know each other, the coach suggests to introduce regular project retrospectives.
                You are thinking about what the person might be referring to. What would be the
                best answer?180

                  o Meetings for the project team to look back into the recent past in order to
                     identify lessons learned so far, and possible improvements

                  o Meetings with the project sponsor to look into the long-term project future in
                     order to identify possible necessary resource allocations

                  o Meetings with the key stakeholders to look at the latest deliverables in order
                     to evaluate their validity and usefulness, as well as identify possible rework.

                  o Meetings with power users of the software from within the company in order
                     to define possible new development tasks.



           181. A project manager is asked to contribute to a document to describe what is
                intended to be achieved with a project once it is successfully finished, and how
                this will be measured. What could be the name of that document?181

                  o Project management plan
                  o Benefits management plan
                  o Change management plan
                  o Statement of work




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 90                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           182. Which of the following can usually be referred to as factors which trigger the
                need for a new project?182

                  o Meet regulatory, legal, or social requirements
                  o Satisfy stakeholder requests or needs
                  o Implement or change business or technological strategies
                  o All of the above and more


           183. What is a project business case?183

                  o A documented economic feasibility study for a project
                  o A more detailed statement of work for a project
                  o A collection of management plans for a project
                  o A breakdown of project scope for a project


           184. Which type of Organizational Process Asset should be updated by the project
                team?184

                  o Processes, policies, and procedures
                  o Corporate knowledge base
                  o External enterprise environmental factors
                  o Internal enterprise environmental factors




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   91
           185. What is not a characteristic of what is referred to as an "organic organization"?185

                  o Low project manager authority
                  o Low resource availability
                  o Full-time project management administrative staff
                  o Flexible work groups


           186. Stakeholders such as suppliers, customers, and end users have what in
                common?186

                  o They are in a similar sphere of influence by project managers
                  o They always share common goals
                  o They usually speak the same language
                  o They usually don't interfere with project management


           187. Which is an area where project managers should particularly collaborate and
                share detailed knowledge about the project with other professionals?187

                  o With C-suite managers
                  o With colleagues from the functional organization
                  o With colleagues from competitors
                  o Across disciplines and company borders




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 92                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           188. Which of the following is usually recognized as a form of power for a project
                manager?188

                  o Legal power
                  o Budgetary power
                  o Reward-oriented power
                  o Culture-oriented power


           189. A project manager hears about an issue and decides to ask the project team
                about more details as to how and when this happened. Is this more of a team
                management or more of a team leadership approach in this moment?189

                  o More of a team management approach
                  o More of a team leadership approach
                  o Both
                  o Neither


           190. A Scrum Master talks to you about the impact and value of servant leadership.
                What is the person probably referring to?190

                  o The idea that an organization can be leaderless and still fully functioning.
                  o The belief that wishes and requirements of a leader have no importance.
                  o The commitment to serve the team as a leader, and to put them first.
                  o The idea of management by objectives when telling a team what to do.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   93
           191. Which is not a trend in project integration practices?191

                  o Use of automated tools
                  o Use of visual management tools
                  o Hybrid methodologies
                  o Use of autocratic decision making


           192. What is a purpose of agile release planning?192

                  o Develop an early understanding what the final product, service or result will in
                     exactly look like in the end.

                  o Create a precise project schedule with long-term forecasts and accurate
                     estimations

                  o Providing a high-level summary timeline of the release schedule in less
                     predictive projects

                  o Outline the requirements in detail and make sure they are described as use
                     cases



           193. What is a product backlog?193

                  o A description of what is to be delivered in a product
                  o A to-do list of tasks to be finished
                  o A breakdown of scope for an iteration
                  o A time-phased list of technical requirements




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 94                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           194. What does an iteration burndown chart track?194

                  o Work remaining to be completed for the product
                  o Work remaining to be completed in the iteration backlog
                  o Work finished so far in the iteration
                  o Work ideally completed on average in every iteration


           195. Which is not one of the five levels of increasingly effective quality
                management?195

                  o Detect and correct defects before the customer finds them
                  o Use quality assurance to examine and correct the process itself
                  o Create a culture committed to quality throughout the organization
                  o Write test cases before writing software code


           196. Which is an advantage of self-organizing teams?196

                  o Freedom of the project manager to make decisions
                  o Faster decision-making processes by the project manager
                  o Increased sense of responsibility of team members
                  o Higher visibility of individual team members




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   95
           197. Which is a category framework that is suitable for prompt lists?197

                  o SCOPE
                  o VUCA
                  o FRESH
                  o SOFTEN


           198. For one of the risks identified in your project, propinquity has been marked as
                "high" in the risk register. What does this mean?198

                  o A stakeholder believes it is of high relevance.
                  o The team believes it is quite likely to occur.
                  o Management is generally reluctant to create reserves for it.
                  o The risk is closely related to other project risks.


           199. A member of the project management team has come up with a 3D model of
                stakeholder influence and interest in your project. What could this be referred
                to?199

                  o Stakeholder salience model
                  o Stakeholder register
                  o Stakeholder cube
                  o Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 96                             (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
           200. How are a procurement lifecycle and contracts related?200

                  o A project procurement lifecycles for a project can include several contracts.
                  o A contract lifecycle is always longer than a procurement lifecycle.
                  o A project contract lifecycle should always equal a procurement lifecycle.
                  o Project lifecycle, contract lifecycle, and procurement lifecycle are unrelated.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   97
                                  Answers and References

            Notes:      1.    The real PMP(R) exam has one or more references to verify
                              the correctness for each item3. This prep document follows
                              this approach.

                        2.    PMBOK(R) Guide page numbers given on the following pages
                              refer to the PMBOK(R) Guide pagination at the bottom of the
                              page.

                              They may differ from the Acrobat pagination in the PDF
                              versions of the document.

                             3.   References given on the following pages to
                                  https://www.pmi.org/certifications/types/project-
                                  management-pmp are accessible for PMI(R) members
                                  only. Access is free.




             3
                 Item: Question with 4 answering options



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                                  (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                   99
                           4.   The "Performance Domains"
                                (Initiating, Planning etc.) for
                                each item on the following
                                pages refer to the PMP(R)
                                Examination Content Outline
                                (https://www.pmi.org/-
                                /media/pmi/documents/publ
                                ic/pdf/certifications/project-
                                management-professional-
                                exam-outline.pdf).

                                The position of certain topics
                                may be different from their
                                place in the PMBOK(R) Guide.

                      Example: Overall risks or High level
                      risks are found in
                       PMP(R) Examination Content
                       Outline:
                       Initiating, Task 4
                       PMBOK(R) Guide:
                       Planning, Process 11.2.3.2., Risk
                       Report




             1 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 348.

             2 Initiating
                    Answer: 1
                    Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 75.

             3 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: The Triple Constraints in Project Management by Michael S. Dobson.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 100
                                 (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             4 Initiating
                    Answer: 4
                    Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                    Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 490.

                    Discount rate:      10%
                                           Year       Cash inflow,   Cash inflow, fu-
                                                     present values    ture values
                    Investment                0           -1,000,000       -1,000,000
                    Revenues                  1              250,000          227,273
                                              2              420,000          347,107
                                              3              420,000          315,552
                    Revenues (3y)                          1,090,000          889,932
                    Net revenues (3y)                         90,000        -110,068
                                                                          Net present value



             5 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: Project Management Best Practices: Achieving Global Excellence by Harold
                  Kerzner, 4th edition, Chapter 1.8 "Best Practices Process".

             6 Planning
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 377.

             7 Project life cycle and organization
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 38.

             8 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: Project Management JumpStart by Kim Heldman, page 47.

             9 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 302 and 238 (descriptions: level of
                  precision, level of accuracy).

             10 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 104.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 101
             11 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 136.

             12 Planning
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 113.

             13 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Management JumpStart by Kim Heldman, page 214.

             14 Initiating
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 104.

             15 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 349.

             16 Planning
                   Answer: 2
                   References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 417.

             17 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 113.

             18 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                   Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 226.

             19 Initiating
                   Answer: 1
                   References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 75 and 405.

             20 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, pages 661ff.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 102
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             21 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 142, 310;
                  Successful Interviewing by Diane Arthur, page 154.

             22 Initiating
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 81.

             23 Planning
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 162.

             24 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 487.

             25 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 341.

             26 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 342.

             27 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 86.

             28 Planning
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 142.

             29 Initiating
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                   Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 593.

             30 Planning
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 210-211.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 103
             31 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 303.

             32 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 283 (figure 8-5).

             33 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: The Human Aspects of Project Management: Managing the Project Team by
                  Vijay K. Verma, Volume Three, page 70.

             34 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 267.

             35 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 113.

             36 Planning
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 82.

             37 Planning
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: Management JumpStart by Kim Heldman, page 78.

             38 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 28.

             39 Planning
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 154.

             40 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 232.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 104
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             41 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 59
                  Project Management, Sixth Edition by G. Michael Campbell, page 235.

             42 Initiating
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                   Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 575.

             43 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 669.

             44 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 302.

             45 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 83, 117-119.

             46 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Quantitative Methods in Project Management by John Goodpasture, pages
                  250-251.

                    Breakpoint costs:                  $1,125,000

                    Variance:                            $125,000
                    80% customer share:                  $100,000

                    Customer price:
                      Target price                     $1,100,000
                      Share on variance                  $100,000
                      Breakpoint price                 $1,200,000


             47 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 131.

Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 105
             48 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 319 ("training").

             49 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Mastering Virtual Teams: Strategies, Tools, and Techniques That Succeed by
                  Deborah L. Duarte and Nancy Tennant Snyder, Second Edition, page 56.

             50 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 118-119.

             51 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 286.

             52 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Business Management by Oliver F. Lehmann, pages 91-92.

             53 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 294-295.

             54 Closing
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: The Project Manager's MBA: How to Translate Project Decisions into Business
                   Success by Dennis J. Cohen and Robert J. Graham, page 160.

             55 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 397.

             56 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 303.

             57 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: The Human Aspects of Project Management: Managing the Project Team by
                  Vijay K. Verma, Volume Three, page 94.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 106
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             58 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 67, 83, 96, 115, 120.

             59 Planning
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 719.

             60 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 194.

             61 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 47.

             62 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Delivering Project Excellence with the Statement of Work by Michael G.
                  Martin, page 37.

             63 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 267.

                      Project     Actual       Earned       Planned
                       week       costs         value        value

                       1          $65,000       $61,000      $67,000
                       2          $85,000       $79,000      $89,000
                       3         $100,000      $102,000     $110,000
                       4         $125,000      $124,000     $121,000
                       5         $135,000      $133,000     $139,000
                       6         $125,000      $120,000     $131,000
                     At data
                     date        $635,000      $619,000     $657,000

                    SV = EV - PV = -$38,000 (behind schedule)
                    CV = EV - AC = -$16,000 (over budget)




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                                (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 107
             64 Planning
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 703.

             65 Planning
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 419.

             66 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 342-343.

             67 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, page 2
                  (http://www.https://www.pmi.org/about/ethics/code).

             68 Initiating
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                   Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 223.

             69 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 118-119.

             70 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 337.

             71 Planning
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 244.

             72 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 154.

             73 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 436.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 108
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             74 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 343.

             75 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 240, 245-246.

             76 Initiating
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 75.

             77 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 443 ("accept").

             78 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 340.

             79 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 498.

             80 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 253 (7.3.2.5).

             81 Initiating
                   Answer: 1
                   References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 38.

             82 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 267 ("If future work will be accomplished at
                  the planned rate, use:").

             83 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 472.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 109
             84 Closing
                   Answer: 2
                   References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 104.

             85 Planning
                   Answer: 4
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 248.

             86 Planning
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 151.

             87 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, pages 512 ff.

             88 Planning
                   Answer: 3
                   References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 151.

             89 Closing
                   Answer: 3
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 499 (12.3.3.3).

             90 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 414, 422, 431-432, 441-442.

             91 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Mastering Virtual Teams: Strategies, Tools, and Techniques That Succeed by
                  Deborah L. Duarte and Nancy Tennant Snyder, Second Edition, page 55.

             92 Closing
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 263 (a successfully finished project has an
                   SPI of 1).

             93 Initiating
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 186.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 110
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             94 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  References: Project Management JumpStart by Kim Heldman, page 171;
                  Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and Controlling by
                  Harold Kerzner, 12th Edition, page 430.

             95 Initiating
                   Answer: 1
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 75.

             96 Planning
                   Answer: 2
                   Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 443 (Sensitivity analysis and tornado
                   diagram).

             97 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 274-275.

             98 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 120.

             99 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 498.

             100 Initiating
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 77.

             101 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 453.

             102 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, page 4
                  (www.https://www.pmi.org/about/ethics/code).




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 111
             103 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 721.

             104 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 565.

             105 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: The Project Management Tool Kit: 100 Tips and Techniques for Getting the
                  Job Done Right by Tom Kendrick, page 51.

             106 Closing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 275.

             107 Initiating
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 31-32.

             108 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 267 ("EAC - If both the CPI and SPI
                  influence the remaining work, use:").

             109 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 164-166.

             110 Closing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 127-128.

             111 Closing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 121.

             112 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 267.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 112
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             113 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 267.

             114 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 90.

             115 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 345.

             116 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 294-295.

             117 Planning
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 183.

             118 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 523.

             119 Closing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 104.

             120 Initiating
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 550-551.

             121 Initiating
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: The Project Management Tool Kit: 100 Tips and Techniques for Getting the
                  Job Done Right by Tom Kendrick, pages 164-165.

             122 Closing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Managing Project Quality by Timothy J. Kloppenborg and Joseph A. Petrick,
                  page 66.


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 113
             123 Planning
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 19-21.

             124 Closing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 267.

             125 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 112.

             126 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 60-62.

             127 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, page 4
                  (https://www.pmi.org/about/ethics/code).

             128 Initiating
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 77.

             129 Planning
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 323.

             130 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 154, 477.

             131 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Management JumpStart by Kim Heldman, page 222.

             132 Closing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Project Management JumpStart by Kim Heldman, page 268.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 114
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             133 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Program Management: A Comprehensive Overview of the Discipline by
                  Mitchell L. Springer, page 34.

             134 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, page 5, 5.3.1 and 5.3.2,
                  https://www.pmi.org/about/ethics/code.

             135 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 340.

             136 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: Managing Project Quality by Timothy J. Kloppenborg and Joseph A. Petrick,
                  page 70.

             137 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Leadership Skills for Managers, Fourth Edition by Charles M. Cadwell, page
                  11.

             138 Initiating
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 75.

             139 Planning
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 478.

             140 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 443.

             141 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Project Business Management by Oliver F. Lehmann.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 115
             142 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 154.

             143 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 47.

             144 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Managing Six Sigma: A Practical Guide to Understanding, Assessing, and
                  Implementing the Strategy That Yields Bottom-Line Success by Forrest W. Breyfogle III,
                  James M. Cupello and Becki Meadows, page 112.

             145 Planning
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 61.

             146 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: Software Project Management For Dummies by Teresa Luckey, Joseph
                  Phillips, page 252.

             147 Closing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: Project Manager Street Smarts: A Real World Guide to PMP Skills, by Linda
                  Kretz Zaval and Terri A. Wagner, page 669.

             148 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMP Handbook, pages 27-29, chapter: Professional Development Units
                  (PDUs), categories 2-5
                  (pmi.org/Certification/~/media/PDF/Certifications/pdc_pmphandbook.ashx).

             149 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, page 3
                  (https://www.pmi.org/about/ethics/code).




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 116
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             150 Closing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: The Human Aspects of Project Management: Human Resources Skills for the
                  Project Manager by Vijay K. Verma, Volume Two, page 152.

             151 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Mastering Virtual Teams: Strategies, Tools, and Techniques That Succeed by
                  Deborah L. Duarte and Nancy Tennant Snyder, Second Edition, page 68 .

             152 Closing
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 350.

             153 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: Managing Project Quality by Timothy J. Kloppenborg and Joseph A. Petrick,
                  page 70.

             154 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 241.

             155 Planning
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 186.

             156 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Mastering Virtual Teams: Strategies, Tools, and Techniques That Succeed by
                  Deborah L. Duarte and Nancy Tennant Snyder, Second Edition, page 70.

             157 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, page 212.

             158 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 113, 176.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 117
             159 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: Earned Value Project Management by Quentin W. Fleming and Joel M.
                  Koppelman, Fourth Edition, page 152.

             160 Planning
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 160.

             161 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 41.

             162 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 247, 549.

             163 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 254.

             164 Planning
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 435.
                    N.B.: Diagram created with Insight Tree by Visionary Tools


             165 Planning
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, pages 373ff.

             166 Planning
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 111.

             167 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 118-119; Practice Standard for Project
                  Configuration Management
                  (https://drm.pmi.org/Default.aspx?doc=Practice_Standard_Project_Configuration_Mana
                  gement.pdf&r=http://www.pmi.org/PMBOK-Guide-and-Standards/Standards-Library-of-
                  PMI-Global-Standards.aspx)


Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 118
                                 (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             168 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 210-211.

             169 Closing
                  Answer: 1
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 121.

             170 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  References: The New Dynamic Project Management: Winning Through the Competitive
                  Advantage by Deborah S. Kezsbom and Katherine A. Edward, 2nd Edition, pages 266-
                  275.

             171 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  Reference: Project Management, A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
                  Controlling by Harold Kerzner, 12th edition, pages 714-716.

             172 Planning
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 205.

             173 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 3
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 264.

             174 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 4
                  Reference: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 274.

             175 Closing
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 127; Identifying and Managing Project
                  Risk: Essential Tools for Failure-Proofing Your Project by Tom Kendrick, Second Edition,
                  page 323.

             176 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 442, 444.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 119
             177 Executing
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 449.

             178 Initiating
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 418.

             179 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 58.

             180 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 224.

             181 Initiating
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 33.

             182 Initiating
                  Answer: 4
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 9.

             183 Initiating
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 30.

             184 Closing
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 39-40.

             185 Initiating
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 47.

             186 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 53.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 120
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
             187 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, pages 53-56.

             188 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 63.

             189 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 64.

             190 Executing
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 65.

             191 Executing
                  Answer: 4
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 144.

             192 Planning
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 216.

             193 Planning
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 131.

             194 Monitoring and controlling
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 226.

             195 Planning
                  Answer: 4
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 275.

             196 Planning
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 310.



Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.

                               (c) 2007-2018, Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany


                                                                                                                 121
             197 Planning
                  Answer: 2
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 416.

             198 Planning
                  Answer: 1
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 424.

             199 Initiating
                  Answer: 3
                  References: PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Edition, page 513.

             200 Executing
                  Answer: 1
                  References: Project Business Management by Oliver F. Lehmann, page 246.




Notes




        This document may be freely printed, copied and distributed for private and commercial use, as long as the lay-
        out, contents and the copyright notes remain unchanged. Please verify that you have the most up-to-date ver-
        sion at: www.oliverlehmann.com.


 122
                                (c) 2007-2018 Team Oliver F. Lehmann Project Management Training, Munich, Germany
