                       Updated for the
                     PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Ed.




CAPM(R)
in Depth
Certified Associate in
Project Management Study Guide
for the CAPM(R) Exam

Second Edition

Paul Sanghera
    CAPM(R) IN DEPTH

 CERTIFIED ASSOCIATE IN PROJECT
MANAGEMENT STUDY GUIDE FOR THE
           CAPM(R) EXAM

        SECOND EDITION



          Paul Sanghera
CAPM(R) in Depth: Certified Associate in Project Management Study Guide for the
CAPM(R) Exam
Paul Sanghera
San Francisco, California, USA
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-3663-5                          ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-3664-2
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018947466
Copyright (c) 2019 by Paul Sanghera
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole
or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical
way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer
software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos,
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no
intention of infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even
if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or
not they are subject to proprietary rights.
PMI, PMP, and PMBOK are registered trademarks of Project Management Institute, Inc. in the
United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective
owners.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the
date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty,
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
     Managing Director, Apress Media LLC: Welmoed Spahr
     Acquisitions Editor: Shiva Ramachandran
     Development Editor: Laura Berendson
     Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Cover designed by eStudio Calamar

Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505,
email orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is
a California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance
Inc. (SSBM Finance Inc.). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please email rights@apress.com, or visit http://www.apress.
com/rights-permissions.
Apress titles may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. eBook
versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our
Print and eBook Bulk Sales web page at http://www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary material referenced by the author in this book is available
to readers on GitHub via the book's product page, located at www.apress.com/9781484236635. For
more detailed information, please visit http://www.apress.com/source-code.
Printed on acid-free paper
To my wife, Renee, and our son, Adam.
Contents
About the Author  vii
Introductionix

Part I: The Big Picture of Project Management 1
Chapter 1: Project Management Framework 3
Chapter 2: Project Environment 45
Chapter 3: Project Integration Management87

Part II: Scope, Schedule, and Resources  133
Chapter 4: Project Scope Management 135
Chapter 5: Project Schedule Management173
Chapter 6: Project Resource Management221

Part III: Cost, Stakeholders, and Communication  277
Chapter 7: Project Cost Management279
Chapter 8: Managing the Stakeholders317
Chapter 9: Project Communication Management343

Part IV: Quality, Risk, and Procurement 379
Chapter 10: Project Quality Management 381
Chapter 11: Project Risk Management417
Chapter 12: Project Procurement Management 469
Appendix A: Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises501
Appendix B: Answers and Explanations for Chapter
            Review Questions 539

Glossary583

Index  597
About the Author
                                 Dr. Paul Sanghera is a leading expert in project
                                 management. He is a scientist, engineer, teacher,
                                 manager, and author. He has years of diverse
                                 hands-on project management experience, both
                                 in academic research labs--from Cornell to
                                 CERN--and in the high-tech computer indus-
                                 try--from Novell to Netscape to MP3. Having
                                 worked in various roles, including project man-
                                 ager, director of project management, director
                                 of software development, software developer,
                                 teacher and trainer, and scientist, Dr. Sanghera
                                 has developed a broad and deep comprehension
                                 of the global principles of project management
applicable to all areas. In addition to authoring or coauthoring more than 150
science research papers published in American, Canadian, European, and other
international research journals, Dr. Sanghera has authored several books in
science, technology, and project management.
Introduction
    "Begin at the beginning, and go on till you come to the end: then stop."
                       --Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll

The primary purpose of this book is to help you pass the Certified Associate in
Project Management (CAPM) exam administered by the Project Management
Institute (PMI). The exam, and hence this book, is based on the sixth edition
of the PMBOK Guide. Because this book has a laser-sharp focus on the exam
objectives, expert project managers and project team members who want to
pass the CAPM exam can use this book to ensure that they do not miss any
objectives. Yet this is not an exam-cram book. The chapters and the sections
within each chapter are presented in a logical learning sequence. A topic in a
chapter and the chapter only depend upon the previously covered topics and
chapters, and there is no hopping from topic to topic. The concepts and top-
ics, both simple and complex, are clearly explained when they appear for the
first time. No prior knowledge of project management is assumed. This facili-
tates stepwise learning, prevents confusion, and makes this book useful also
for beginners who want to get up to speed quickly to pass the CAPM exam,
even if they are new to the discipline of project management. The presenta-
tion of material in such a fashion enables the book to help a wider audience,
as noted next.


Who This Book Is For
With a focus on the CAPM exam topics, this book is designed to serve the
following audiences:
      *   Project management practitioners who want to prepare
          for the CAPM exam
      *   Entry-level project managers and project team members
          who want to prepare for the CAPM exam
      *   Beginners who want to join the field of project manage-
          ment and get up to speed quickly
x   Introduction


          *    Project managers who want a book to use as a quick and
               easy reference to the discipline of project management
          *    Instructors and trainers who want a textbook for a
               course on introductory project management for both
               exam and non-exam classes

    How the Book Is Organized
    This book tells the story of project management in a cohesive and concise
    yet comprehensive fashion. This book is written to the most current ver-
    sion of the CAPM exam based on the sixth edition of A Guide to the Project
    Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) by PMI. The discipline of
    project management, according to the PMBOK Guide, contains ten knowledge
    areas, such as cost management and quality management, and five process
    groups: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing.
    The CAPM exam is solely based on the PMBOK Guide, which is organized
    along the knowledge areas. To keep things simple for the reader, I have also
    organized this book along the knowledge areas. The project management
    processes in one knowledge area interact with processes in other knowledge
    areas. That said, all efforts have been made to keep the presentation cohesive.
    All concepts are explained where they appear for the first time. All sections
    in a chapter and all chapters in the book are logically connected to each other
    to support sequential learning. To support this effort, the book is organized
    into four parts.
    A glossary at the end of the book covers all the important concepts and can
    be helpful for a quick check of a term at any stage of your reading.


    How Each Chapter Is Organized
    Each chapter begins with a list of the exam objectives on which the chapter
    is focused. The first section in each chapter is an introduction in which we
    establish three or four underlying concepts or topics that will be explored in
    the chapter. Each chapter has the following features:

          *    Exam Objectives. All exam objectives covered in the
               chapter are fully explained at the beginning of the chapter.
          *    Big Picture. Each chapter begins by introducing the big
               picture of the topics covered in the chapter. This prepares
               the reader for a smooth dive into the details, which follow.
                                                                  Introduction   xi



      *   Study Checkpoints. Each chapter in its body pres-
          ents Study Checkpoints, which are exercises to ensure
          that you get the crucial points in the covered material.
          The solutions to Study Checkpoints are presented in
          Appendix A.
      *   Notes, Tips, and Cautions. As you read through a
          chapter, you will find Notes that present additional helpful
          material related to the topic being described, Tips that
          provide additional real-world insight into the topic being
          discussed, and Cautions on the points that would be easy
          to trip on for some.
      *   Summary. The "Summary" section of each chapter pro-
          vides the big, unified picture while reviewing the impor-
          tant concepts in the chapter in a very concise way.
      *   Exam's Eye View. The "Exam's Eye View" section
          highlights the important points in the chapter from
          the perspective of the exam: the things that you must
          comprehend, the things that you should watch out for
          because they might not seem to fit in with the ordinary
          order of things, and the facts that you should memorize
          for the exam.
      *   Review Questions. Each chapter ends with a "Review
          Questions" section that has a two-pronged purpose: to
          help you test your knowledge of the material presented
          in the chapter and to help you evaluate your ability to
          answer the exam questions based on the exam objectives
          covered in the chapter. The answers to the review ques-
          tions are presented in Appendix B.

About the CAPM Exam
This book covers the material for the CAPM exam. Passing this exam is neces-
sary to obtain CAPM certification.
To be eligible to take the CAPM exam, you must meet a set of minimum
requirements. A summary of these requirements and other details is listed in
the following table.
xii   Introduction


      The CAPM Exam at a Glance

      Exam Detail                            CAPM
      Number of questions                    Scorable: 135
                                             Pretest: 15
      Maximum time allowed                   3 hours
      Question types                         Multiple choice
      Minimum educational background         High school diploma or global equivalent
      Minimum project                        1,500 hours of professional experience on a
      management experience                  project team or 23 contact hours of formal project
                                             management education
      Exam fee (given in U.S. dollars--may   Member: $225
      vary by country)                       Non-member: $300
       Sign code of professional conduct     Yes




      Note For the most up-to-date and detailed information, visit the PMI
      website at www.pmi.org, or see the latest version of the CAPM Certification
      Handbook by PMI.


      The following are a few tips that you can use both while you are preparing for
      the exam and during the exam:

             *      PMBOK has a very formal way of naming processes,
                    process groups, knowledge areas, and documents. Know
                    these formal names well. However, just like in real-life
                    project management, do not expect that the exam will
                    always refer to these names in a formal way. To help you
                    on this issue, this book refers to these names in both
                    formal and informal ways. For example, performing qual-
                    ity control (informal) means the Control Quality process
                    (formal), scope plan (informal) means project scope man-
                    agement plan (formal), and initiating (or initiation) means
                    Initiating Process Group.
             *      The questions in the CAPM exam are largely based on
                    the PMBOK Guide, Sixth Edition. Still, you need to read
                    the questions carefully and patiently and figure out what
                    counts and what does not, and if there is some extra
                    information.
                                                           Introduction   xiii



*   Get comfortable with the idea that there will be some
    questions that you may not be able to answer correctly. In
    such a situation, just believe in yourself and your experi-
    ence and select the best answer accordingly. You may have
    the option (read the instructions before starting the exam)
    to leave these questions for a possible review later if you
    have time. Key point: Move on without getting frustrated.
*   There will be questions for which you will need to choose
    between an innocent way of skipping the formal process
    to save time and following the formal project manage-
    ment process. In almost all cases, the correct answer will
    be to follow the process.
*   There will be questions for which you will need to
    choose between facing the problem head-on and taking
    an easy way out, such as dodging a thorny issue, ignoring
    a challenging problem, or postponing a difficult decision.
    Almost always, the correct answer is to meet the problem
    head-on in a professional manner.
*   To answer some questions correctly, understand that
    in the world of project management as seen from the
    perspective of PMBOK, project managers communicate
    directly and clearly and do not say things to be read
    between the lines. For example, if you have a problem
    with a team member, you talk to the team member
    face-to-face rather than going to the member's manager,
    which you might need to do eventually if you can't solve
    the problem by dealing directly with the team member.
*   Understand clearly the roles of the key stakeholders, such
    as the project manager, project sponsor, and customer.
    Especially understand your responsibilities as a project
    manager. You need to be proactive to make decisions and
    manage the project, influence the factors that contribute
    to changes rather than waiting for the changes to occur,
    and have up-to-date information about the project.
xiv   Introduction


            *   Know the details of the input, output, and tools and tech-
                niques for each process, not just the names. For example,
                it's not enough to remember that the project manage-
                ment plan is an input to a process. You should know the
                project management plan is an input because it contains
                such and such subsidiary plans from which such and such
                information is used in this process. Be prepared to see
                the subsidiary plan as an input in the answer options,
                whereas the PMBOK Guide might have listed the project
                management plan as an input.

      Best wishes for the exam; go for it!
                                                        --Paul Sanghera, Ph.D.
                                                               PA R T


                                                                  I

The Big Picture
of Project
Management
Welcome to the world of project management. Here is project management
for you in five simple concepts: initiate, plan, execute, monitor and control,
and close.
The rest is in the details. We start this journey by presenting the big picture
of project management--exploring the project management framework and
the environment in which the project is performed and overviewing project
management via all five stages of the project: initiate, plan, execute, monitor
and control, and close.
                                                                      CHAPTER


                                                                             1

Project
Management
Framework
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 6 percent of the CAPM exam,
equivalent to about eight questions.
Study the whole chapter in detail. The concepts involved may not be mentioned
directly in the exam objectives, but you will need them in order to answer the
questions correctly.

CAPM Exam Objectives
   1.Understand the five project management process groups and the processes within
     each group.
   2.Recognize the relationships among project, program, portfolio, and operational
     management.
   3. Define a typical project lifecycle.
   4. Understand the function and importance of tailoring for different projects.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_1
4   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


    What do the Eiffel Tower, the Internet, and this book have in common?
    Projects! All three of them are outcomes of projects. Even given all the
    required material and knowledge, how do people really build immense and
    complex structures or systems, such as the Eiffel Tower of Paris, the Taj Mahal
    of Agra, or the Internet and the World Wide Web of the Information Age?
    The answer is again projects. Through projects, it is possible to build small
    and big and simple and complex things in an effective and efficient manner.
    All projects need to be managed. A so-called unmanaged project is simply a
    poorly managed project that is destined to fail. Therefore, the importance of
    project management cannot be overstated.
    We all know from experience that each project has (or should have) a
    beginning and an end. Therefore, managing a project means managing the
    lifecycle of the project, starting from the beginning (initiating) and going to the
    end (closing); this is accomplished using processes, which constitute what are
    called project management knowledge areas. Although you use your knowledge
    in terms of processes to manage projects, the management will be greatly
    influenced by the environment in which the project runs, such as the structure
    and culture of the performing organization. Projects also originate from their
    environments.
    The goal of this chapter is to walk you through the framework of project
    management. To that end, we will explore three avenues: the project lifecycle,
    the project management knowledge areas, and the project in the context of
    programs, portfolios, and the organization's strategy. In the process of doing
    so, we will introduce some basic concepts of project management.


    Basic Concepts in Project Management
    Each discipline of knowledge, from physics to biology and from computer
    science to poetry, builds upon some basic concepts. The terms that refer to
    or define these concepts make up the language of the discipline. The very
    basic terms in project management are described briefly in the following list:
          *    Project. A project is a work effort made over a finite
               period of time with a start and a finish to create a unique
               product, service, or result. Because a project has a start
               and an end, it is also called a temporary effort or endeavor.
          *    Project Phase. A project phase is a set of logically
               related activities that usually completes one or more
               major deliverables of the project. The phases are generally
               completed in sequence; however, an overlap is possible in
               some situations. Depending on its size and complexity, a
               project may have one or more phases.
                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth   5



*   Project Life Cycle. It is the full project duration from
    beginning to end, including all project stages: initiating,
    planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and
    closing. If projects have multiple phases, all of these stages
    are repeated in each phase.
*   Process Groups. These are the technical names for the
    project stages: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring
    and controlling, and closing.
*   Organization. An organization is a group of individuals
    organized to work for some purpose or mission.
    Computer companies, energy companies (to whom you
    pay your electric bills), and cable companies are examples
    of organizations. An organization might offer products,
    such as books or donuts, or services, such as Internet
    access or online banking.
*   PerformingOrganization.Theperforming organization,
    also referred to as the project organization, is the
    organization that is performing the project.
*   Project Stakeholder. A project stakeholder is an
    individual or an organization that can affect or be affected
    by the project execution. A project can have a wide
    spectrum of stakeholders, from the project sponsor, to
    an environmental organization, to an ordinary citizen.
*   Process. In the context of projects, a process is a set of
    related tasks performed to manage a certain aspect of a
    project, such as cost, scope, and risk. Each process belongs
    to a knowledge area and corresponds to a process group.
*   Knowledge Area. A knowledge area in project
    management is defined by its knowledge requirements
    related to managing a specific aspect of a project, such as
    cost, by using a set of processes. PMI recognizes a total
    of nine knowledge areas, such as cost management and
    resource management.
*   Tailoring. Obviously, you don't apply all the project
    management knowledge to a project. For a given project,
    with help from the project team, you select appropriate
    lifecycle phases and needed outputs, and to produce
    those outputs you choose the right processes, inputs, and
    tools and techniques. This method is called tailoring.
6   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


          *   Project Management. Project management is the
              use of knowledge, skills, and tools to manage a project
              from start to finish with the goal of meeting the project
              requirements. It involves using the appropriate processes.
          *   Phase Gate. A review at the end of each phase leading
              to the decision to continue to the next phase as planned,
              continue to the next phase with changed plan, or end the
              project.
    This is a minimal set of terms that you need to understand before you can
    start your exploration of the world of project management. More terms will
    be introduced as you continue exploring the discipline of project management
    in this book.
    Now that you understand these basic terms, you can ask a very basic question:
    What does it mean to manage a project? In other words, what's involved in
    managing a project?


    Understanding Projects
    Before delving into the details of project management, you need to understand
    what a project is, where it came from, and why. At any organization, there are
    many activities being executed every day. Most of these activities are organized
    into groups of interrelated activities. These groups fall into two categories:
    projects and operations. An operation is an ongoing and repetitive set of
    tasks, whereas a project has a lifecycle--a beginning and an end.


    What Is a Project?
    A project is a work effort made over a finite period of time with a start and
    a finish to create a unique product, service, or result. Because a project has
    a start and a finish, it is also called a temporary effort or endeavor. In other
    words, as the PMI defines it, "a project is a temporary endeavor undertaken
    to create a unique product, service, or result." So, a project has two defining
    characteristics: it is temporary, and it creates a unique product. Let's explore
    further these two defining concepts: temporary and unique.
    Temporary. The temporary nature of projects refers to the fact that each
    project has a definite beginning and a definite end. A project can reach its end
    in one of two possible ways:
          *   The project has met its objectives--that is, the planned
              unique product has been created.
          *   The project has been terminated before its successful
              completion for whatever reason.
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth         7



Note that the temporary nature of a project does not mean that the project
will be of short duration, nor does it refer to the product it creates. Projects
can create lasting products, such as the Taj Mahal, the Eiffel Tower, or the
Internet.
The second defining characteristic of a project is that it must create a unique
product.
Unique product. The outcome of a project must be a unique product,
service, or result. How do a product, service, and result differ from each
other?
       *    Product. This is a tangible, quantifiable artifact that is
            either the end item or a component of it. The big-screen
            television in your living room, the Swiss watch on your
            wrist, and the wine bottle on your table are some
            examples of products.
       *    Service. Actually, when we say a project can create
            a service, we really mean the capability to perform a
            service. For example, a project that creates a website for
            a bank to offer online banking has created the capability
            to offer the online banking service.
       *    Result. This is usually the knowledge-related outcome
            of a project--for example, the results of an analysis
            performed in a research project.
In this book, quite often we will refer to product, service, or result as just
"product" or "project outcome" for brevity.


Caution! Not only organizations undertake projects. A project can also be undertaken by a
group of individuals or even a single individual.


Projects are organized to execute a set of activities that cannot be addressed
within the limits of the organization's ongoing normal operations. To clearly
identify whether an undertaking is a project, you must understand the
difference between a project and an operation.
8   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


    Distinguishing Projects from Operations
    An organization executes a multitude of activities as part of the work to
    achieve objectives. Some of these activities are to support projects, and others
    are to support what are called operations. An operation is a set of tasks that
    does not qualify to be a project. In other words, an operation is a function that
    performs ongoing tasks. It does not produce a unique (new) product, and it
    does not have a preplanned beginning and end. For example, to put together a
    data center is a project, but after you put it together, keeping it up and running
    is an operation.
    It is important to understand that projects and operations share some
    characteristics, such as the following:
          *    Both require resources, including human resources,
               i.e., people.
          *    Both are constrained to limited, as opposed to unlimited,
               resources.
          *    Both are managed--that is, planned, executed, and
               controlled.
          *    Both have objectives and contribute to meeting the
               company's strategic objectives.
          *    Both can have and share stakeholders.
    The distinctions between projects and operations can be made by sticking to
    the definition of a project--that it is temporary and unique. Operations are
    generally ongoing and repetitive. Although both projects and operations have
    objectives, a project ends when its objectives are met, whereas an operation
    continues contributing to objectives--and possibly to a new set of objectives
    in the event of a change in the organization's strategy.
    Projects can be performed at various levels of an organization; they vary in
    size and accordingly can involve just one person or a team. Table 1-1 presents
    some examples of projects.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth     9



Table 1-1. Examples of Projects

Project                                          Outcome (Product, Service, or Result)
Constructing Eiffel Tower                        Product
Running presidential election campaign           Results: win or lose; Products: documents
Developing a website to offer online             Service
education
Setting up a computer network in one             Service
building
Moving a computer network from one               Result: network is moved to another building
building
Study the genes of members of Congress           Results (of the research); Product: research
                                                 paper
Book sold in a bookstore                         Product
A software app like MS Word sold as a CD         Product
and paid for once
A software app integrated into web and           Service
paid for monthly
Human Genome Project                             Result



                            STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.1

   Identify each of the following items as a project or an operation.
          A.   A librarian performing her daily job responsibilities
          B.   A bookseller processing customer orders
          C.   A network administrator ensuring that the network stays up and
               running 24/7
          D.   Taking a course in molecular biology


A project can result in a product (or service) that is sustained by an operation.
For example, constructing the Eiffel Tower is a project, whereas managing it
for the tourists visiting it every day is an operation.
Now that we have a clear idea of what a project is, we have to wonder why
an organization would launch a specific project. So, let's ask a fundamental
question: Where do projects originally come from?
10   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Origins of Projects: Where Do Projects Come
     From?
     Projects are originated by organizational leaders in response to one or more
     situations the organization is facing. These situations, or factors acting on the
     organization, may fall into one of the following four categories:

           1. Business/legal requirements. This category includes
              projects based on the need of meeting legal, regulatory,
              or social requirements. For example, consider a building
              owner authorizing a project to make the building
              accessible to physically disabled persons in order to meet
              the legal requirements for using the building for a specific
              business.
           2. Stakeholder requests or needs. This category
              includes projects based on satisfying stakeholder requests
              or needs. An example would be an environmental
              organization starting a project to raise awareness among
              politicians about the science behind global warming issues.
              Another example would be a company that undertakes a
              project to lessen the negative impact that its operations
              or products may have on the environment.
           3. Business or technological strategies. This category
              of factors would give rise to projects based on the need to
              implement or change business or technological strategies.
              For example, a web design company authorizes a project
              to automate certain aspects of maintaining websites to
              increase its efficiency and revenue. For another example,
              based on recent technological advances, a taxi company
              might start a project to implement an automatic driving
              feature in some of its taxis.
           4. Products, processes, or services. This category of
              factors would give rise to projects based on the need to
              create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services.
              For example, a biotechnology company authorizes
              a project to produce and implement SOP (standard
              operating system) in all its labs.
     As a careful reader would note, these four categories of factors specified
     by PMI are not mutually exclusive. For example, the last category is at least
     partially redundant; a project in response to any of these categories may
     create a product or service. For this reason, or as a result of the objectives
     of the project, the project may fall into more than one of these categories.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth             11



For example, a car manufacturer's project to make electric cars using cutting-
edge technology in response to environmentally aware customers' needs falls
into all of the last three categories: 2, 3, and 4.
These categories of factors collectively are called project initiation context.
As illustrated in Figure 1-1, these factors are linked, on one hand, to the
strategic objectives of the organization and influence its business strategy, and
on the other hand are linked to the business value of the organization though
projects. In short, an organization with a certain business value, responding
to one or more of these factors, runs a project that produces some business
value, adding to the previous business value of the organization. This is how
projects bring about change--by driving the organization from a lower
business-value state to a higher business-value state--and in this way help the
organization to stay viable.


Note The strategy of an organization is an action plan to achieve its business goals and
objectives. It's also called the strategic plan or strategic business plan. The strategy determines
the portfolio of projects and programs that the organization will execute.



            Organization's Strategic                      Organization's Business
                  Objectives                                     Strategy



Satisfy stakeholder request                                           Meet legal, regulatory,
           or needs                        Project
                                                                      or social requirements
   Implement or change                    Initiation
 business or technological                 Context                       Create, improve, or fix
          strategies                                                 products, services, or processes




                                           Project




                                       Business Value


Figure 1-1. Origination of a project and its single most important outcome: business value
added to the organization
12   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework



     Caution! The factors discussed in this section not only influence the organization's current
     business strategies but also its current operations because operations are there to serve business
     strategies or objectives.


     In addition to the initiation context discussed here, in the next chapter, we
     will explore what other organizational and external factors may influence the
     project.
     Where there is a project, there is project management.


     Understanding Project Management
     In this book, we refer to project management as defined in the project
     management standard by the Project Management Institute (PMI): "Project
     management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to
     project activities to meet the project requirements."
     This standard, contained in the Project Management Body of Knowledge
     (PMBOK) Guide, presents, as PMI claims, "a subset of the project management
     body of knowledge that is generally recognized as good practice." By generally
     recognized, PMI means two things: 1) the presented knowledge is applicable
     to most projects most of the time; and 2) there is consensus about its value
     and usefulness. The good practice is also the general consensus that the
     application of the presented knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
     management processes can enhance the probability of project success.


     Note As a result of innovation and advances in science and technology, the body of knowledge
     in the project management profession is constantly changing, so the standard is updated
     accordingly every few years.


     In a poorly managed project, bad things happen to the project, such as missed
     deadlines, cost overruns, and poor quality, all resulting in dissatisfied project
     stakeholders. This will essentially fail the project and hurt the organization's
     reputation and viability. However, effective project management helps to
     manage different aspects of project, such as cost, scope, and stakeholders
     making the project more predictable as it's being executed. This helps to
     identify and resolve problems and issues--as well as to identify and respond to
     risk--in a timely fashion, increasing the chances of project success. Moreover,
     with effective project management, you can clearly link the project result to
     the business goals of the organization, which will enable you to adjust the
     project plans in a changing business environment. This way, effective project
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth         13



management helps the organization to persist in a fast-changing world by
staying relevant and viable. In this book, project management means effective
project management until mentioned otherwise.
Projects are inseparable from project management. At initiating time, a project
is just born, and it's brought up by a procedure called progressive elaboration
through project management.


Understanding Progressive Elaboration
As the saying goes, Rome was not built in a day. Rest aside, the product of a
project--even the project plan--is not built in a day either. Usually there is
a concept first and a broad vision for the end product--that is, the outcome
of the project. The clearer the vision you have of the unique product that
you want from the project, the more accurate the project plan will be. So,
you move toward the project plan in incremental steps as the ideas about
the final product are refined and as you get more and more information
about the requirements in a progressive fashion. This procedure of defining
(or planning) a project is called progressive elaboration.
Here is an example of progressive elaboration. You wake up one morning
with an idea to close the digital gap in your community. Now, you have a
concept of the final product (result) of your project: close the digital gap in
your community. But what do you really mean by that? It might include many
things--building computers in an economical way and providing them at low
prices to those who don't have them, raising awareness of the necessity of
computer literacy, offering classes, and the like. Now, you are really working
to refine your idea of the final product. The second question is, how are you
going to do this? Here, you are referring to the project plan. You can see that
the project plan and its accuracy and details depend upon how refined the
idea of the final product is. The final product or objectives and the plan to
achieve them will be elaborated further in smaller steps.


Tip Uncontrolled changes that make it into the project without being properly processed are
called scope creep. Do not confuse progressive elaboration with scope creep.


Progressive elaboration, in general, means developing something in
incremental steps. The project plan will be broadly defined to start and will
get more accurate, detailed, and explicit in an incremental fashion as better
understanding about the project deliverables and objectives develops. It
involves successive iterations of the planning process, which result in a more
accurate and complete plan.
14   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Even after you have an approved final project plan and the project starts
     executing, progressive elaboration continues to some extent. For example,
     you will see later in this chapter that the execution and planning stages of
     the project interact with each other. Based on project performance and
     stakeholder requests the project plan could change, even including project
     scope.
     Most of project management is done by performing a set of processes.


     Understanding a Process
     Processes are the heart of project management. In other words, processes
     are atoms, the smallest functional units, of project management. If you want to
     think of project management like a project management professional, think in
     terms of processes. Almost everything in the world of project management is
     done through processes.
     What is a process, anyway? Back up a little and look around you; you will see
     processes everywhere, not only in project management. For example, when
     you make coffee in the morning, you go through a process. The water, the
     coffee filter, and the roasted hazelnut coffee made by grinding golden-colored
     beans are the input items to this process. The coffeemaker is the tool, and
     how you make the coffee is the technique. A cup of freshly brewed hazelnut
     coffee is the output item from this process. So, a process, in general, is a set of
     interrelated activities performed to obtain a specified set of products, results,
     or services. A project management process, as explained in the example and
     in Figure 1-2, always consists of three parts: input, tools and techniques, and
     output. If you like this analogy, think of a process as a chemical reaction in
     which tools and techniques operate on input to produce an output. The term
     raw data in Figure 1-2 means that the input is processed to produce output.

           Input                             Tools and                           Output
                                            Techniques
      Raw data or       Tools and        Appropriate tools      Produces     The outcome of
      information for   techniques       and techniques                      the operation of
      the process       operate on                                           tools and
                        input                                                techniques on
                                                                             input data or
                                                                             information

     Figure 1-2. Three parts of a process: tools and techniques operating on input to produce
     output
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth       15



Of course, you can come up with other examples of processes that you
have been using in your life without realizing it. In project management, you
use processes to accomplish things, such as developing a project schedule,
directing and managing the project work, and developing and managing the
project team.


Tip As phase is the atom of a project, process is the atom of project management.


As illustrated in Figure 1-2, each process consists of three parts, described in
the following list:
       *    Input. The input to a process consists of the raw
            data--the data or information that is needed to start
            the process and that will be processed into output. For
            example, the project management plan is one of several
            input items in the Develop Schedule process that will be
            used to develop the schedule of a project.
       *    Tools and Techniques. Tools and techniques are the
            methods used to operate on the input to transform it
            into output. For example, a critical path method that
            helps to develop a schedule is a tool used in the schedule
            development process.
       *    Output. The output is the outcome or result of a
            process. Each process contains at least one output item;
            otherwise, there would be no point in performing a
            process. For example, an output item of the schedule
            development process is, well, the project schedule.
Now that you understand what a process is, you likely realize that you will
be using different processes at different stages (not phases) of a project, such
as planning and execution. Actually, the whole lifecycle of a project can be
understood in terms of five stages, with each stage corresponding to a group
of processes.


Caution! An organizational operation may also have some kinds of processes, but that does
not make the operation a process.
16   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     The following are some characteristics of processes:
             1. Iterations. Some processes, such as Develop Project
                Charter and Close Project, are run only once or at
                predetermined points in the process, while others,
                such as Conduct Procurements and Acquire Recourses,
                may be periodically run depending on the project size.
                Yet processes like Define Activities may be even more
                frequently performed.
             2. Process Interconnect. Processes are connected with
                other processes by input or output. An output item of
                a process becomes an input to an other process or a
                terminal output; i.e., a project or phase deliverable.
             3. Overlapping. Some of the input items may appear in
                multiple projects. This is also true for tools or techniques.
                From this, you can see that processes may overlap in their
                activities.
     Now that we have a very good basic idea of projects, we can take a tour of
     the project lifecycle.


     Understanding the Project Lifecycle
     As you already know, each project has a beginning and an end. The timespan
     from the project's beginning to its end is called the project lifecycle. If a project
     has multiple phases, all the phases are completed during its lifecycle to complete
     the project. Regardless of whether the project has multiple phases or just one
     phase, during this lifecycle the project is started, organized and prepared for,
     carried out (project work is performed), watched over, and closed. In the
     standard terminology, a project is initiated, planned, executed, monitored and
     controlled, and closed.


     Caution! Do not confuse project lifecycle with product lifecycle. A project is executed to create
     a product or products, which lasts after the project is finished. In general, the project lifecycle is
     contained within the lifecycle of each product it creates. For example, a project creates a product
     that lasts for a certain time after the project ends, and then it retires. As another example, a project
     is run to add features to a product that existed before the project was initiated and lasts after the
     project is completed.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth          17



From initiation/authorization to completion/closure, a project goes through a
whole lifecycle that includes defining the project objectives, planning the work
to achieve those objectives, performing the work, monitoring and controlling
the progress, and closing the project after receiving product acceptance.
Figure 1-3 shows the different stages of the project lifecycle; the arrows
indicate the flow of information. The five stages, technically called process
groups, of a project lifecycle are described in the following list.


Caution! I refer to the five process groups as five stages for the purpose of helping you
visualize a project. Technically and in PMBOK, they are called process groups. However, be
prepared to recognize them regardless of how they are referred to in the exam; do not expect the
exam to always refer to a process group or a document by its formal technical name. This is also
true with the real world out there, where you will be performing projects.




                                           Initiating




                                           Planning



                  Monitoring
                     and                                         Executing
                  Controlling


                                            Closing


Figure 1-3. Different stages in the lifecycle of a project. Each of these stages represents a
process group.
18   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Initiating a Project
     This stage defines and authorizes the project. The project manager is named
     and the project is officially launched through a signed document called the
     project charter, which is a high-level document that contains items such as
     the purpose of the project, a product description, project objectives and
     requirements, and a summary of the milestone schedule. The central purpose
     of this stage is to align the project's purpose with the business needs and
     the organization's business strategy on one hand and with the stakeholders'
     expectations on the other.
     It is good policy to involve customers and other important stakeholders in the
     initiating stage of the project. It will give them a feeling of shared ownership that
     will greatly contribute to the success of the project by positively influencing
     factors such as acceptance of deliverables and stakeholder satisfaction.


     Note In the discipline of project management, like in many other disciplines, the term
     high-level means lacking details or not referring to details. Keep this meaning in mind when you
     read terms in this book such as high-level product description, high-level plan, and the like. Details
     are usually worked out through a process called progressive elaboration.




     Caution! The processes in the initiating process group, just like those in any other process
     group, can also be used to initiate a phase of a project that has multiple phases.


     After the project has been initiated, it needs planning.


     Planning the Project
     In this stage, you, the project manager, along with the project management
     team, develop the project scope, define and refine the project objectives, and
     develop activities to meet those objectives. You do this by developing the
     project management plan, which is a collection of several plans and other
     documents that constitute the course of action required to achieve the
     objectives and meet the requirements of the project. The processes used
     to perform this stage fall into a group called the planning process group. In this
     process group, some non-plan documents are also developed for the project.
     The approved scope plan, schedule plan, and cost plan are called the scope
     baseline, schedule baseline, and cost baseline, respectively.These three baselines
     together are called the project baseline or the performance measurement
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth          19



baseline (PMB).The project performance at any time is assessed by comparing
the results from project execution against this performance measurement
baseline (PMB). In other words, to see how the project is performing, you
compare the actual project execution results against this baseline.


Note The project management plan contains plans from various project management areas
called subsidiary plans, such as a project scope management plan, a schedule management plan,
and a quality management plan.


You then execute the project as planned.


Executing the Project
In this stage, you, the project manager, manage the execution of the project
as planned in the project management plan. You coordinate all the activities
being performed to achieve the project objectives and meet the project
requirements. Of course, the main output of this project is the project
deliverables. Approved changes, recommendations, and defect repairs are
also implemented in this stage. The stakeholders can also suggest changes,
which must go through an approval process before implementation. The
project execution is performed using processes that fall into a group called
the executing process group.
So, the project work defined in the project management plan is executed by
using the processes found in the executing process group. The processes in
this group are used to accomplish a three-pronged goal:
       *    Coordinate people and resources used to perform the
            project activities.
       *    Integrate and manage the project activities being
            performed.
       *    Ensure the implementation of the project scope and
            approved changes.
The lion's share of project resources is consumed in performing processes
from the executing process group.


Note Performing processes from the executing process group may also generate change
requests, which must be processed for approval in the monitor and control group.
20   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Where do the changes and recommendations implemented in this stage come
     from? They arise from monitoring and controlling the project. In general, the
     execution of the project needs to be monitored and controlled to ensure the
     project stays on the planned track.


     Monitoring and Controlling the Project
     You monitor and control the project throughout its lifecycle, including
     during the executing stage. The purpose of monitoring and controlling is to
     make sure that the project stays on track, i.e., is performed as planned, and,
     if it goes off track, to take action to bring it back on track.To accomplish this,
     you continually perform the following steps:

            1. Collect the actual project performance data.
            2. Analyze it to compare the results against the project
               performance baseline to measure project deviation
               from the plan.
            3. Based on deviation, generate change requests, e.g.;
               recommend preventive and corrective actions, and
               process them for approval followed by implementation.
     Change requests may also come directly from the stakeholders, and should
     also be properly evaluated and processed. You will do all this using the
     processes that fall into the process group called the monitoring and controlling
     process group.


     Note Monitoring and controlling does not start only after the project begins execution. Rather,
     the project needs to be monitored and controlled all the way from initiation through closing.


     Whether completed or terminated, each project needs to be closed properly.


     Closing the Project
     In this stage, you verify that all the required project processes are complete,
     all project-related contracts are closed, the outcome of the project is turned
     over to another group, and you can bring the project to an end by disbanding
     the project team. Closing the project also includes conducting a project
     review for lessons learned. Don't forget the last--but not least--task of
     the closing stage: celebration. Terminated projects (that is, projects
     canceled before completion) should also go through the closing stage. The
     processes used to perform the closing stage fall into the closing process group.
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth           21



In a multi-phase project, each phase can and should be closed using the same
process used to close the project.


Note What we refer to as project stages here are not the project phases. A project phase is
a part of the whole project in which certain milestones or project deliverables are completed. All
these stages, technically called process groups, can be applied to any phase of a project that is
divided into multiple phases.




Note The processes of the closing process group can be used to close a project, as well as to
close a phase of a project.


Each process is a two-dimensional entity. It belongs to both a certain project
stage (group) and a specific process knowledge area.


Understanding Project Management
Knowledge Areas
To manage projects, you use project management knowledge, which is
categorized into multiple aspects; each category is called a project management
knowledge area. For example, each project has a scope that needs to be
managed, and the knowledge required to manage scope is in the knowledge
area called project scope management. To perform the project work within the
project scope, you need resources, which need to be managed; the knowledge
area used to manage human resources is called resource management. You get
the idea. Each process belongs to one of the ten knowledge areas discussed
in the following list.

        1. Project integration management. The project is
           initiated, planned, and executed in pieces using different
           knowledge areas, and all those pieces are related to
           each other and need to be come together. That is
           where integration management comes in. For example,
           coordinating efforts to develop and integrate different
           subsidiary plans into the project management plan needs
           to be managed. In general, the integration management
           knowledge area offers processes to define, identify,
           coordinate, and integrate various activities and processes
           within each project management process group.
             In this book, we discuss project integration management
             in Chapter 3.
22   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


          2. Project scope management. The primary purpose
             of project scope management is to ensure that all the
             required work, and only the required work, is performed
             to complete the project. Scoping a project is like drawing
             boundaries around it delineating what is included in
             the project and what is not. During scope management,
             you develop the scope baseline, one of the three very
             important project baselines, the other two being schedule
             baseline and cost baseline.
              In this book, we discuss project scope management in
              Chapter 4.
              The work included in the project scope needs to be
              scheduled.
          3. Project schedule management. The primary purpose
             of project schedule management is to develop and manage
             the project schedule so as to complete the project in time
             as planned. It contains processes to generate information
             needed to develop the schedule, a process to develop the
             schedule, and a process to control the schedule. During
             schedule management, you develop the schedule baseline,
             one of the three very important project baselines, the
             other two being scope baseline and cost baseline.
              In this book, project schedule management is covered in
              Chapter 5.
              Resources are needed to complete the project activities
              in the project schedule.
          4. Project resource management. The primary purpose
             of project resource management is to identify, obtain, and
             manage the resources needed to complete the project.
             The term resources resources refers to both human
             resources, e.g.; project team, and physical resources,
             i.e., material, equipment, facilities, and infrastructure.
             This includes the processes used to obtain, develop, and
             manage the project team that will perform the project
             work.
              Project resource management is discussed in Chapter 6.
              All the project resources cost money.
                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   23



5. Project cost management. The primary task of
   project cost management is to estimate and control
   the project costs, and the primary goal is to complete
   the project within the approved budget. During cost
   management, you develop the cost baseline, one of the
   three very important project baselines, the other two
   being scope baseline and schedule baseline.
    We cover project cost management in Chapter 7.
    We do all these and other project management tasks for
    project stakeholders.
6. Project stakeholder management. The primary
   purpose of project stakeholder management is to identify
   project stakeholders and manage and monitor their
   engagement in the project. This involves analyzing their
   potential impact on the project and their expectations
   from the project, and accordingly developing a strategy
   to appropriately get them engaged in the project.
    In this book, project stakeholder management is covered
    in Chapter 8.
    Not only in project stakeholder management, but
    in managing all aspects of the project, you need to
    communicate.
7. Project communication management. It is
   absolutely imperative for the success of the project
   that project information is generated and distributed,
   i.e., communicated, in a timely fashion. Some would say
   communication is the most important aspect of a project
   and the most important skill for a project manager to have.
   Without a doubt, it is a critically important component
   of project management and a common thread that runs
   through the project lifecycle.
    This process group offers three processes: plan commu-
    nication to determine communication approach; manage
    communication to make it happen; and monitor commu-
    nication to ensure it happened. The key to a project and
    the mantra of effective communication is the distribution
    of the right information to the right stakeholders at the
    right time by using the right communication methods to
    create the desired impact.To make that happen, you need
    be able to create, store, and retrieve information.
24   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


              Project communication management is discussed in
              Chapter 9.
              Any project is complete only to the degree to which its
              objectives and requirements are met; this refers to the
              project quality, which needs to be managed, too.
          8. Project quality management. This process group
             offers three processes to manage quality: plan quality to
             determine the quality requirements and standards that are
             relevant to the project at hand; manage quality to ensure
             that the planned quality requirements and standards are
             applied; and control quality to verify that the project
             and its deliverables meet the quality requirements and
             conform to the quality standards.
              We discuss project quality management in Chapter 10.
              We make assumptions and estimates and face constraints.
              These sources of uncertainty can give rise to risks, which
              must be managed.
          9. Project risk management. A project risk is an event
             that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
             meeting the project objectives. The primary purpose of
             project risk management is to identify risks and respond
             to them should they occur. To make that happen, this
             project group offers processes to identify, analyze, plan
             and implement responses to, and monitor risks. It also
             contains a process used to plan risk management.
              In this book, project risk management is covered in
              Chapter 11.
              There will be situations in which your organization does
              not have the expertise to perform certain schedule
              activities in-house. For this or other reasons, you might
              want to acquire some items or services from an outside
              vendor. This kind of acquisition is called procurement, and
              it also needs to be managed.
         10. Project procurement management. The primary
             purpose of procurement management is to manage
             the acquisition of products (that is, products, services,
             or results) from outside the project team in order to
             complete the project. The external vendor who offers
             the service is called the seller.
                                                CAPM(R) in Depth   25



As you have seen, managing a project largely means
performing a set of processes at various stages of the
project, such as initiating and planning. Accordingly,
processes are grouped corresponding to these stages,
and these groups are called process groups. Processes
are also part of the knowledge required to manage
projects. Each of these processes belongs to one of the
ten knowledge areas identified in the PMBOK Guide, Sixth
Edition. So, a process has a dual membership--one in a
process group, indicating at what stage of the project the
process is performed, and the other in a knowledge area,
indicating what aspect of the project is managed by using
the process. Table 1-2 shows this dual membership for all
the processes identified in the PMBOK Guide.
Table 1-2. Mapping of the Project Management Processes to Process Groups and Knowledge Areas                                                      26

Process Groups =>    Initiating        Planning Process Group            Executing Process      Monitoring and          Closing
Knowledge Areas      Process                                             Group                  Controlling Process     Process Group
|| V                 Group                                                                      Group
Integration          Develop           Develop Project Management Plan 1. Direct and Manage     1. Monitor and          Close Project or
Management (3)       Project Charter                                      Project Work             Control Project      Phase
                                                                         2. Manage Project         Work
                                                                            Knowledge           2. Perform Integrated
                                                                                                   Change Control
Scope                ---               1. Plan Project Scope Management ---                     1. Validate Scope       ---
Management (4)                         2. Collect Requirements                                  2. Control Scope
                                       3. Define Scope
                                       4. Create Work Breakdown
                                          Structure
Schedule             ---               1. Plan Schedule Management       ---                    Control Schedule        ---
                                                                                                                                             Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework




Management (5)                         2. Define Activities
                                       3. Sequence Activities
                                       4. Estimate Activity Resources
                                       5. Estimate Activity Durations
                                       6. Develop Schedule
Resource             ---               1. Develop Resource Plan          1. Acquire Resources   Control Resources
Management (6)                         2. Estimate Activity Resources    2. Develop Team
                                                                         3. Manage Team

                                                                                                                               (continued)
Table 1-2. (continued)

Process Groups =>        Initiating     Planning Process Group        Executing Process       Monitoring and         Closing
Knowledge Areas          Process                                      Group                   Controlling Process    Process Group
|| V                     Group                                                                Group
Cost Management (7) ---                 1. Plan Cost Management       ---                     Control Costs          ---
                                        2. Estimate Costs
                                        3. Determine Budget
Stakeholder              Identify       Plan Stakeholder Engagement   Manage Stakeholder      Monitor Stakeholder
Management (8)           Stakeholders                                 Engagement              Engagement
Communications           Identify       Plan Communications           1. Distribute           Report Performance
Management (9)           Stakeholders                                    Information
                                                                      2. Manage Stakeholder
                                                                         Expectations
Quality                  ---            Plan Quality Management       Manage Quality          Control Quality        ---
Management (10)
Risk Management (11)                    1. Plan Risk Management       Implement Risk          Monitor Risks          ---
                                        2. Identify Risks             Responses
                                        3. Perform Qualitative
                                          Risk Analysis
                                        4. Perform Quantitative
                                          Risk Analysis
                                        5. Plan Risk Responses
Procurement              ---            Plan Procurement Management   Conduct                 Control Procurements
Management (12)                                                       Procurements
                                                                                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth
                                                                                                                                       27
28   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.2

        What is the core difference between knowledge areas and process groups? Try to
        answer this question in one sentence.



     Note Not all the processes are used in all projects. The project management team decides
     which processes need to be used in a given project.



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.3

        In the following table, match each item in the first column with a corresponding item
        in the second column:

        Knowledge Area       Action
        A. Message            1. W
                                  hile developing the schedule, Lora realized that
                                 there was a risk involved in the project. So, she put her
                                 thoughts into a note that she wrote on her computer.
        B. Scope              2. M
                                  anage interdependencies among different processes
                                 belonging to different knowledge areas.
        C. Cost               3. E nsure the project includes the work required to
                                  complete the project successfully and no extra work.
        D. Schedule           4. P
                                  lan the schedule and complete the project within the
                                 planned schedule.
        E. Quality            5. P
                                  lan the budget, track what you are spending, and
                                 complete the project within budget.
        F. Risk               6. E nsure that you develop the right product that will satisfy
                                  the needs for which the project is undertaken.
        G. Procurement        7. O
                                  btain the team to do the project work and lead and
                                 motivate the team to keep working in the right direction
                                 in an efficient and effective way.
        H. Resources          8. G
                                  enerate and distribute the required project information
                                 to the right stakeholders at the right time by using the
                                 right method.
        I. Communication      9. P
                                  lan for uncertain events that could happen and deal with
                                 them when they do happen in such a way that possible
                                 benefit is maximized and damage is minimized.
        J. Integration       10. Identify the project work that needs to be contracted out
                                 of the performing organization and contract it out.
                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth      29



Once you enter the field of project management you will immediately run into
two neighbors of a project: the program and the portfolio. Your project may
be standalone, part of a program, or belong to a portfolio.


Triangular Relationship: Project, Program, and
Portfolio
As a project manager, you should know the basic concepts of programs and
portfolios and how they are related to each other and to projects. The real
action to obtain the goals and objectives of an organization always happens
at the project level, but for good reasons a project may be run as part of a
program or portfolio; the two structures are described in the following.
Program. A program may be defined as a set of interrelated projects all
working toward the same set of objectives. These projects are put into
a program to reap the benefits of managing them in a coordinated way
that would not be available by managing them individually. For example, a
publication company may put several science book development projects into
one program and a set of web-development projects related to marketing,
sales, and learning into another program.
A program may also be a part of a higher-level program. Both project and
subprograms within a program are referred to as program components.
Just as a project is managed by a project manager, a program is managed
by a program manager, who oversees program components and manages
project-level aspects. Program management focuses on optimally managing
the interdependencies among the projects in the program in order to keep
the program and project goals and objectives aligned with the strategic goals
and objectives of the organization. Program managers also make sure that
program benefits and project benefits are both realized. In addition, the
program manager's responsibilities also include:
      *   Make sure that the program scope flows appropriately
          into program components and manage interdependencies
          among the program components to best meet program
          objectives, and accordingly allot the budget to the
          program components.
30   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


            *    Resolve resource conflict and constraints that affect the
                 program components and manage change requests about
                 the shared governance framework.
            *    Resolve program-level issues between component
                 projects and also resolve constraints and conflicts that
                 affect projects within the program.
            *    Manage program risks that may impact program
                 components.
     Portfolio. A portfolio is a higher-level structure that may contain projects,
     programs, subportfolios, and operations and is managed by a portfolio
     manager. These components are put together in a portfolio to facilitate
     effective management in order to implement the strategic business plan of
     the organization.


     Caution! The portfolio components, programs, or projects may or may not be interdependent
     or directly related.


     Portfolio management is the centralized management of one or more
     portfolios in which portfolio components are managed at the portfolio level
     to achieve specific strategic business objectives. A portfolio is an interface of
     the firm's projects and programs to its strategy. Portfolio management focuses
     on making sure that programs and projects are prioritized for resources to
     serve the organization's strategy. Therefore, investment decisions are usually
     made at the portfolio level. One task of portfolio management is to select
     the optimal set of programs and projects to meet the strategic objectives,
     on one hand, and to increase the likelihood of realizing the desired return on
     investment, on the other hand. It also provides centralized management of the
     aggregate risk of all profile components.
     To understand the relationship of a portfolio with projects and programs,
     note the following:
            *    Even if an organization does not have any programs and
                 has only individual projects, all these projects can be
                 grouped into one or more portfolios.
            *    If an organization has programs and no individual projects
                 external to all programs, all these programs can be
                 grouped into one or more portfolios.
            *    If an organization has some programs and some individual
                 projects, all these programs and projects can be grouped
                 into one or more portfolios.
                                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth            31




Caution! Projects, programs, and portfolios have different lifecycles and focuses and different
sets of objectives, and hence different sets of activities to meet those objectives and different sets
of resulting benefits. However, they may share the same resources serving the same stakeholder.
This underlies the importance of intraorganization coordination to avoid and resolve conflicts.


Figure 1-4 shows the triangular relationship among portfolios, programs,
and projects; in the figure, an arrow represents containment. As the figure
illustrates, all portfolios are composed of programs, projects, or both. A
program consists of only projects and not portfolios. The figure also illustrates
that both a program and a portfolio can have projects. That means a project
may have membership in a portfolio directly or through a program. What is
not shown in this simple figure that a program may have subsidiary programs
and a portfolio may contain subsidiary portfolios and operations.




Figure 1-4. Triangular relationship between projects, programs, and portfolios

As compared to projects and programs, a portfolio is closer to an organization's
business objectives, and therefore this is where most of the investment
decisions are made. If you want to learn about an organization's business
intent and direction (or strategy), look at its portfolio. It's also important to
note that a portfolio can include operational work as part of its structure.
Table 1-3 presents a comparison between some characteristics of projects,
programs, and portfolios.
32   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Table 1-3. Comparison Between Projects, Programs, and Portfolios

     Characteristic Project                   Program                     Portfolio
     Definition      Endeavor with            Group of related            Collection of projects,
                     beginning and end        projects and subsidiary     programs, subsidiary
                     to create a unique       programs managed            portfolios, and other
                     product, service, or     together to reap the        related work managed
                     result.                  benefits not available      together to meet the
                                              from managing them          strategic objectives.
                                              individually.
     Management      Project manager          Program manager             Portfolio manager
                     manages the project,     manages the program         performs general
                     including project        by coordinating the         portfolio management
                     team, to lead the        program components'         that may include managing
                     project to success       activities to ensure the    or coordinating the
                     by meeting project       delivery of planned         portfolio management
                     objectives.              program benefits.           staff and also the program
                                                                          and project staff with
                                                                          reporting responsibility to
                                                                          portfolio.
     Scope           Project scope limited    A program's                 Portfolios have an
                     to meeting its           scope affects and           organizational scope to
                     objectives; developed    encompasses the             produce changes in the
                     throughout the           scopes of the program       strategic objectives of the
                     project lifecycle.       components aimed at         organization.
                                              meeting the program
                                              benefits in the context
                                              of the strategic goals of
                                              the organization.
     Planning        Project manager,         Program has high-level      Portfolio manager
                     from high-level          plan that includes          performs planning at the
                     information, develops    tracking the progress       portfolio level, which
                     detailed project plans   and interdependencies       includes developing and
                     by using progressive     of program                  executing necessary
                     elaboration              components; this plan       processes including
                     throughout the           also provides guidance      communication in context
                     project lifecycle.       to plan at component        of aggregate portfolio.
                                              level.
     Change          Project manager          Program manager             Portfolio manager
                     expects change and       adapts change to            monitors changes in the
                     performs processes       optimize the benefits       broader internal and
                     to manage it.            from program                external environment and
                                              components.                 responds to them to best
                                                                          serve the strategic plan of
                                                                          the organization.

                                                                                            (continued)
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth         33



Table 1-3. (continued)

Characteristic Project                      Program                  Portfolio
Monitoring        Project manager           Program manager          Portfolio managers
                  monitors and              monitors the             monitor strategic changes
                  controls the project      progress of program      and resource allocation,
                  activities/processes      components to make       performance results, and
                  to produce the            sure the overall goals   risk at the portfolio level.
                  planned products,         and benefits will be
                  results, or services of   achieved within the
                  the project.              planned budget and
                                            schedule.
Success           Success measured          Program success          Success relates to
                  generally by quality      measured by              the overall portfolio
                  of project and its        delivery of planned      performance, which is an
                  product, level of         program benefit and      aggregated investment
                  customer satisfaction,    the efficiency and       compared to the overall
                  and whether project       effectiveness of the     benefit realized.
                  completed within          delivery.
                  budget and time.



                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.4

   Match each item in the first column of the following table with one or more suitable
   items in the second column.

   Entity                May Contain
   A. Project            1. Operations
   B. Program            2. Projects
   C. Portfolio          3. Programs
                         4. Portfolios
                         5. Activities to create a well-defined unique product



Throughout the book, you will be exploring the details of project management,
and therefore getting introduced to some advanced concepts up front will
make that journey more pleasant and smooth.
34   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Some Common Concepts
     Throughout this book, you will be encountering concepts such as probability,
     baseline, project team, and project management team. Those concepts are
     introduced in the following sections.


     Probability-Related Concepts
     The theory of probability has its early seventeenth-century roots in the
     investigations of games of chance, such as roulette and cards. Since then,
     a multitude of mathematicians and scientists have contributed to the
     development of the theory of probability. Today, the concepts of probability
     appear in almost every discipline, ranging from physics to project management.
     Risk (an important aspect of a project) and probability have the same origin:
     uncertainty. In project management, there is always an important question:
     What is the probability of this risk occurring? In the modern age, probability
     has already entered into folk psyche through phrases such as "What are the
     odds that this will happen?"
     Probability. Probability is defined as a chance that something will happen.
     For example, when you play the lottery and you wonder what the odds are
     that you will win, you are thinking of probability. The simplest example of
     probability is tossing a coin. When you toss a coin, what is the probability
     that the coin will land heads up? When you toss a coin, there are only two
     possibilities: it will land either heads up or tails up. Each possibility is equally
     likely if you are not cheating. Therefore, the probability that the coin will land
     heads' up is 1 out of 2, or 50 percent, or 0.5. In general, if there are n possible
     outcomes of an event and each outcome is equally likely, then the probability
     of a specific outcome is 1/n.
     Another useful concept in probability is the combined probability of several
     events. For example, if you toss two coins, the probability that first coin will
     land heads up and the second coin will land tails up is 0.5 x 0.5 = 0.25. In
     general, to calculate the combined probability, you multiply the individual
     probabilities. If the probability that an Event X will happen is A, the probability
     that Event Y will happen is B, and the probability that Event Z will happen
     is C, then the probability that all the three events (X, Y, and Z) will happen is
     A x B x C. To summarize, the probability that a number of independent events
     will occur is calculated by multiplying the probabilities of occurrence of all the
     individual events.
     Random Variable. A random variable can acquire any value within a given
     range or out of a set of values. For example, you can use a random variable
     to represent the results of rolling a fair die, which has six sides numbered by
     dots from 1 to 6. The possible outcome of rolling a die could be any number
     from the set of outcomes: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth     35



Expected Value. This is the expected value of an outcome. As an example,
assume you get into a bet that you will win $10 if a coin toss results in heads,
and you will lose $5 if it results in tails. Given that the probability for heads
or tails is 0.5 for each, the expected value for the money that you will win
is $10 x 0.5 = $5, and the expected value for the money that you will lose is
$5 x 0.5 = $2.5.
Variance. The variance of a random variable is the deviation from the
expected value. It is computed as the average squared deviation of each
number from its mean. For example, assume that the values of a random
variable are 2, 4, 5, 7, and 2 in five measurements. The mean value for these
measurements is
                                (2 + 4 + 5 + 7 + 2) / 5 = 4
The variance of the spread of these values is

             V = s 2 = e( 2 - 4 ) + ( 4 - 4 ) ( 7 - 4 ) ( 2 - 4 ) u / 5 = 3.4
                                 2           2         2         2
                       e                                           u
Standard Deviation. This is the square root of the variance--that is, . So,
in our example, the standard deviation is the square root of 3.4--that is, 1.84.
Algebraic Equations. Project/program management and some questions
in the CAPM, PMP, and PgMP exams will assume that you can do simple
mathematical calculations. You should also have a very simple understanding
of algebraic equations. You should be able to make simple manipulations, such
as the following:
                       CPI=EV/AC implies EV=CPI x AC
                        CV=EV-AC implies EV=AC+CV

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.5

   You are about to throw a quarter and a dime several times. What is the probability of
   the following happening?
      A.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try.
      B.   The dime will land tails up on the first try.
      C.   The quarter will land heads up and the dime will land tails up on
           the first try.
      D.   Both the quarter and the dime will land heads up on the first try.
      E.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try and also heads up
           on the second try.
36   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Global Project Variables
     There are some significant factors in projects and project management that
     vary their values throughout the project lifecycle. You must keep your eye on
     these variables from the very beginning of the project:
            *     Cost and number of team members (staff). This
                  is low in the beginning because the project is just in the
                  preparation stage, reaches a maximum when the project
                  is being executed--that is, when most work is done--and
                  drops rapidly when the project draws to a close because
                  most of the work has already have done.
            *     Ability to influence the characteristics of the
                  project product. Your or any other stakeholder's
                  ability to influence the project product characteristics
                  without significantly changing the cost is the highest in
                  the beginning because not much has been done yet in any
                  direction. However, this ability gradually decreases as the
                  project progresses because we have already invested in a
                  given direction.
            *     Risk and uncertainty. This is highest in the beginning
                  because there are plenty of unknowns and assumptions.
                  It decreases as the project progresses as unknowns start
                  disappearing and details start appearing as a result of the
                  principle of progressive elaboration. This is true about
                  both risk and uncertainty, as risks arise from uncertainty,
                  which at least partially arises from assumptions.

                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.6

        In the following table, match each item in the first column to the corresponding item
        in the second column.

        Project Variable                          Value
        A. Level of staff                         1. Highest in the beginning and end
                                                     of the project and lowest when the
                                                     project is being executed
        B. Risk                                   2. Highest in the beginning and decreases
                                                     as the project progresses
        C. Ability to influence the characteristics 3. Low in the beginning, maximum when
           of the project product without              the project is being executed
           significantly impacting the project cost
        D. Cost                                   4. Uniform throughout the project
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth       37




Baseline
The project baseline is defined as the approved plan for certain aspects of
the project, such as the cost, schedule, and scope of the project. The project
performance is measured against this baseline. The project baseline is also
referred to in terms of its components--cost baseline, schedule baseline,
and scope baseline. How do you know how the project is performing?
You compare the performance against the baseline. Approved changes in cost,
schedule, and scope will also change the baseline.


Big Picture of Project Management
In this chapter, you have learned what project management is and how
project management is performed by applying knowledge and skills to project
activities in order to meet project objectives. Applying knowledge boils down
to performing processes. We have also learned that projects originate from
the need to achieve the organization's strategic objectives, and they may come
to you standalone or as parts of a program or a portfolio.
Figure 1-5 shows the big picture of project origin and project management in
terms of projects, processes, the project lifecycle in terms of project stages,
and the project aspects managed by ten different knowledge areas. There are
ten important aspects of projects, and each of these ten aspects is managed
by using the corresponding knowledge area. For example, cost is managed by
using the cost management knowledge area, and communication is managed
by using the communication management knowledge area. So, project
management is performed by applying processes from certain knowledge
areas at certain stages of the project.
The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      *   A project, whether standalone or part of a program or
          a portfolio, is performed to contribute to meeting the
          strategic objectives of an organization.
      *   The project lifecycle consists of five stages, technically
          called process groups: initiating, planning, executing,
          monitoring and controlling, and closing. Depending on
          the project, these stages may repeat in different phases.
      *   The project processes that are performed to manage
          projects make up ten project management knowledge
          areas: integration management, scope management, time
          management, cost management, resource management,
          communication management, stakeholder management,
          quality management, risk management, and procurement
          management.
38   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework




     Figure 1-5. The big picture of project management: the aspects of a project that need to be
     managed at different stages of the project lifecycle by using processes


     In nutshell, project management and processes performed in project
     management have two dimensions: knowledge and process group. This chapter
     presented a big picture of project management from a more theoretical
     perspective. A rather detailed big picture of project management from a more
     practical perspective is presented in Chapter 3, where we will explore the
     project integration knowledge area.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth        39




Summary
The business activities inside an organization are generally organized into
groups, which fall into two categories--operations and projects. Operations
usually consist of ongoing routine work, whereas a project has a goal to
generate a unique product, service, or result in a finite time--that is, it has a
planned beginning and a planned end. Organizations launch projects for different
reasons, such as to meet a business or legal requirement or to take on an
opportunity offered by the market. However, the underlying motivation behind
taking on these opportunities is the business strategy of the organization. A
project, like anything else in an organization, needs to be managed. Project
management is the application of knowledge and skills to project activities in
order to meet the project objectives. It involves performing a set of processes
distributed over ten knowledge areas of project management: communication
management, stakeholder management, cost management, resource management,
integration management, procurement management, quality management, risk
management, scope management, and schedule management. Each process is
two dimensional: it is a part of a knowledge area and also has a membership in
one of five process groups: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring/controlling,
and closing.The process groups represent different stages of a project lifecycle.
A successful project completion adds to the organization's business value, and
in this way changes the organization's business value state to a higher level.
A project can be standalone or belong to either of two higher-lever entities:
programs and portfolios. A program is a collection of interrelated projects
and subsidiary programs and is performed to reap benefits that would not
be available if the projects were managed individually. Programs have a closer
view of the company's business strategy or strategic objectives than do the
projects. A structure that is even closer to a company's strategy is the portfolio,
which, in general, is a collection of projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios,
and operations. A portfolio is a direct interface to the organization's business
strategy.
Road Ahead. In this chapter, we explored the basic framework of projects
and project management. Projects are born and managed in an environment
constituted by factors within the performing organization and the outside
world. We will explore that environment in the next chapter.
40   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Exam's Eye View
     Comprehend
     *The way PMI views it: The discipline of project management is constituted by ten
      knowledge areas: scope management, cost management, resource management, quality
      management, risk management, schedule management, procurement management,
      communication management, stakeholder management, and integration management.
     *Depending upon which stage of the project lifecycle they are executed in, the processes
      are grouped into five process groups: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and
      controlling, and closing.
     * A process belongs to exactly one knowledge area and one process group.
     *The same input may appear in more than one process. This is also true for tools and
      techniques.
     *An output from one project either becomes an input to another process or it's a
      terminal output; i.e., a project or phase deliverable.
     *You do not have to perform all the processes in a project, and a process may be
      performed several times.
     *Projects bring change to a company by adding to the company's business value, and in this
      way raise its business value state to a higher level.

     Look Out
     *For a work effort to be qualified as a project, it must be temporary (that is, have a start
      and a finish), and the outcome must be a unique product, result, or service. Routine,
      ongoing work is an operation, not a project.
     *A project may vary in size--it may be a few days long or a few months long--and may
      involve one person or quite a few individuals.
     *A big project is not called a program, but a megaproject.
     *A project may or may not be a part of a program or a portfolio, but a program always
      consists of projects, or subsidiary programs, or both.
     *A program may contain a subsidiary program, and a portfolio may contain a subsidiary
      portfolio and operation too.
     *It's not necessary to perform all the processes for a project. Processes are selected to
      meet the needs of the project.

     Memorize
     *The ten knowledge areas and five process groups listed under the "Comprehend" section
      of this table.
     *Process groups are not project phases. A phase contains all process groups.
     *Organizations start projects in response to the factors acting on them, which can be
      categorized into four groups: business or legal requirements; stakeholder requests or
      needs; business or technological strategies; products, processes, or services.
                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth   41




Review Questions
   1. Which of the following are the essential characteristics
      that make a group of activities a project?
       A. It takes multiple individuals to perform these
          activities, and it creates a new product.
       B. The work is managed by a project manager.
       C. The group has a plan and a budget.
       D. The group has a start date and a finish date, and its
          outcome will be a new product.
   2. Which of the following is a project?
       A. Running a donut shop
       B. Building another library in your area, which might
          take a long time
       C. Keeping a network up and running in a university
          department
       D. Running a warehouse
   3. Which of the following are the process groups?
       A. Starting, planning, executing,       monitoring   and
          controlling, and closing
       B. Initiating, organizing and preparing, executing,
          monitoring and controlling, and closing
       C. Initiating, planning, implementing, monitoring and
          controlling, and closing
       D. Initiating, planning, executing,     monitoring   and
          controlling, and closing
   4. Which of the following is not a project management
      knowledge area?
       A. Project procurement management
       B. Project risk management
       C. Project quality management
       D. Project team management
42   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


          5. Which of the following is the best definition of progressive
             elaboration?
              A. Taking the project from concept to project manage-
                 ment plan
              B. Taking the project from conception to completion
              C. Taking the project from initiating to closing
              D. Decomposing the project objectives into smaller,
                 more manageable work pieces
          6. Your project depends on two business partners, On The
             Fly Inc. (OTF) and The Sure Thing Inc. (ST), delivering
             their products to you on time. The chances are three out
             of four that OTF will make the delivery on time and two
             out of three that ST will not make the delivery on time.
             The probability that OTF and ST will both deliver on time
             is equal to:
              A. 0.25
              B. 0.5
              C. 5/7
              D. 4/7
          7. Both projects and operations share all the following
             characteristics except:
              A. Performed by individuals
              B. Planned, executed, monitored, controlled, and closed
                 in a preplanned way
              C. Limited by constraints
              D. Performed to achieve the strategic objectives of the
                 organization
          8. You are being interviewed by a functional manager,
             who says, "We have this huge undertaking of launching
             an online education website that contains different
             components, such as designing the website, developing the
             content, developing the administrative system including
             registration and payment, marketing the courses on the
             website, integrating different components of the website,
             and finally going live. Each component is functionally
                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   43



     complex and large enough that it will be better served
     under a different management." The manager is most
     likely describing a:
     A. Project
     B. Program
     C. Operation
     D. Portfolio
 9. Your company runs a website that makes digital music
    downloads available to end users. You have been assigned
    a project that involves adding parental guidance warnings
    to various downloads. This project originated due to
    which category of factors?
     A. Social, regulatory, or legal requirements
     B. Stakeholder requests or needs
     C. Products, processes, or services
     D. Business or technological strategies
10. Select each of the following that is a project management
    knowledge area:
     A. Project integration management
     B. Project scope management
     C. Project communication management
     D. Project time management
11. What is not true about project management processes?
     A. Each process must be performed at least once in a
        project.
     B. A process belongs to a knowledge area and also to a
        process group.
     C. A process can be performed more than once in the
        same project.
     D. A process is performed to accomplish a specific task
        of process management.
44   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


         12. What is not true about project management processes?
              A. The same document may be an input to more than
                 one process.
              B. The same tool or technique may be used in more
                 than one process.
              C. The output of one process cannot be an input to
                 another process.
              D. It's possible that a process will be executed only once
                 in project and multiple times in another project.
         13. As you have decided to outsource a piece of your project,
             you will conduct procurements using a process belonging
             to which process group?
              A. Executing
              B. Planning
              C. Monitoring and Controlling
              D. Initiating
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             2

Project
Environment
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 13 percent of the CAPM
exam, equivalent to about 18 questions.
Study the whole chapter in detail. Some concepts involved may not be
mentioned directly in the exam objectives, but you will need them in order to
answer the questions correctly.
From Chapters 1 and 2, also internalize the concepts that project management
processes interact with one another--e.g.; an output item generated by one
process may become an input item for some other process--and that a tool
or technique may be used in more than one process.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_2
46   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     CAPM Exam Objectives
     Project Environment:
        1. Identify the factors and assets that may impact the outcome of a project.
        2. Distinguish between organizational systems.
        3. Understand the purpose and activities of a project management office.
        4. Recognize the hierarchy of projects, programs, and portfolios.
     Role of the Project Manager:
        1. State the primary functions of a project manager.
        2. Understand a project manager's sphere of influence.
        3. Identify the major elements included in the PMI triangle.
        4. Recognize the difference between leadership and management.


     Although you use your knowledge in terms of processes to manage projects,
     the management will be greatly influenced by the environment in which the
     project runs, such as the structure and culture of the performing organization.
     Projects also originate from their environments.
     In the previous chapter, you learned how the five process groups (which we
     also referred to, in this book, as the different stages of the project lifecycle)
     and the ten project management knowledge areas constitute the project
     management framework. The actual implementation of project management
     is greatly influenced by the facts on the ground--where the rubber hits the
     road. In other words, a given project is performed in a certain environment;
     e.g.; it runs in an organization with its own structure and culture, in a certain
     location with its own culture and laws. This part of the environment is
     called the enterprise environment factors (EEF). Now, the organization has
     some assets, such as knowledge, policy and procedures, and processes, to
     start the project and support it through its lifecycle. This part of the project
     environment is called the organizational process assets (OPA). In addition to
     these two components, we will add project stakeholders to the environment
     to complete the story.
     This environment influences the project and therefore impacts it. In fact, a
     project is born in this environment and goes through it for its entire lifecycle.
     As they say in physics, action and reaction are equal and opposite. As a project
     is being influenced and impacted by its environment, it or its outcome influence
     and impact back some element of the environment. For example, a successful
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           47



project can change the business-value state of the organization to a higher
level, and a project aimed at opposing a cultural trend or creating a new trend
impacts the culture of a society.
The goal in this chapter is to explore how the project environment influences
the project and hence project management. We will build this chapter on three
basic concepts: influence, organizational systems, and project stakeholders.


Caution! You will hear an earful about two concepts, influence and impact, in this book and
in project management, in general. So, it's important to get them right. Think of influence like a
force, and when a force is applied to anything, it has an impact on that thing. The magnitude of the
impact may vary depending on the situation.



Project Environment: Big Picture
As explained in Chapter 1, a project originates in response to a situation in
order to fulfill the business need of an organization according to its strategy.
The organization and its internal and external environments, e.g.; EEF and
OPA, are already there and are where the project is born, as illustrated
in Figure 2-1. The business need assessment leads to producing the two
project management documents--i.e., the project business case and benefit
management plan, which includes project objectives and success measures--
which leads to producing the project charter document. The project charter
authorizes the project and fully activates the environment to start operating
on the project. As the project environment does influence--and as a result
both positively and negatively impacts--the project, you must implement
project management accordingly to lead the project to success. As illustrated
in Figure 2-1, the main elements that constitute the project environment are
enterprise environment factors, organizational assets, and project stakeholders.
48   Chapter 2 | Project Environment




     Figure 2-1. The big picture of the project environment: organizational structure, enterprise
     environment factors, organizational assets, and project stakeholders contribute to
     environment that influences a project

     Enterprise Environment Factors (EEF). Enterprise environmental factors
     are factors that are related to the environment either internal or external to
     the performing organization and that can influence and potentially impact the
     project. Some examples are the organization's structure and culture and any
     city culture conditions external to the organization. The EEF are external to
     the project.
     Organizational Project Assets (OPA). These are the processes or
     process-related assets of the project-performing organization that can be
     used to help the project succeed. Procedures, templates, and lessons-learned
     databases developed from previous projects are some examples. The OPA are
     internal to the organization and external to the project.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      49



Project Stakeholders. Stakeholders can be both internal and external to
the organization and the project. The project team and project sponsor in
the organization are examples of internal stakeholders, and customers the
external.
Note that, understandably, the project environment is largely created by the
performing organization. For presentation convenience, we will start with EEF
and OPA. Let's explore the enterprise environmental factors along with the
organizational process assets in some detail.


Identifying Environmental Factors and Process
Assets and Their Influence on Process
While exploring the general environment of the performing organization, you
should identify the environmental factors and the process assets that will
influence your project. Some of these factors and assets can be used to help
the project; others may have a negative influence. However, in either case, you
need to manage them.


Enterprise Environmental Factors
Enterprise environmental factors are the factors that are related to the
environment either internal or external to the performing organization and
that can potentially influence and hence impact the project. They may originate
from within the performing organization, from outside of organization, or from
both. These factors may have a positive or negative influence on the project;
e.g.; some factors may facilitate the project and some others may give rise to
constraints. Some types of examples of organizational environmental factors
are presented in Table 2-1.
50   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Table 2-1. Some Examples of the Organizational Environmental Factor Types

     EEF Type                     Examples                                              Internal/External
     Organization structure,      Vision, mission, values, beliefs, leadership style,   Internal
     governance, and culture      management style, code of conduct, cultural
                                  norms
     Infrastructure               Facilities and equipment to do the project,           Internal
                                  telecommuting support, computer hardware
                                  to run communication software and other
                                  project-related applications
     Information technology       Project management information systems such Internal
     software                     as software tools for scheduling tasks and
                                  meetings
     Employee capability          Competencies, human resource department,              Internal
                                  relevant skills and specialty knowledge
     Resource availability        Constraints on contracting and purchasing,            Internal
                                  approved list of procurement providers, work
                                  authorization system
     Geographic distribution      Work location, collaboration software, video          Internal
     of facilities and            conferencing tools, distributed computing
     resources                    software like cloud computing
     Physical environmental       Weather, transportation, housing                      External
     factors
     Social and cultural          Political climate, religious and cultural             External
     factors                      traditions, ethics
     Legal restrictions and       Country or city laws related to safety and            External
     requirements                 security regulations
     Government or industry Regulatory agency regulations about prodution External
     standards              and environment, product standards, quality
                            standards
     Commerial databases          Standardized cost-estimating data, risk               External
                                  databases, benchmarking data
     Academic research            Industry studies, research publications               External
     Marketplace conditions       Trademarks, brand recognition, market shares,         External
                                  information about competitors




     Caution! When identifying internal and external factors, it is important to consider the context
     of the factor. For example, the culture of the city where the performing firm is located is an external
     environmental factor, while the firm's culture in an internal factor.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth     51



Identifying the environmental factors is only part of the job, as you must
effectively use the positive factors to help the project and try to take
action to minimize the effect of negative factors on the project. Note that
environmental factors can be internal to the performing organization, such
as the organization's culture, or external to the organization, such as market
conditions. However, the organizational process assets are internal only.


Organizational Process Assets
These are the processes or process-related assets from the organization that
can be used to help the project get going and succeed. The organizational
process assets are typically grouped into two categories: processes and
procedures for conducting work, and a corporate knowledge database for
storing and retrieving information. For example, the performing organization
might have its own guidelines, policies, and procedures whose effect on the
project you must consider while developing the project charter and other
project documents that will follow. Another example of an organization's
process assets is the knowledge and learning acquired from previous projects.
The following list contains some items from both categories: processes and
procedures and the knowledge database.
Processes, Procedures, and Policies. This category includes processes,
procedures, policies, and other guidelines and requirements. In the following,
we present some types and examples:
      *   Standardized Processes and Procedures. Examples
          are organizational-level policies, such as health and safety
          policies, ethics policies, project management policies, and
          quality policies and procedures, such as quality checklists
          and auditing processes.
      *   Standard Guidelines and Criteria. Examples are as
          follows:
          *   Project closure guidelines, project acceptance
              criteria, proposal evaluation criteria, performance
              measurement criteria, and so on
          *   Guidelines and criteria for tailoring the standardized
              organizational processes for the purpose of the
              project
      *   Templates. Examples are templates to support some
          project management tasks, such as a list of standard risks
          to look for, project schedule network diagrams, and the
          work breakdown structure.
52   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


            *    Requirements. Examples are the following:
                 *    Communication requirements, hiring requirements,
                      and safety and security requirements
                 *    Guidelines and requirements for project closure,
                      such as final mandatory project audits and product
                      acceptance criteria
     You need to follow these guidelines and accommodate the requirements
     while working out the details of the project management processes that you
     will perform.
     As is clear from the few examples presented here, you will be using these
     process assets throughout the project lifecycle. Accordingly, these will get
     more coverage in the upcoming chapters of the book.


     Tip Processes and procedures come from outside of the project--e.g.; project management
     office (PMO) or some other office within the organization--and you can't update them; while
     knowledge databases also come from outside the project, but you can and should update--i.e.,
     add to--them.


     Knowledge Database Repository. This category includes databases that
     allow you to do two things: 1) retrieve information to use it for your project,
     and 2) store information from your project as it proceeds for this and future
     projects to use. Here are some items in this category:
            *    Project Files. The documents and other files produced
                 in the project, such as the project charter and scope
                 statement
            *    Measurement Database. An example is a database
                 for the performance measurements.
            *    Historical Information and Lessons Learned.
                 Archives of files from previous projects, including lessons
                 learned from the projects
            *    Issue and Defect Management. A database that
                 allows the managing of issues and defects, such as logging,
                 controlling, and resolving an issue or defect. You can
                 also find the status of the issue or the defect from this
                 database.
            *    Financial Database. The financial information related
                 to the project, such as budget, work hours, and cost
                 overruns
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth         53



        *    Configuration Management Database. Contains
             the change history: different versions and baselines for
             the company standards, policies, and archived project
             documents

                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.1

    Q1. From the organization's perspective, what is the core difference between
    enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets?
    Q2. In the following table, match each item in the first column to items in the second
    column.

Factor and Asset Categories Factor or Asset Examples
Internal factor                A. Company's email system
                               B. Check list
External factor                C. City laws where company is
Processes and procedures       D. Configuration management system
                               E. An approved external provider
Knowledge databases            F. Commercial Risk database
                               G. Interest rate
                               H. Configuration repository from past projects of the company.



In a nutshell, enterprise environmental factors and organizational process
assets contribute to the project environment along with project stakeholders,
and this environment influences and impacts the project. One very important
internal EEF is the organizational culture and structure, which we will discuss
in more detail.


Note Enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets are common inputs
to many project management processes. Sometimes they can also appear as an output from a
process, such as archived documents and lessons learned.
54   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Understanding the Organizational Culture and
     Its Influence on Projects
     Each organization often develops its own unique culture that depends on
     many factors, such as the application area of the organization and the general
     management philosophy implemented in the organization. The organizational
     culture includes the following elements:
           *   Work Environment. The organizational culture reflects
               work ethics and work hours. For example, do the employees
               work strictly from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., or do they work
               late into the night and on weekends, or are employees are
               allowed to work from home?
           *   Management Style. The organizational culture also
               reflects authority relationships. Do the managers manage
               by authority or by leadership? How much feedback
               is taken from the employees in making management
               decisions? How do the employees view the authority of
               the management?
           *   Policies. The organizational policies, methods, and
               procedures also reflect the organizational culture.
           *   Values and Vision. A significant part of organizational
               culture lives in the set of values, norms, beliefs, and
               expectations shared within the organization. This may
               be impacted by the organization's mission and vision.
               For example, a nonprofit organization will have different
               values than a for-profit organization. Furthermore, one
               organization may encourage an entrepreneurial approach,
               while another organization may be rigidly hierarchical and
               may take an authoritarian approach in making decisions
               on what to do and what not to do.
     Organizational culture has an influence on multiple aspects of a project,
     including the following:
           *   Project Selection. The organizational culture will creep
               into the selection criteria for projects and programs.
               For example, a rigidly hierarchical and authoritarian
               organization may not be very interested in programs and
               projects with high risk.
           *   Project Management Style. The project manager
               should adapt the management style to the organizational
               culture. For example, an authoritarian style may run
               into problems in an entrepreneurial organization with a
               participative culture.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth          55



       *    Team Performance Assessments. While making team
            performance assessments, the project manager should
            keep in mind the established norms and expectations
            within the organization.
       *    Project Policies and Procedures. The project policies
            and procedures will be influenced by the organizational
            policies and procedures because both should be
            consistent with each other.
While itself a contribution to the organizational system, the culture of an
organization is greatly influenced by its structure.


Understanding the Organizational Structures
and Their Influence on Projects
From the perspective of a project, organizational structures can be divided
into three groups: project friendly, not project friendly, and a spectrum of
types in between. Project-friendly organizations are project-oriented
organizations, and those with PMO have high project resource availability
and employ full-time project managers with almost full authority. On the
contrary, non-project friendly organizations, such as functional--also called
centralized--organizations have little to no project resource availability and
only hire part-time project managers with little to no authority. Project-
friendly organizations may be further grouped into two subcategories--those
that derive their revenue primarily from performing projects for others and
those that do in-house projects to deliver products or services for customers.
Project-friendly organizations are well aware of the importance of project
management and generally have systems available to support project
management. Non-project friendly organizations generally have a low
appreciation for and understanding of the importance of project management
and often lack systems to support project management. By systems, I mean
tools and facilities specialized or suitable for performing project management
effectively, such as project management information systems.


Caution! In the case of project resources, the key word here is availability: in-house, easily
accessible online, or in any other form.


To do your job efficiently and effectively, you must figure out what kind of
organizational structure you are working in. An effective project manager
understands the organizational structure and leverages it for the success of
the project. The exact structure of any organization results from an interplay
56   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     of a multitude of variables and is unique. However, here, in the context of a
     project, we will discuss a few organization types as defined by their structures:
     functional organizations, project-oriented organizations, matrix organizations,
     and more.


     Functional Organizations
     A functional organization has a traditional organizational structure in which
     each functional department, such as engineering, marketing, and sales, is a
     separate entity. A typical functional structure is shown in Figure 2-2, where
     each member (staff) of each department reports to the functional manager of
     that department, and the functional manager in turn reports to an executive,
     such as the chief executive officer (CEO). Depending on the size of the
     organization, there could be a hierarchy within the functional managers--for
     example, directors of engineering, QA, and IT operations reporting to the vice
     president (VP) of engineering, who in turn reports to the CEO.
     The scope of a project in a functional organization is usually limited to the
     boundaries of the functional department. Therefore, each department runs
     its projects largely independent of other departments. When communication
     needs to occur between two departments, it is carried out through the
     hierarchy of functional managers.




     Figure 2-2. A simple example of the structure of a functional organization
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth       57



All the managerial power, or authority, in a functional organization is vested
in the functional managers, who generally control the team members'
performance evaluations, salary, bonuses, hiring, and firing. With their role
limited to coordinating the project activities, project managers are held
responsible for the project results even though they have little say in resource
assignments and holding team members accountable for their work. As a
result, being project manager in a functional organization can be challenging and
sometimes frustrating. You, as a project manager in a functional organization,
can benefit greatly from your good relationships with functional managers and
team members. Networking and leadership are the keys to your success in a
functional organization.
A project manager in a functional organization has the following attributes:
      *    The project manager's role and the project team are
           part-time
      *    There is little or no authority over anything: resource
           assignments, team members, and the like.
      *    The project manager reports directly to a functional
           manager.
      *    There is little or no administrative staff to help project
           manager with the project.
      *    Little or no project resources are available.


Note In functional organizations, project management might be conducted under other
names, such as project coordinator or team leader.


On the other end of the spectrum is the project-oriented organization.


Project-oriented Organizations
A project-oriented organization's structure is largely organized around projects.
Most of the organization's resources are devoted to projects. An ideal simple
structure example for project-oriented organizations is shown in Figure 2-3,
where project team members report directly to the project manager, who has
a great deal of independence and authority. Along with responsibility comes
a high level of autonomy over the projects. The project managers are happy
campers in a projectized organization. Functional organizations and project-
oriented organizations are on opposite ends of the spectrum as far as a
project manager's authority and project resource availability.
58   Chapter 2 | Project Environment




     Figure 2-3. A simple example of the structure of a projectized organization


     A project manager in a projectized organization has the following attributes:
            *    The project manager is fulltime.
            *    The project manager has full authority over the project
                 team.
            *    There is fulltime administrative staff to help with the
                 project.
     A project management office (PMO) is another organizational structure,
     discussed at the end of this section, in which project managers are fulltime
     with high authority and a high availability of project resources.
     On the scale of project friendliness, next to project-oriented organizations
     and PMOs are matrix organizations.


     Matrix Organizations
     A matrix organization is organized into functional departments, but a project
     is run by a team that may have members coming from different functional
     departments. As shown in a simple example in Figure 2-4, the project would
     be managed by a project manager belonging to the functional department of
     project management. Of course, project team members would come from
     other departments. On the spectrum of a project manager's authority, full- or
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   59



part-time employment, and project resource availability, matrix organizations
come in next to project-oriented organizations and PMOs. Matrix organizations
are generally categorized into a strong matrix, which is closer to project-
oriented structure; a weak matrix, which is closer to a functional structure;
and a balanced matrix, which is in the middle of strong and weak.




Figure 2-4. A simple example of the structure of a matrix organization


We have explored three of the main organizational structures. In the real
world, some organizations use a hybrid (mix) of these structures to meet their
varied needs. For example, a functional organization may run a specific project
just like it would be run in a projectized organization. Such organizations are
called, well, hybrid organizations.


Hybrid Organizations
A hybrid organization is a type of organization that contains elements of
multiple other organizational structures, such as functional, matrix, and
projectized. For example, consider an organization that has a traditional
functional departmental structure, but launches some projects within a single
department, and some interdepartmentally; some of the project managers are
fulltime, some part-time, with varying authority. So, what you've got here is a
hybrid organization.
60   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Tables 2-2 and 2-3 summarize the influences of the different organizational
     structures on projects.

     Table 2-2. Influences of the Organizational Structures on Projects

     Organization Structure
     Project                  Functional      Project-oriented         PMO                    Hybrid
     Characteristic
     Group arranged by        Job function    Project                  Mixed
     Project manager's        None to little High to almost full       High to almost full    Mixed
     authority
     Project manager's role Part-time         Part-time to fulltime    Fulltime               Mixed
     Project management       Part-time       Part-time to fulltime    Fulltime               Mixed
     administrative staff
     Project budget           Functional      Project manager          Project manager        Mixed
     controlled by            manager
     Resource availability    None to little High to almost full       High to almost full    Mixed



     Note In a weak matrix, the role of a project manager is more of a coordinator or an expediter
     like in functional organizations, and in a strong matrix, the project manager may have considerable
     authority close to that in a project-oriented organization.


     Table 2-3. Influences of the Matrix Organizational Structures on Projects

     Type of Matrix Structure
     Project Characteristic      Weak                   Balanced                   Strong
     Work groups arranged by Job function               Job function               Job function
     Project manager's           Low                    Low to moderate            Moderate to high
     authority
     Project manager's role      Part-time              Part-time                  Fulltime
     Project management          Part-time              Part-time                  Fulltime
     administrative staff
     Project budget              Functional manager     Functional manager,      Project manager
     controlled by                                      project manager, or both
     Resource availability       Low                    Low to moderate            Moderate to high
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth       61




Multi-Divisional, Organic, and Virtual Organizations
These are three more organizational structures whose influence we will
discuss in the following.
Multi-Divisional. In this kind of structure, work groups or divisions are
organized by product, production processes, portfolio, program, geographic
region, or customer type. Each division functions like a department in a
functional organization; the influence of this struture on the project is identical
to that in a functional organization: parttime project manager with no or little
authority and no or little project resource availability, etc.
Organic. In this flexible organization structure, also called simple or flat,
there are minimal boundaries. For example, start-up companies often have
this kind of structure. In this structure there are parttime project managers
with no or little authority and no or little project resource availability. The
projects are started by functional managers with parttime project management
administrative staff.
Virtual. Welcome to the Information Age, and and thanks to the Internet or
web technologies, we now have all kinds of virtual organizations and virtual
projects in action. In this structure, where individuals and groups are connected
through the web, we have fulltime or part-time project managers with low to
moderate authority and low to moderate project resource availability. The
projects may be started by functional managers or project managers with
fulltime or part-time project management administrative staff.


Project Management Office (PMO)
The project management office (PMO) refers to an entity in an organization
that is responsible for providing centralized support, control, or directives
for projects in the organization. The actual structure and function of a PMO
depends on the organization's needs.
The supportive PMO type provides templates and information about access,
best practices, lessons learned from past projects, and training. In this type of
structure, PMOs have a low degree of control and influence over the project.
On the control and influence scale, the next PMO type is the controlling type,
where in addition to providing support, it requires compliance, including the
following:

      1. Use of specific templates, forms, and tools
      2. Adoption of project management frameworks or
         methodologies
      3. Conformance to a given governance framework
62   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     This type provides PMOs with moderate control over projects.
     The maximum control and influence over projects is exercised by PMOs of
     the directive type, where they directly manage projects with full control.
     As a PMO has a higher-level view of and data from all projects, it can help
     align the project objectives with the organization's strategy and in this way
     deliver added business value for the organization. A PMO can provide a
     measurement system at the organization level by integrating project data with
     the information from the organization strategy, and in this way act as a liaison
     between portfolio, programs, and project.
     As already discussed in this chapter, organizational structure at least partially
     determines or reflects the management structure, governance structure, and
     culture of the organization. Organizational structure, governance structure,
     management structure, and culture are very significant factors in composing
     the organizational system; they have tremendous influence over projects. They
     are very important components of enterprise environmental factors.
     In addition to enterprise environmental factors and organizational process
     assets, project stakeholders have tremendous influence--hence, impact--on
     projects.
     So, who are project stakeholders? Let's meet them.


     Introducing the Project Stakeholders
     Right from the day you assume responsibility for managing a project, you start
     meeting a very special class of people called the project stakeholders. It is very
     important for the success of the project that you identify these individuals and
     communicate with them effectively throughout the project.


     Identifying Project Stakeholders
     Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations whose interests are
     affected (positively or negatively) by the project execution and completion.
     As they say in physics, action and reaction are equal and opposite; if a project
     is going to influence and hence impact stakeholders, they are going to impact
     the project back. If we consider, for simplicity, only two cases: a project
     stakeholder has something to gain from the project or something to lose to
     the project. Accordingly, these stakeholders fall into two categories--positive
     stakeholders, who will normally benefit from the success of the project, and
     negative stakeholders, who will see some kind of disadvantage coming from
     the project. The implications obviously are that the positive stakeholders
     would like to see the project succeed, and the negative stakeholders' interests
     would be better served if the project were delayed or canceled altogether. For
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth          63



example, your city mayor might be a positive stakeholder in a project to open
a Walmart store in your neighborhood because it brings business to the city,
whereas some local business leaders might look at it as a threat to the local
businesses and thereby may act as negative stakeholders.


Caution! Stakeholders can be grouped into more than two categories, as we will do in a
separate chapter, but here for the sake of simplicity we broadly divide them into two groups:
positive and negative.


Negative stakeholders are often overlooked by the project manager and
the project team, which increases project risk. Ignoring positive or negative
project stakeholders will have a damaging impact on the project. Therefore,
it's important that you, the project manager, start identifying the project
stakeholders early on in the project. The different project stakeholders can
have different and conflicting expectations, which you need to analyze and
manage. We will explore that and much more about stakeholders in the
upcoming chapters. But for now, while noting that identifying all the project
stakeholders might be a difficult task, let's meet some obvious stakeholders:
       *    Project Management Office (PMO). If your organization
            has a PMO and it is directly or indirectly involved in the
            project, then the PMO is a stakeholder in that project.
       *    Project Team. Project team broadly includes project
            management team and individuals who perform the work
            of the project to produce the project outcome. This
            team may consist of individuals from different groups and
            departments with different subject-matter expertise and
            skills.
       *    Program Manager. If your project is part of a program,
            then the program manager is certainly a stakeholder in
            your project.
       *    Portfolio Managers and Portfolio Review Board.
            A portfolio manager is an individual who performs high-
            level management or governance of a set of projects
            and programs and interfaces between the projects/
            programs and the business strategy of the organization
            for which the projects and programs are being run. The
            portfolio review board is a committee that selects and
            rejects projects by reviewing them for factors such as the
            project value, return on investment, and risks involved in
            performing the project.
64   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


          *   Functional Managers. These are individuals who play
              management roles within administrative or functional
              areas of the organization. For example, the VP of
              marketing is a functional manager and so is the director
              of engineering. The level of authority depends on their
              position in the hierarchy and also the organizational
              structure. For example, if you are using resources that
              are under a functional manager, that functional manager
              is a stakeholder in your project.
          *   Operational Management. These are the individuals
              who are performing management roles in the operational
              areas of the organization. For example, the director of IT,
              who is responsible for maintaining the computer network
              that your team is using, is a stakeholder in your project.
              Depending on your project, you might be handing over
              the product of the project to an operations group that
              will be responsible for providing long-term support for it.
          *   Sellers and Business Partners. Business partners are
              entities external to the performing organization, such as
              contractors and suppliers that enter into a contractual
              agreement with the performing organization to provide
              certain components for the project. These components
              are the products, services, or results that you procure.
              Business partners are the external organizations that
              fill a specific role for the project, such as installing the
              product of the project, providing training and support for
              the product, or providing specialized expertise for the
              project. Business partners are different from vendors in
              that they have a special ongoing relationship with the
              organization, which often is attained by satisfying some
              requirements, such as a certification.
          *   Customer/User. In general, customers are the entities
              that will acquire the project's outcome, such as a product,
              and users are the entities that will use the product. In
              some cases, customers and users may be the same entity,
              and in other cases there may be a whole chain (with
              different layers) of customers and users. For example,
              a textbook produced by a project run by a publisher is
              recommended by instructors, bought by bookstores, and
              used by students.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth          65



       *     Project Sponsor. This is the individual or group that
             provides financial resources for the project. A sponsor
             has a major stake in the project and may play an active
             role in the project team from time to time. The following
             are some of the functions of a sponsor:
             *    The sponsor champions the project when it's
                  conceived. This includes gathering support for the
                  project by performing actions such as acting as the
                  project spokesperson to higher-level management
                  and by spelling out the benefits of the project.
             *    The sponsor leads the project through the selection
                  process until the project is finally authorized, at
                  which point the leadership role goes to the project
                  manager.
             *    The sponsor plays an important role in developing
                  the initial project scope and charter.
             *    The sponsor serves as an authority and a catalyst
                  for issues beyond the control of project managers,
                  such as authorizing some critical changes and other
                  yes/no decisions.
In addition to these key stakeholders, who are easy to identify, there can
be a number of other stakeholders who might be more difficult to identify
both inside and outside your organization. Depending upon the project, these
might include investors, sellers, contractors, family members of the project
team members, government agencies, media outlets, lobbying organizations,
individual citizens, and society at large. Have I left anyone out?
While dealing with the stakeholders, the keyword is influence. Watch out for
influencers who are not direct customers or users of the product or service
that will come from the project, but who can influence the course of the
project due to their positions in the customer organization or performing
organization. The influence can be either positive or negative--that is, for or
against the project.


Caution! Do not confuse the project management team with the project team. The project
management team consists of individuals involved in the project management tasks. It is a subset
of the project team, which includes members of the project management team and also other
members, such as those who perform the actual work of the project.
66   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     So, the stakeholders not only are affected positively and negatively by the
     project, but the project can also be impacted positively or negatively by them.
     It is critical for the success of the project that you identify positive, negative,
     and other types of stakeholders early on in the project, understand and analyze
     their varying and conflicting expectations, and manage those expectations
     throughout the project. We will return to this topic further on in the book
     where a full chapter is devoted to stakeholder management.
     Hold on; when we were identifying project stakeholders, did somebody say
     project manager?


     Identifying the Stakeholder Within: Project Manager
     Of course you, the project manager, are one very special project stakeholder
     with a crucial stake: the project success. The job role of a project manager is
     extremely challenging and thereby exciting. In general, the role of a project
     manager is to lead the project team to meet the project objectives aligned
     with the company's strategic objectives. Depending on the company, you may
     be involved even before the project initiation stage in project-defining and
     -justification activities in the context of the company's objectives.


     Tip Depending on the nature of the project and the company's needs, the project manager's
     role may be tailored, just like the processes to be run in the project.


     You fulfill your role by aligning project objectives with company objectives,
     showing the vision to the project team, coordinating various project activities
     through communication, and leading the team in delivering the product to
     meet project objectives. You work within what is called the project manager's
     area (or sphere, as PMI calls it) of influence, which includes the project team,
     offices and managers within the performing organization, supplies, end-users
     and customers, and other stakeholders. Depending on the organizational
     structure of your organization, you may be interacting with a PMO, project
     sponsor, functional managers, program manager, portfolio manager, and
     possibly executives. Here, networking, formal and informal relation building,
     and communication skills are critical.
     The importance of communication in project management cannot be
     overemphasized. Even a well-scheduled and well-funded project can fail
     in the hands of a hardworking team of experts due to the lack of proper
     communication. As a project manager, you might be dealing with a wide
     functional variety of individuals, ranging from executives to marketing personnel
     to technologists. You should be able to wear different communication hats
     depending upon whom you are communicating with. For example, you will not
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       67



be using unnecessary technical jargon to talk to executives or marketing folks,
and you will not speak marketing lingo to the software developers. You will be
speaking to different stakeholders in their language, while filling the language
gap between different functional groups, and in that way you will eliminate
misunderstandings resulting from miscommunication. The key point is that
you put on the appropriate communication hat depending on which individual
or group you are communicating with. Be able to switch communication hats
quickly and avoid technical jargon and acronyms that are not understood by
the person or group with whom you are communicating. The goal is clarity of
language to convey the message accurately and effectively.
You will be communicating throughout the project. So, for a given project, you
must develop a communication strategy that addresses the following issues:
      *    What needs to be communicated?
      *    With whom do you want to communicate? You might need
           to communicate different items to different individuals or
           groups.
      *    How do you want to communicate--that is, what is
           the medium of communication? Again, this might differ
           depending on whom you are communicating with.
      *    What is the expected and real outcome of your
           communication? You need to monitor your
           communication and its results to see what works and
           what does not so you can learn and improve.
Communication is also an ingredient for many other skills, such as negotiation
and problem solving. We have two complete knowledge areas concerning
this in project management, one for communication management and one for
stakeholder management, and we will be covering them in upcoming chapters.
But, from the discussion so far in this and previous sections, it is clear that
it takes more than just knowledge of project management to be an effective
project manager. Even in the very definition of project manager there appears
the phrase "lead the project team." So, leadership skills are obviously necessary.
PMI defines the project manager competencies by what it calls the PMI talent
triangle.
From the material covered so far in this book, you know project managers
should 1) know project management, obviously; 2) lead the project team; and
3) align the project objectives with the organization's strategic and business
objectives. The corresponding competencies or talents may be termed as 1)
technical project management skills; 2) leadership skills; and 3) strategic and
business management skills, respectively. Well, we have just defined the PMI
talent triangle, shown in Figure 2-5 and further discussed next.
68   Chapter 2 | Project Environment




     Figure 2-5. PMI Talent Triangle: combination of 1) technical project management skills; 2)
     leadership skills; and 3) strategic and business management skills


     Technical Project Management Skills
     In general, technical skills refer to the knowledge and ability to perform
     specific tasks in a specific field. The key word here is practical or hands on
     as opposed to just theoretical knowledge only. Technical tasks are usually
     performed in the field, such as mechanics, IT, and mathematics and science. As
     project management includes almost any field including these as its application
     areas, project management is also considered a technical field.
     The technical project management skill, in general, refers to the ability to
     effectively apply project management knowledge to deliver the planned project
     objectives. Some top technical project management skills are discussed here:
            1. Manage Project Elements. These skills refer to the
               general ability to effectively manage different project
               components, such as cost, resources, risks, and schedule.
            2. Plan and Prioritize. These are the skills needed to plan
               thoroughly and prioritize things in the context of project
               objectives and stakeholder needs.
            3. Tailoring. This is the ability to tailor tools, techniques,
               and methods according to the needs of the project at
               hand.
            4. Focus on Critical Elements. These skills refer to the
               ability to focus on the critical elements of each project:
               critical success factors, schedule, some selected most-
               relevant financial reports, and issue log.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       69




Strategic and Business Management Skills
Strategic and business management skills refer to having a high-level view of
the company, with an understanding of its strategic and business objectives,
and the ability to effectively use this understanding to perform certain tasks.
These tasks include negotiating, implementing decisions, and performing other
tasks, all with one goal in mind: the alignment of project outcome with the
company's strategic objectives. You are not expected to be a business expert,
but the more you know, the better it would be. Furthermore, you can get
help from business experts in the company, including operation managers. You
should have at least enough business knowledge to perform at the three levels
of a task: organization level, project level, and alignment level.
Organization Level. These strategic and business management skills refer
to the ability to know and explain the organization's mission, strategy, goals
and objectives, and product and services. You should also know and be able
to explain the following:
      1. What are the market conditions of the business the
         company is in? How big is the market, and is it expanding
         or going downhill? Who are the customers? What would
         be the right time to market the project's product? And so
         forth.
      2. What are the different aspects of the company's business
         operation, such as type of operation, technology being
         used, and so on.
      3. What are competitor companies and what is their
         position in the market?
Project Level. These strategic and business management skills refer to
knowing and being able to explain the project being managed. Moreover, with
help from the project sponsor and business experts, you, working with the
project team, should be able to develop the project delivery strategy in light
of the organization's strategy. Once the project strategy is in hand, you should
be able to implement it in such a way that the project adds maximum business
value to the organization.
Alignment Level. These skills refer to the ability to align the project
objectives and deliverables with the organization's strategy. This is another
way of saying what we said in the previous paragraph: you will implement
the project strategy to add maximum business value to the organization. In
practice, it's done by setting your priorities correctly and being tactical in
order to deliver the project outcome in light of the organization's strategy.
70   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     In a nutshell, strategic and business management skills are the abilities to
     understand organization strategy, draw a project-delivery strategy from it,
     and align the project strategy with the organization's strategy, as illustrated
     in Figure 2-6.




     Figure 2-6. Strategic and business management skills: understand organization's strategy,
     draw project-delivery strategy from it, and align project strategy with organization's strategy



     Leadership Skills
     In a traditional organizational structure, such as a functional structure, project
     managers do not have formal authority over the project team members who
     perform the team's work. So, you have no other choice than to manage by
     leadership and not by authority or power. The good news is that managing by
     leadership is overall more effective and productive than managing by authority
     anyway. A project team is generally a group of individuals coming together
     for the lifetime of the project, possibly from different functional groups and
     likely with different skills and experience. They need a leader to show them
     the vision and to excite, inspire, motivate, guide, and direct them toward the
     goals and objectives of the project. You, the project manager, are that leader,
     no matter what the organization's structure.
     Leadership includes a plethora of capabilities or skills that you learn and develop
     by practicing them; e.g.; communication, negotiation, critical thinking, problem
     solving, and interpersonal. Interpersonal skills are very important because you
     practice leadership by dealing with people--in project management mostly
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth         71



with project stakeholders. When dealing with people, the following are some
of the qualities that good leaders generally exhibit:
Visionary. Visualize the product and how it fits into the big picture of the
organization's strategy, and be able to translate this vision for the team. Have a
holistic big-picture view of the project, accounting for all internal and external
factors.
Team Builder. The ability to build an effective team using a fun attitude, a
sense of humor, a positive and optimistic approach, and other appropriate
personality traits.
Positive and Optimistic. While being aware of weaknesses and the negative
side of things and working to correct them is good, always exhibit a positive
and optimistic attitude when dealing with people.
Social Personality Traits. Be respectful; kind, courteous, and friendly;
honest and trustworthy; and ethical in dealing with people. Show respect or
sensitivity to other cultures, lifestyles, and ways of thinking.
Collaborative and Conflict Resolver. Adopt a collaborative, as opposed
to confrontational, approach in dealing with people, managing relationships,
and resolving conflicts.
Effective Communicator. Listening and showing interest by asking
questions, giving and accepting feedback, and managing expectations are some
of the important components of communication exhibited by a good leader.
Pro-integrity. Exhibit professionalism with integrity; give credit where it
belongs.
Hands-on Skills. Critical and analytical thinker; problem solver; action and
results oriented.


Tip Research shows the project managers, on average, spend 90 percent of their time on the
job communicating.


Some of the skills mentioned or discussed here, such as communication, team
building, and conflict resolution, will be further elaborated later in the book.
However, negotiation, influencing, and problem-solving skills warrant more
discussion here.
72   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Three Skills: Negotiation, Influencing, and Problem
     Solving
     Three skills, which are implicit parts of the PMI talent triangle, are worth an
     explicit discussion: negotiation, problem solving, and influencing.
     Negotiation. A negotiation is give and take, with the goal of generating
     a win-win outcome for both parties whenever possible. For example, you
     might need to negotiate at any stage of the project lifecycle. Here are some
     examples of negotiations:
           *    Negotiating with stakeholders regarding expectations
                during project planning. For example, the suggested
                deadline for the project schedule might not be practical,
                or you might need a certain type or quantity of resources
                to make it happen.
           *    Negotiating with functional managers to obtain human
                resources, such as software developers and big-data
                experts
           *    Negotiating with team members regarding specific job
                assignments and possibly doing conflict resolution among
                the team members
           *    Negotiating changes to the project schedule, budget, or
                both because a stakeholder proposed changes to the
                project objectives
           *    Negotiating with external vendors in procurement.
                However, in contract negotiations, representatives from
                the legal department might be involved.
     The ability to influence helps negotiations.
     Influencing. Influencing means getting individuals or groups to do what you
     want them to do without necessarily having the formal authority to mandate
     an outcome from them. This is becoming an increasingly essential management
     skill in today's information economy. To exercise influence, you must understand
     both the formal and the informal structures of your organization. Again, you
     might need to use influence when you are dealing with any aspect of the
     project--for example, controlling changes to the project, negotiating schedule
     or resource assignments, resolving conflicts, and the like.
                                                                 CAPM(R) in Depth        73



Sometimes you will be negotiating to solve a problem.
Problem Solving. Project-related problems might occur among stakeholders
(including team members) or with projects. Either way, they are there to
damage the project. Your task is twofold--identify the problem early enough
and solve it. In doing this, you will be using critical thinking with both logical and
quantitative approaches. Here is the general technique for accomplishing this:
       1. Identify the Problem. Look for early warning signs
          by paying close attention to the formal progress reports
          and to what the team members say and do regarding the
          project. Once you identify a potential problem, do your
          homework. Understand and identify the problem clearly
          by collecting more information without passing judgment.
       2. Identify the Root Cause. Analyze the information
          about the problem to discover its root cause or causes.
       3. Generate Possible Solutions. Once the root cause or
          causes are clearly identified, work with the appropriate
          stakeholders, such as project team members, to explore
          multiple (alternative) solutions.
       4. Evaluate. Assess the multiple solutions and choose the
          best one to implement.
       5. Implement. Apply the chosen solution.
       6. Verify. Assess and verify the effectiveness of the
          implemented solution.
       7. Repeat. Depending on the results of verification, you
          may have to start again at any of the preceding steps.
The key point throughout the problem-solving process is to focus on the
problem, not on the individuals, with the goal of finding a solution in order to
help the project succeed. There should be no finger pointing.
As one of the three sides of the project manager's talent triangle, strategic
and business management skills ensure that the project manager is able to
participate in pre-initiation activities, such as defining the project--including
its objectives and success criterion--and making a business case for the
project, which leads to project selection.
74   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Project Management Business Documents and
     Project Selection
     In the previous chapter, we discussed how projects originate from their
     project initiation context; i.e., the need to
           1. meet legal, regulatory, or social requirements;
           2. satisfy stakeholder requests or needs;
           3. implement or change business or technological strategies; or
           4. create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services.
     This context triggers the process of creating two project management business
     documents: 1) project business case, and 2) project benefit management plan.


     Project Business Case
     This document makes the case for the would-be project from a business
     perspective by providing necessary information that can be used to assess
     whether the expected project outcome is worth the required investment. It
     includes the business need, project objectives, and success criterion. The exact
     form and content may depend on the company, but the following standard
     components are usually there under some title names in this document.
     Business Need. As previously mentioned, the creation process of the
     project business case document is trigged by some business need identified
     in the project initiation context. This document contains the summary of
     business assessment; in which state the business problem or opportunity is
     that is warranting action; what business value this action would add to the
     organization; what the scope of the effort is; and which stakeholders would be
     affected by this effort.
     For example, think of a new technology that presents an opportunity for a
     company to expand its business.
     Business needs present a situation that needs to be analyzed.
     Business Analysis of the Situation. This analysis starts by identifying the
     origins of the business problem or opportunity at hand and the strategic
     objective and goals of the organization. Then, a gap analysis is performed
     by comparing project requirements with the present capabilities of the
     organization. The project risks and critical factors to consider in evaluating
     success are also laid out.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth          75



With all this information, the obvious question the document addresses
is what to do about the problem or opportunity. It may propose different
solutions and then propose the criterion by which to evaluate these different
ways to help you make the decision--the decision criterion. For example, to
address a problem, if it proposes the solutions A, B, and C. For each of A, B,
and C, it answers the question: To address the problem, what is required to
be done at a bare minimum? What is only desired but not required; and what
is optional, or not essential? The answers to these questions will help you
decide which path should be taken to respond to the problem or opportunity.
The business case also records the different ways to respond to the problem
or opportunity.
Option: What to Do? These are different solutions or alternative ways to
address the problem or opportunity. The very basic set of options a business
case could address is as follows: do nothing, i.e., no project; do the minimum;
or do more than the minimum. Then there would be alternative ways of doing.
Recommendation: What Path to Take? This component of the business
case recommends one of the options considered in the document, citing the
option analysis results. For the option, it also includes constraints, dependencies,
and assumptions and risks along with the factors to be used to measure the
project success. Furthermore, the milestones and roles and responsibilities of
the project are laid out.
Evaluation: How to Measure to Benefits? This component describes the
plan of how the benefits delivered by the project will be measured throughout
the project lifecycle.
In summary, a business case presents and analyzes a problem or an opportunity
in the context of the organization's strategy; proposes alternative courses of
action and the criterion of how to select one out of these; based on this
criterion, recommend one and state how to measure the benefits and success
of the project that would come out of the recommended course of action.
Sounds like a lot to carry in one document, but remember that the business
case is not a self-contained document. It depends upon or refers to other
documents, such as business need assessment, project success measures, and
project benefit management plan.


Tip A business case document is used to authorize further project management activities, and
usually the project sponsor is responsible for its development and maintenance throughout the
project lifecycle in case the project is finally approved.
76   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Project Benefit Management Plan
     The project benefit management plan document describes what, when, and
     how project benefits would be delivered, as well as how they would be
     measured. The key elements in the document answer some key questions,
     such as:
            1. What are the project's target benefits and how well do
               they align with the organization's business strategy?
            2. What is the benefit delivery timeframe; e.g.; short
               term, ongoing, phase-by-phase, or long term?
            3. Who is the benefit owner to record, report, and
               monitor the benefits as they materialized?
            4. What are the metrics to tag or mark the realization and
               measurement of each benefit?
            5. What are the key assumptions and risks regarding the
               benefit realizations?
     This document defines the target benefits of a given project. But, in general, a
     project benefit is any project outcome that delivers value to the organization
     or to the stakeholders who are the planned beneficiaries of the project. The
     information from business need assessment and business case documents is
     used in developing the project benefit management plan document.


     Caution! The project manager must keep the general management approach in harmony
     with the theme of the business case and the project benefit management plan documents, which
     are interdependent and are developed iteratively and maintained through the project lifecycle.


     In addition to project benefits, the business case document also refers to
     project success measures. In fact, all these documents and plans are being
     developed to gear the project toward success. So, what is project success, and
     how is it measured?


     Project Success Measures
     Before we can talk about measuring the project success, we need to define.
     Although most project practitioners and researchers agree that project
     success is defined and measured by the degree of meeting the project
     objectives. However, different stakeholders can have different ideas about
     which factors to count and with how much weight in measuring success; e.g.;
     time, cost, quality, alignment of result with organization's business strategy, etc.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth     77



The bottom line is that project success is defined and methods or metrics to
measure it are determined for every project uniquely.
Obviously, the factors chosen to define success should be reliably measurable.
For example, here are some financial factors that can be used to measure the
success of a project:
      *   Return on Investment (ROI). The ROI is the
          percentage profit from the project.
          For example, if you spend $400,000 on the project,
          and the benefit for the first year is $500,000, then ROI
          equals ($500,000-$400,000)/$400,000, which equals
          25 percent.
      *   Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR). This value is obtained by
          dividing the benefit by the cost.
          The greater the value, the more attractive the project
          is. For example, if the projected cost of producing
          a product is $20,000, and you expect to sell it for
          $60,000, then the BCR is equal to $60,000/$20,000,
          which is equal to 3. For the benefit to exceed the cost,
          the BCR must be greater than 1.
      *   Present Value (PV) and Net Present Value (NPV).
          To understand these two concepts, you must understand
          that one dollar today can buy you more than what
          one dollar next year will be able to buy. (Think about
          inflation and return.) The issue arises because it takes
          time to complete a project, and even when a project is
          completed, its benefits are reaped over a period of time,
          not immediately. In other words, the project is costing
          you today but will benefit you tomorrow. So, to make an
          accurate calculation for the profit, the cost and benefits
          must be converted to the same point in time. The NPV
          of a project is the present value of future cash inflows
          (benefits) minus the present value of current and future
          cash outflows (cost). For a project to be worthwhile
          economically, the NPV must be positive. As an example,
          assume you invest $300,000 today to build a house,
          which will be completed and sold after three years for
          $500,000. Also assume that real estate that is worth
          $400,000 today will be worth $500,000 after three years.
          So, the present value of the cash inflow on your house is
          $400,000, and hence the NPV is the present value of the
          cash inflow minus the present value of the cash outflow,
          which equals $400,000-$300,000, which equals $100,000.
78   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


           *   Payback Period (PBP). Payback period is defined as the
               duration of time required to recoup the original amount
               of investment. For example, a $15,000 investment made
               at the start of year 1 that returned $5,000 at the end of
               each year for first three years would have a three-year
               payback period. The longer the payback period, the less
               desirable the investment is. This is because, as explained
               earlier, the value of the money unit--e.g.; dollars--
               decreases with time.
           *   Internal Return Rate (IRR). This is just another way
               of interpreting the benefit from the project. It looks at
               the cost of the project as the capital investment and
               translates the profit into the interest rate over the life
               of that investment. Calculations for IRR are outside of
               the scope of this book. Just understand that the greater
               the value for IRR, the more beneficial the project is.
               Technically, IRR is defined as the interest rate at which
               the net present value of all the cash flows (both positive
               and negative) from a project or investment equal zero.
     Now, what is cash flow?
           *   Cash Flow (CF) and Discounted Cash Flow (DCF).
               Whereas cash refers to money, cash flow refers to both
               the money coming in and the money going out of an
               organization. Positive cash flow means more money is
               coming in than is going out. Cash inflow is benefit (income),
               and cash outflow is cost (expenses). The discounted
               cash flow refers to the amount that someone is willing
               to pay today in anticipation of receiving the cash flow in
               the future. DCF is calculated by taking the amount that
               you anticipate to receive in the future and discounting
               (converting) it back to today on the time scale. This
               conversion factors in the interest rate and opportunity
               cost between now (when you are spending the cash) and
               the time when you will receive the cash back.
           *   Other examples of factors that may be used as success
               measures include other financial and non-financial project
               objectives; the business value added to the organization
               to change its state; and fulfilling the terms and condition
               of a contract. The key point is that for each project,
               before the rubber hits the road, the success must be
               defined, method and factors to measure it determined,
               and agreement among appropriate stakeholders reached.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth            79




Tip One of the most important technical aspects of project management is that you are able
to measure items such as project benefits, project progress, and project success. So, for example,
if your project is a 99 percent success, this success will not be a matter of opinion or perspective;
rather, this success will be rock solid as it's measured.


Well, we started with need assessment, looked at project management business
documents--i.e., business case and project benefit management plan--and
now know how to measure project benefits and project success. With all this
data and information, are we ready for project authorization? Not quite yet.


Project Authorization
Figure 2-7 illustrates the procedure of project authorization. As pointed
out earlier, the business case document is used to authorize further project
management activities. However, the project is formally authorized by the
project charter document issued by the project sponsor, which allows the
project manager to start using the organization's resources for the project.
We will learn in the next chapter how to produce the project charter.




Figure 2-7. Project selection procedure: project management activities are authorized
based on project business case document, and project is authorized based on project charter
document


As part of the project selection procedure, various scoring or other models
may be used to choose between different courses of action as a response
to the problem or opportunity, as discussed in the "Project Business Case"
section. Similarly, various economic models may be applied to assess the
80   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     project benefits; quantities or factors like return on investment and benefit
     cost ratio, discussed in the previous section, can be used. These models are
     out of the scope of this book.
     Two other simple tools that can be used during the project selection procedure
     are opportunity cost and expert judgment.


     Opportunity Cost
     Opportunity cost refers to selecting a project over another due to the scarcity
     of resources. In other words, by spending this dollar on this project, you are
     passing on the opportunity to spend this dollar on another project. How big
     an opportunity are you missing? The smaller the opportunity cost, the better
     it is.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.2

        You have been offered a Project B that will earn you a profit of $100,000 in three
        months. You already have an offer of a Project A that will earn you a profit of $70,000
        in three months. You can only do one project during these three months, and the
        project requesters are unable to move the project durations.
        Q1. What is the opportunity cost of Project A?
        Q2. What is the opportunity cost of Project B?
        Q3. Just based on the opportunity cost, which project will you select?
        Q4. Describe what can change your decision based just on the opportunity cost.




     Expert Judgment
     Expert judgment is one of the techniques used in project management to
     accomplish various tasks; for example, it's used to perform various project
     management processes, as you will see in upcoming chapters. It may be used
     during the project selection procedure. It refers to relying on expert advice
     and using that advice as the only factor or one of multiple factors to make
     a decision. This expert advice can come from one or more of the following
     sources:
           *    Senior management
           *    An appropriate unit within the organization
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth           81



        *    Project stakeholders, including customers and sponsors
        *    Consultants
        *    Professional and technical associations
        *    Industry groups
        *    Subject-matter experts from within or outside the
             performing organization
        *    The project management office (PMO)
As previously mentioned, the use of expert judgment is not limited to project
selection; it can be used in many processes, such as developing a project
charter. Expert judgment can be obtained by using a suitable method, such as
individual consultation, interview, survey, or panel group discussion.


Caution! Keep in mind that expert judgment can be very subjective at times and might include
political influence. An excellent salesperson or an executive with great influence can exploit this
method successfully.



Summary
In an organization, a project is born out of the need to address a problem or
an opportunity while staying in alignment with the organization's strategy. The
project is born and performed in a certain environment constituted by three
components: enterprise environmental factors (EEF), organizational process
assets (OPA), and project stakeholders. EEFs are environmental factors, which
can be internal to the organization, such as organizational structure and
culture, or external to the organization, such as the law of the land where the
organization is located. However, OPAs are only internal to the organization
and of two types: processes, policy, and procedures; and knowledge database
repositories. The project manager cannot change policy and procedures but can
add to the knowledge databases. Enterprise environmental factors are related
to how the performing organization does its business, whereas organizational
process assets are specific to how the organization runs its projects.
Project environment influences and hence impacts the project. As a project is
being influenced and impacted by its environment, it or its outcome influence
and impact back some element of the environment. The goal of project
management is to manage the influence of the environment on the project in
such a way that the project influences back to change the business-value state
of the organization to a higher level.
82   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     The organization's business need triggers the process of creating two project
     management business documents: 1) project business case, and 2) project
     benefit management plan. The project sponsor authorizes the project by signing
     the project charter, a document based on these two project management
     business documents. So, how do we prepare the project charter document?
     Road Ahead. The project charter is produced in the initiating stage, the first
     of the five stages or process groups of the project lifecycle that we explored
     in Chapter 1. In the next chapter, you will learn the process of creating the
     project charter as well as the rest of the processes used to integrate the
     activities from all five project stages.


     Exam's Eye View
     Comprehend
     *Project environment that influences projects largely constituted by enterprise
      environmental factors (EEF) and organizational project assets (OPA) in addition to project
      stakeholders.
     *EEFs may be internal to the performing organization, such as organizational structure and
      culture, or external, such as marketing conditions and legal restrictions, while OPAs are
      internal only, such as policies and procedures, and knowledge database repositories.
     *A project is run in an environment constituted by organizational structure, organizational
      culture, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets.
     *The project manager's authority is none to little in a functional organization, low to high in
      a matrix organization, and high to almost full in a project-oriented organization.
     *To be an effective project manager, it takes more than just the knowledge of project
      management; it requires the PMI talent triangle: 1) technical project management skills, 2)
      leadership skills, and 3) strategic and business management skills.
     *Strategic and business management skills are the abilities to understand the organization's
      strategy, draw a project delivery strategy from it, and align the project strategy with the
      organization's strategy.
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth      83




Look Out
*The same item may have entry into different kinds of EEFs and OPAs; context is
 important. For example, the culture of a company is an internal EEF, while the culture of
 the country in which the company exists is an external EEF.
*You can update--i.e., add to--a knowledge repository; from the processes, policies, and
 procedures part of OPAs, you cannot update policies and procedures, but you can and will
 be updating some items, such as the project plan.
*Any individual or organization that is affected by a project and can influence, and hence
 impact, it is called a project stakeholder. Stakeholders certainly exist inside but can also
 exist outside of the performing organization.
*You must identify both types of stakeholders of your project, including positive and
 negative, and you must not ignore the negative stakeholders.
*Regardless of the structure of the performing organization, project managers are
 responsible for project results.
*The project charter is the only document that is issued to authorize the project, while the
 business case document is only used to authorize the project management activities to
 continue until the project is finally authorized or disapproved.

Memorize
*Between EEF and OPA, items related to processes, policies, procedures, and knowledge
 databases, including lessons learned and OPAs; the rest are EEFs
*The organizational structure table
*Knowledge, performance, and personal abilities are the three kinds of characteristics that
 are necessary for a project manager in order to effectively manage projects.
*In some organizational structures, such as functional organizations, project management
 might be conducted under other names, such as project coordinator or team leader.
*PMI talent triangle: combination of 1) technical project management skills, 2) leadership
 skills, and 3) strategic and business management skills
*The two project management business documents are 1) project business case and 2)
 project benefit management plan.
*A project is authorized by the project sponsor's issuing the project charter.
84   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Review Questions
          1. In which of the following organizational structures does
             the project manager have the greatest authority?
              A. Functional
              B. Project-oriented
              C. Matrix
              D. Virtual
          2. In which of the following organizational structures does
             the project manager have the least authority?
              A. Functional
              B. Project-oriented
              C. Matrix
              D. Virtual
          3. Check each that is the correct representation of the PMI
             talent triangle:
              A. Leadership skills, strategic and business management
                 skills, and the IT part of project management skills
              B. Technical project management skills, leadership
                 skills, and knowledge of business strategy of the
                 organization
              C. Technical project management skills, leadership skills,
                 and strategic and business management skills.
              D. Strategic and business management skills, technical
                 project management skills, and knowledge of the IT
                 part of the company's business
          4. Strategic and business management skills include all
             except:
              A. Understanding organization's business strategy
              B. Ability to draw project delivery strategy from
                 organization's business strategy
              C. Ability to align project strategy with organization's
                 strategy
              D. Ability to tailor the tools, techniques, and methods to
                 effectively implement organization's business strategy
                 though the project
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   85



5. The project resource availability is at maximum in
   organizations with the following structure(s):
   A. PMO
   B. Hybrid
   C. Multi-divisional
   D. Organic
6. The project manager is responsible for achieving
   project objectives in an organization with the following
   structure(s):
   A. Project-oriented only
   B. Strong matrix and project-oriented only
   C. PMO and projectized only
   D. All structures
7. You have just joined an organization as a project manager
   and are studying the enterprise environmental factors of
   the organization to find out how you can leverage them
   for the success of your upcoming projects. Enterprise
   environmental factors may have what kind of influence
   on the projects?
   A. Positive only
   B. Negative only
    C. Positive or negative
    D. None
8. Technical project management skills include the abilities
   to: (Check all that apply)
    A. Manage IT-related aspects of project only
    B. Focus on the critical elements of each project, such as
       critical success factors and schedule
    C. Tailor tools, techniques, and methods to the needs of
       the project at hand
    D. Plan and prioritize.
86   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


          9. Select the internal enterprise environmental factors:
              A. Code of conduct within the performing company
              B. Code of conduct that people in the city where the
                 company is are expecting you to follow
              C. Standardized cost estimate data on the company
                 computer system
              D. Project team members who are living in and working
                 from foreign countries
         10. Which of the following are the project management
             business documents?
              A. Project charter
              B. Project business case
              C. Project benefit management plan
              D. Business need analysis
         11. Which document is issued to authorize a project?
              A. Project Business Case
              B. Project Benefit Management Plan
              C. Project Charter
              D. Both Project Charter and Project Business Case
         12. Who authorizes the project?
              A. Functional manager of the department where project
                 will be performed
              B. CEO of the organization
              C. Project sponsor
              D. Project sponsor and project manager
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             3

Project
Integration
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 9 percent of the CAPM exam,
equivalent to about 12 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the names of the inputs, tools and techniques,
and outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given
process uses and how it helps in generating the output, as well as what a given
tool or technique does in a given process.
While studying this knowledge area pay attention to how tasks can be tailored
to meet needs, and recognize an agile environment in action; for example,
continual assessment generates change requests, which lead to changing plans,
or adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_3
88   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


     CAPM Exam Objectives
     Project Integration Management:
        1.Understand the seven project management processes in the project integration
          management knowledge area.
        2.Identify the input, tools, techniques, and outputs defined in the seven processes in
          project integration management.
        3.Understand the purpose of project integration management and the project
          manager's role within it.
        4.Identify concepts and procedures related to project change management.
        5.Identify tailoring consideration in project integration management and recognize key
          documents.
        6. Identify methods for project integration and knowledge management.


     As you learned in Chapter 1, a project is performed by using processes that
     belong to five process groups and ten knowledge areas. The activities and
     results of most of these processes need to be integrated to drive the project
     to a successful conclusion. This integration is facilitated through the processes
     in the integration management knowledge area. First, the project needs to
     be chartered and authorized, which is accomplished during project initiation
     using the Develop Project Charter process of integration management. After
     the project has been initiated, you need to develop a project management
     plan, which becomes the primary source of information for how the project
     will be planned, executed, monitored and controlled, and closed. After you
     have performed the project planning by using the process in the planning
     process group and having your efforts coordinated by the Develop Project
     Management Plan process in the integration management knowledge area, you
     need to manage the project execution by using the processes in the executing
     process group. The execution efforts are coordinated by using the following
     integration management processes: Direct and Manage Project Work and
     Manage Project Knowledge. Furthermore, the project needs to be monitored
     and controlled throughout its lifecycle. These efforts are coordinated and
     integrated by using the processes in integration management, namely Monitor
     and Control Project Work and Perform Integrated Change Control. Upon
     completion or cancellation, a project needs to be properly closed. The closing
     efforts are coordinated by the integration management process called Close
     Project or Phase.
     So, the central question in this chapter is as follows: How are the day-to-day
     efforts in a project coordinated and integrated to complete the project? In
     search of an answer, we will explore coordination and integration in three
     fundamental underlying areas: launching, i.e., initiating and planning, the project;
     directing, managing, and controlling the project execution; and closing the
     project. In other words, this chapter will present the big picture of project
     management from a more practical perspective.
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth        89




Integration Management: Big Picture
By now, we already know that most of project management is performed
through processes. However, project management is not just a collection of
processes that you run one after the other and then are done. These processes
depend on each other--i.e., they are logically linked to each other by outputs
and input--and many of them need to be iterated several times based on
the need. This implies that we need to oversee or coordinate the processes
that we run to perform the day-to-day project management. The integration
management knowledge area offers processes to accomplish just that; in
other words, to define, identify, coordinate, and integrate various activities
and processes within each project management process group. For example,
the Develop Project Management Plan process coordinates the efforts of all
the processes in the planning process group and integrates the results into the
project management plan. The tasks of the integration management knowledge
area are accomplished by using the integration management processes shown
in Table 3-1 along with their major outputs.

Table 3-1. The Processes of Integration Management and Their Major Outputs

Process Group       Integration Management Processes        Major Output
Initiating          Develop project charter                 Project charter
Planning            Develop project management plan         Project management plan
Executing           Direct and manage project work          Deliverables, work
                                                            performance data, and
                                                            change requests
                    Manage project knowledge                Lessons learned register
Monitoring and      1. Monitor and control project work     1. Work performance
controlling                                                    reports, change requests
                    2. Perform integrated change control    2. Approved change
                                                               requests
Closing             Close project or phase                  Final product transition


As Table 3-1 demonstrates, integration management contains processes from
all five process groups. These processes interact among themselves in complex
ways. Some of the interactions are shown in Figure 3-1 and described in the
following list:

       1. The Develop Project Charter process generates the
          project charter, which, along with output from other
          processes, becomes an input item to the Develop Project
          Management Plan process, which in turn generates the
          project management plan.
90   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


            2. The project management plan becomes an input to all
               five other processes of integration management: Direct
               and Manage Project Work, Monitor and Control Project
               Work,PerformIntegratedChangeControl,Manage
               Project Knowledge, and Close Project or Phase.
            3. The Direct and Manage Project Work process generates
               the work performance data, which becomes an input item
               to the Monitor and Control Project Work process, which
               in turn generates the change requests and performance
               reports, both of which are input to the Perform Integrated
               Change Control process.
            4. The Perform Integrated Change Control processes all
               the change requests, including those from the Direct
               and Manage Project Work process, and generates the
               approved change requests, which become an input item
               back into Direct and Manage Project Work, whose output,
               the deliverables, are input to Manage Project Knowledge
               and Close Project or Phase after being accepted.
            5. The Close Project or Phase process also takes the
               project charter, an output of the Develop Project Charter
               process, as an input.

                                           ZWZ
                                           
                                                                           WZ
                                                   WZ
                               WZ                              WZ
                                                               
          WZ/                     ZWZ                                          ZWZZ
           ZZ                             DW                                    W
                                WZ                  WZ
                                                    
                                                    
        WZ 
                                                                                    
        Z                                  DWZ                                      
                                            <Z

                                               
         DZZZZ                                                        D
           WZtZ                         tZZ                           WZtZ

                                Z
                                                     
                                

     Figure 3-1. Big picture of interactions and data flow among different processes of
     integration management
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth          91



So, integration management spans all the process groups: initiating, planning,
executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing. To initiate a project, one
must coordinate and integrate efforts to develop the project charter.


Note It is noteworthy that integration management is the only knowledge area to have
processes in every process group; i.e., in all stages of the project lifecycle.




Developing the Project Charter
The project charter is a document that contains the high-level project
information, such as the project's purpose, objectives, and preapproved
financial resources. The single most important reason why this document
is produced--using the Develop Project Charter process--is to receive the
formal authorization for the project. To accomplish this, it is necessary that the
charter clearly shows the business need for the project and that the project
objectives align with the organization's strategic objectives. For this purpose,
two project management business documents, the project business case and
project benefit management plan, are produced as discussed in Chapter 2.
Both of these documents are input to the Develop Project Charter process,
as shown in Table 3-2, which also shows the other input items along with the
tools and techniques applied on inputs to produce the listed outputs: the
project charter and the assumptions log.

Table 3-2. The Develop Project Charter Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                 Tools and Techniques                Output
1. Business case                      1. Expert judgment                  1. Project charter
2. Benefit management plan            2. Data gathering                   2. Assumptions log
3. Agreements                         3. Meetings
4. Enterprise environmental factors   4. Interpersonal and team skills
5. Organizational process assets



Note The project charter is the document that formally authorizes a project, and includes
naming the project manager, determining the authority level of the project manager, and allowing
the project manager to start using organizational resources on the project.


The other input items for the process of developing a project charter are
discussed next.
92   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management



     Tip The business case document is developed from the project initiation context--i.e., the
     organization's business need--and is used to justify the investment in the project and to draw
     boundaries around the project; i.e., what is and is not included.


     Agreements. When a project is to be performed for a customer who is
     external to the performing organization, it is usually done based on a contract.
     The contract may provide key information required for the charter, such
     as customer-side stakeholders and payment terms. However, in addition to
     a contract, an agreement may come in several other forms, such as verbal
     agreements, e-mail, letters of intent, service-level agreements (SLA), and
     memorandums of understanding (MOUs). We will explore the agreements
     further when we cover the procurement management knowledge area.
     Enterprise Environmental Factors. During the development of the project
     charter, you must consider the performing organization's environmental
     factors relevant to this task, which include the following:
            *    Government and industry standards, such as legal
                 requirements, product standards, and quality standards
                 relevant to the project and used in determining the
                 project requirements, etc.
            *    Regulatory and legal requirements and
                 constraints can influence the product requirements.
            *    Organization's culture and political climate can
                 influence how to process and channel the project charter
                 and getting resources pre-approval.
            *    Marketplace conditions may influence milestone
                 schedule and requirements.
            *    Organizational structure and governance
                 framework may influence project manager's assigned
                 responsibility and authority level and the decision on
                 who will have authority on the project.
            *    Stakeholders' expectations and their risk
                 threshold can influence several elements of the charter,
                 such as product requirements, milestone schedule, overall
                 project risk, project objectives, and success criteria.
     Note that the environmental factors can be internal to the performing
     organization, such as the organization's culture, or external to the organization,
     such as market conditions.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       93



Organizational Process Assets. As you learned in Chapter 2, the
organizational process assets are typically grouped into two categories:
processes and procedures for conducting work, and a corporate knowledge
database for storing and retrieving information to help the project and its
processes. For example, the performing organization might have its own
guidelines, policies, and procedures, whose effect on the project must be
considered while developing the project charter and other project documents
that will follow. Another example of an organization's process assets are the
knowledge and learning acquired from previous projects. Here are some
specific examples of organizational process assets that can be useful in
developing the project charter:
      *    Templates to support some project management tasks,
           such as project charter templates
      *    Standard policies and procedures of the organization
           relevant to developing the project charter
      *    Procedures for issuing work authorizations
      *    Knowledge database of the organization that contains
           historical information from previous projects, such as
           project selection decisions and project performance
To summarize, the input items to developing the project charter may
include two business documents--project business case and project benefit
management plan--enterprise environmental factors, organizational process
assets, and possibly a contract or some other form of agreement. You take
the available inputs and apply the relevant tools and techniques to develop the
project charter.


Tools and Techniques to Develop Project Charter
Expert judgment, data gathering, meetings, and interpersonal and team skills
are used as tools and techniques to develop the project charter, as described
in the following.
Expert Judgment. Expert judgement as a tool is discussed in Chapter 2.
To develop the project charter, expert judgement may be sought in the
relevant area, such as organization strategy, to ensure the project aligns with
this strategy, benefit management, duration estimation for milestone schedule,
budget estimation, risk identification to assess high-level overall project risk,
and the field of the project.
Data Gathering. To collect data in the process of developing the project
charter, data-gathering techniques such as interviews, focus groups, and
brainstorming can be used. Interviews can be conducted in a formal or
informal setting to obtain information from experts or stakeholders on any
94   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


     appropriate topic, such as stakeholder expectations, product requirements,
     project risk estimation, and project constraints. You can bring together an
     appropriate set of stakeholders and experts on any relevant topic, such
     as project success criteria and risk identification. This is a form of focus
     group. Furthermore, in the process of using this information to produce a
     project charter, you can use brainstorming if you get stuck or just to make
     sound decisions. The brainstorming technique is generally used in a group
     environment to gather ideas as candidates for a solution to a problem or issue
     without any immediate evaluation of these ideas. The evaluation and analysis
     of these ideas happens later.
     Meetings. We have already motioned this tool. This is a very general tool
     and can be used when appropriate to collect or discuss information on
     any topic, such as project objectives, success criteria, high-level project and
     product requirements, and list of milestones.


     Caution! In interviews, trust and proper confidentiality are essential to create an environment
     of honesty and thereby collect unbiased data.


     Interpersonal and Team Skills. Interpersonal and team skills are an
     important part of the leadership skills expected from a project manager, as
     discussed in Chapter 2. These skills, such as meeting-management facilitation
     and conflict management, can be used to develop the project charter. Some
     good meeting-management practices include 1) run the meeting with an
     agenda; 2) send timely invitaions to appropriate stakeholders; 3) prepare for
     the meeting; 4) make sure that the meeting minutes are being taken; and 5)
     follow up the meeting with minutes and action items from the meeting.
     The facilitation skill can be used in a meeting or in any group situation, including
     online, to effectively guide a group to a successful conclusion, such as a decision
     or resolution to an issue, based on your encouraging effective participation,
     considering all contibutibutions, and developing mutual understanding. To
     develop mutual understanding, sometimes conflict-resolution skills are
     warranted, such as to get stakeholders to agree on project charter aspects
     like project objectives, product requirements, milestones, and project success
     criteria.
     You apply these tools and techniques on input to produce the output of the
     Develop Project Charter process.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       95




Output of Develop Project Charter
The output of the Develop Project Charter process contains two items--
assumptions log and project charter--as described in the following.
Assumptions Log. This item contains assumptions and constraints mostly
at a strategic and operational level. They are usually recorded in the business
case document and can also come from expert judgment. When the project
starts, the assumptions log grows as lower-level assumptions are made
due to a lack of details that affect cost estimate, schedule, plans, and so on.
Assumptions are important as they give rise to risks.
An assumption is a factor that you consider to be true without any proof or
verification. For example, an obvious assumption that you might make during
planning for an in-house project could be the availability of the required skill
set to perform the project. It's important to document assumptions clearly
and validate them at various stages of the project because assumptions
carry a certain degree of uncertainty with them, and uncertainty means risk.
Assumptions can appear in both the input and the output of various processes.
A constraint is a restriction (or a limitation) that can affect the performance
of the project. It can appear in both the input and the output of various
processes. For example, there could be a schedule constraint that the project
must be completed by a predetermined date. Similarly, a cost constraint would
limit the budget available for the project.
Project Charter. It is a high-level document that summarizes information
about the project and its intended outcome. A careful reader may already
know what is in it by now, because we have been mentioning the items in it
directly or indirectly. Anyhow, here they are:
      *   The Project Purpose and Justification. This includes
          the purpose of the project and high-level project
          justification, including business need for the project and
          return on investment.
      *   High-level Project Description. This includes key
          deliverables and scope, i.e., boundaries around the
          project.
      *   High-level Project Requirements. These are based
          on the needs of the customer, the sponsor, and other
          stakeholders.
      *   Project Objectives and Success Criteria. This
          explains what exactly will be accomplished to meet the
          purpose--that is, what the outcome of the project will be.
          Each objective should be measurable and have a success
          criterion assigned to it.
96   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


            *    High-level Risks. This is overall high-level project risk.
                 The lower-level risks will be identified during project
                 planning.
            *    Milestone Schedule. The charter should include a
                 high-level schedule, such as a milestone schedule.
            *    A Budget Summary. A high-level summary of the
                 project budget--that is, how much money is required and
                 at what times during the project.
            *    Project Manager. Assign a project manager with
                 specified responsibility and authority level.
            *    Project Sponsor. The name and authority level of the
                 project sponsor authorizing the project charter.
            *    Project Exit Criteria. This states the conditions that
                 have to be met before closing or cancelling the entire
                 project or project phase.
            *    Project Approval and Acceptance Requirements.
                 This item answers the following questions:
                 *    What are the name and responsibility of the person
                      or committee that will approve and accept the
                      project when it's finished?
                 *    What constitutes project success?
                 *    Who decides whether the project is successful?
                 *    Who signs off on the project completion?
     Depending on the project and the organization, the charter may include other
     elements as well, such as a budget summary, a list of participating functional
     departments of the organization, and their roles in the project.


     Caution! The project charter provides the interface between the project and the organization's
     strategic objectives.


     As previously stated, the project charter provides the project manager with
     the authority to use organizational resources to run the project. Remember
     that, formally speaking, project charters are prepared external to project
     management by an individual, a committee in the organization, or the PMO.
     In other words, project management starts where the project charter ends.
     However, practically, the would-be project manager might actually be involved
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           97



in writing the project charter or a part of it. The project approval and funding
will still be external to the project management boundaries.
A project charter is not a contract, as no money is involved.


Note Usually the Develop Project Charter process is performed only once or at pre-determined
points in the project; for example, for a project that includes multiple phases, it may be performed
at the beginning of each phase to validate the assumptions made during the previous phases.




                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.1

    Q1. True or false: It is the responsibility of the project manager to develop the project
    charter.
    Q2. True or false: A project charter is a contract between the performing entity and the
    entity for which it's being performed.
    Q3. Which process project document interfaces the project with the organization's
    strategy?



Caution! It's important to realize that the approval and funding of a project occur outside
the boundaries of the project. However, the project management team may help and be involved
in writing the project charter, and the project manager even may be asked to get involved in
developing the business case.


Once you have the project charter, you know the high-level product
requirements that the project will satisfy. However, a high-level requirement
written in a certain way might mean different things to different stakeholders.
So, after you get the project charter, one of your next tasks will be to develop
a common understanding of the project among the project stakeholders. You
accomplish this by drawing or explaining boundaries around the project at a
lower level--that is, what is included and what is not--thereby spelling out
what exactly the deliverables are. By doing this, you are determining the scope
of the project at the lower level.
After the project has been chartered, it's time to plan the project. Project
planning involves determining exactly what will be done and how it will be
done. Executing a project means implementing the project management plan
for that project. Therefore, the project management plan contains the project
98   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


     scope, which defines what needs to be done to meet the project objectives.
     But, how is the project management plan actually developed?


     Caution! There is another process that is performed along with Develop Project Charter to
     initiate the project. That process is called Identify Stakeholders, which we will cover when we
     explore the stakeholder management knowledge area.



     Developing the Project Management Plan
     Congratulations, you have your project defined and initiated with the project
     charter. You can't wait to begin executing. But hold on! I have three questions
     for you. First, how do you know what exactly to execute and how? Second,
     when you are executing your project, how will you know that you are on the
     right track? Third, during the execution, how will you know that the project is
     performing in such a way that it will end with success? To address these and
     other related questions, you will need to do some planning before you begin
     the execution.
     So, once the project has been initiated, it is time to do some planning. Project
     planning starts with the process of Develop Project Management Plan, which
     defines, prepares, coordinates, and integrates all subsidiary plans, such as
     scope and risk management plans, into one plan called the project management
     plan. Most of the subsidiary plans are prepared as part of other processes.
     One of the goals here is to develop a source of information that will work
     as a guideline for how the project will be planned, executed, monitored and
     controlled, and closed.
     One reason why it is important to develop a project management plan is
     that not all projects need all the planning processes and to the same degree.
     Depending upon the complexity of the project, the project management plan
     can be either a summary or a collection of subsidiary plans and components.
     One necessary item in the plan is the baseline for at least the following project
     features: scope, time, and cost. A baseline is a reference against which actual
     project performance is compared to measure deviation.


     Note The project management plan provides the basis of all the needed project work and how
     it will be performed.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth     99



The process of developing the project management plan, illustrated in Table 3-3,
falls in the knowledge area of integration management because it coordinates
the various planning processes and activities. Therefore, output from other
planning processes, in addition to the project charter, are the obvious inputs
to this process. The other inputs are enterprise environmental factors and
organizational process assets. You take the relevant information from the
project charter and elaborate that. The outputs from other planning processes
refer to the subsidiary plans, such as cost or quality management plans; we
will cover these processes and plans in other chapters. You have to deal
with enterprise environmental factors, such as using the existing facilities and
working within the given organizational structure and governance framework,
following industry standards, and meeting legal and regulatory requirements.
Similarly, you must work with the relevant organizational process assets:
using the organizational standard policies, processes, and procedures; plan
management templates, and knowledge database.

Table 3-3. The Develop Project Management Plan Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                              Tools and Techniques      Output
1. Project charter                 1. Expert judgment        1. Project management plan
2. Outputs from other planning     2. Data gathering
   processes                       3. Meetings
3. Enterprise environmental        4. Interpersonal and
   factors                            team skills
4. Organizational process assets


To develop the project management plan, you apply expert judgment, data
gathering, meetings, and interpersonal and team skills as tools and techniques.
Expert judgment may be sought in the areas relevant to developing the
project management plan, such as tailoring the project management process
to the project needs; elaborating on a high level information from the project;
and developing technical details to be included in the project management
plan. Data-gathering techniques used here include interviews, focus groups,
brainstorming, and checklists. A checklist in this case would be a list of items
or information to include in the project management plan. While developing
the plan you check against the list to verify that each item in the list has
been included. Other data-gathering tools mentioned, which were explained
in the development of the project charter, may be used here in the context
of project management. The interpersonal and team skills are also the
same as explained in the section on developing the project charter: conflict
management, facilitation, and meeting management.
100   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      By applying these tools and techniques to input, you produce the output
      of the Develop Project Management Plan process, which is, well, a project
      management plan. Plans and baselines of a typical project management plan are
      listed in Table 3-4 with the chapter numbers where they are discussed in detail.
      Depending to the project's needs, additional plans and other components may
      be developed and included in the project management plan, such as a change
      management plan and a configuration management plan.

      Table 3-4. Plans and Baselines of a Typical Project Management Plan

      Plan Component         Chapter Number        Plan Component              Chapter Numbers
      Scope management       4                     Requirements                4
      plan                                         management plan
      Schedule management 5                        Cost management plan        7
      plan
      Quality management     10                    Resource management         6
      plan                                         plan
      Communications         9                     Risk management plan        11
      management plan
      Procurement            12                    Stakeholder engagement      8
      management plan                              plan
      Scope baseline         4                     Schedule baseline           5
      Cost baseline          7                     Performance measurement 1, 4, 5, 7
                                                   baseline



      Caution! Some documents, which are not included in the project plan, are produced and used
      at different times throughout the project lifecycle. They are simply called project documents.


      Now, you have a project management plan. Assuming that you also have all
      other needed project documents, can you now start project execution? Yes, but
      once the project execution begins, it needs to be managed using appropriate
      processes, such as the Direct and Manage Project Execution process.


      Directing and Managing Project Work
      The project work defined and scheduled in the project management plan
      is performed using the Direct and Manage Project Execution process. This
      is where the rubber hits the road. This integration process manages work
      planned in all knowledge areas by interacting with processes across the process
      groups. This process is used to manage various technical and organizational
      interfaces in the project to facilitate smooth execution of the project work.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth        101



The three main functions of directing and managing project work are as follows:
        *    Execute the planned project activities to produce
             deliverables in order to meet the project objectives.
        *    Produce work performance and related change requests.
        *    Implement the approved changes, defect repairs, and
             other actions.
The key words during this process are implement, perform, and change. Table 3-5
illustrates the Direct and Manage Project Work process with its input, tools
and techniques, and output.

Table 3-5. The Direct and Manage Project Work Process: Input,Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                 Tools and Techniques     Output
1. Project management plan            1. Expert judgment       1. Project deliverables
2. Project documents                  2. Project management    2. Project performance data
3. Approved change requests              information systems   3. Issue log
4. Enterprise environmental factors   3. Meetings              4. Updates: Project
5. Organizational process assets                                  management plan, Project
                                                                  documents, Organizational
                                                                  process assets



Input to Directing and Managing Project Work
The input to directing and managing project work mainly consists of the items
that need to be implemented--makes sense. Information on the project work
that needs to be performed to produce project deliverables is the major input
to this process. The specific input items are discussed in the following.
Project Management Plan. Directing and managing project execution is
all about implementing the project management plan, which contains all the
major subsidiary plans, such as the scope management plan, cost management
plan, and schedule management plan. Obviously, it also includes important
outputs from other planning processes, such as the scope baseline, the
schedule baseline, and the cost baseline. It also describes how the work will
be executed so as to meet the project objectives and produce deliverables
that satisfy the planned requirements.
Project Documents. These include: 1) milestone list that shows scheduled
dates for specific milestones; 2) project schedule that shows work activities,
their durations, needed resources, and scheduled start and finish dates; 3)
project communication, which includes performance reports, deliverables
status, and other useful information; 4) requirements traceability matrix, which
traces whether the deliverables satisfy the planned requirements; 5) change
102   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      log, which contains the status of all change requests; 6) risk report, which
      contains information on identified risks; and 7) risk register, which provides
      information on threats and opportunities that could possibly impact project
      execution.
      We will explore these documents in upcoming chapters.
      Approved Change Requests. As shown in Table 3-5, the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process generates the work performance data, which
      becomes an input item to the Monitor and Control Project Work process,
      which in turn generates the change requests and performance reports, both
      of which are input to the Perform Integrated Change Control process. The
      Perform Integrated Change Control process outputs the approved change
      requests, which become an input item back into Direct and Manage Project
      Work. The approved change requests include those reviewed and approved
      by the project manager or change control board (CCB), depending on the
      nature of the each change request.
      Enterprise Environmental Factors. Items in this category that can be of
      influence or need to be considered in directing and managing project work
      include organizational structure and culture; company infrastructure, such as
      facilities and equipment; and stakeholder risk thresholds, such as allowable
      cost overruns. Putting it in context, while executing this process, you will be
      interacting with other processes and departments in your organization. In
      general, a project team includes people from different departments. Usually,
      the reporting relationships within the same department are very well defined
      and structured. However, the relationships between different departments
      (especially between individuals from different departments at the same level
      of authority) are not well defined. So, managing such project interfaces in a
      given organizational structure and culture is a crucial function of a project
      manager during project execution. Generally speaking, project interfaces are
      the formal and informal boundaries and relationships among team members,
      departments, organizations, or functions--for example, how the development
      department and the QA department interact with each other's departments
      while working on the same project. The project manager has to manage these
      interfaces.
      Organizational Process Assets. Items in this category that can be useful
      or need to be considered in directing and managing project work include the
      following:
            *   Management procedures and management databases with
                historical information for defining, identifying, controlling,
                and tracking issues and defects
            *   Performance measurement database used to store and
                make available performance measurement data
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       103



      *    Procedures related to change control and risk control
      *    Information from previous projects that can be used in
           this process, such as schedule, performance measurement
           baselines, risk registers, risk reports, and lessons learned
           repository
For example, a defect management database may contain a list of validated
defect repairs with information on whether a previously performed defect
repair has been accepted or rejected. This will tell you whether you need
to implement the defect repair again; of course, you have to look at that
information in the context of that time and that project.
In a nutshell, the project management plan and approved change requests are
the major inputs to directing and managing project work because executing the
project is all about implementing the project management plan along with the
approved change requests.
You direct and manage project work by using some tools, which will be
discussed in the next section.


Tools and Techniques for Directing and Managing
Project Work
The major tool used to direct and manage project work is the project
management information system (PMIS), which is a collection of IT tools,
such as software to gather, integrate, and disseminate the output of project
management processes; automated scheduling tools; a configuration
management system; an information entry, storage, and distribution system;
and interfaces to other online systems. This PMIS is used to facilitate processes
from the initiation stage all the way to the closing stage. For example, Microsoft
Project is a software tool that lets you create and manage a project schedule.
Another tool used in directing and managing project work is expert judgment,
which depends on the issue and the available resources. Expert advice
or training relevant to this process may include topics such as technical
knowledge of the industry, with a focus on the area of the project; cost and
budget management; organizational governance; legal and procurement; and
legislation and regulations.
Meetings can also be used as a tool for this process. There may be various
types of needed meetings, including kick-off, technical, iteration planning,
steering group, problem solving, and progress update.
The project is executed to produce some outcome--the deliverables--which
will be the output of directing and managing the project work.
104   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      Output of Directing and Managing Project Work
      When the project is being executed, at each point in time there are some
      deliverables with parts completed, some issues that have arisen, performance
      data that has been produced, and a status for the project that can be reported
      to the stakeholders. These important output items, along with others, are
      discussed in the following list.
      Deliverables. A deliverable is a unique and identifiable project outcome (i.e.,
      product, service, or result) identified in the project management plan that
      must be generated to complete the project. The core purpose of executing
      the project management plan is to produce deliverables.
      To produce the right deliverable, change control must be applied regularly,
      starting from the first version of a deliverable. In addition to the work that
      produces original deliverables, the following items are implemented during
      project execution.
      Work Performance Data. When the project work is being performed, we
      observe and take measurement on how we are doing. These observations and
      measurements are called work performance data. This is raw data that can be
      analyzed to draw useful conclusions. The following are a few examples:
            *   Deliverables status; e.g.; completed or 30 percent done
            *   Overall schedule progress
            *   Schedule activities: actual start and finish dates
            *   Costs incurred: $100,000 spent so far
            *   30 change requests made, 10 defects found
      Issue Log. Throughout the project, you will face issues, e.g.; problems,
      inconsistencies, and conflicts. These issues need to be resolved so they do
      not start impacting the project negatively. To start the process, you enter an
      issue into an issue log with the following information: issue type, who raised
      the issue and when, issue description, priority, who the issue is assigned to,
      target resolution date, status, and final resolution.
      The issue log is updated during monitoring and controlling activities.
      Change Requests. During the execution of the project work, requests for
      changes may arise as a result of various issues and may affect certain aspects
      of the project, such as the following:
            *   Project scope
            *   Project cost
            *   Project schedule
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth   105



     *   Policies or procedures
     *   Plan
These change requests might come from inside or outside the performing
organization and can be optional or mandated legally or contractually.
These change requests must be approved before they can be processed and
implemented and can include the following types:
     *   Direct Change Requests. These are changes that are
         not a result of any other action in the project; e.g.; changed
         market conditions are demanding a new product feature.
         This may result in requests for changes to project plan,
         scope, schedule, or/and cost. Of course, these changes
         can also result from other change requests, listed next.
     *   Indirect change requests. These include the following:
         *   Defect Repairs. This is a deliberate action to modify
             a nonconforming product component. For example,
             there could be a list of defects found during the
             quality assurance (QA) process that seek approval
             for repairs.
         *   Corrective Actions. This is a deliberate action
             to bring the performance of the project work back
             on track and in line with the project management
             plan. For example, the QA process can recommend
             corrective actions to improve quality, which are
             directions for executing the project work to bring
             the expected project performance into conformance
             with the project management plan.
         *   PreventiveA ctions.Thesearedirectionsto
             perform an activity so as to prevent something from
             happening in the future and to bring the performance
             of the project work back on track and in line with the
             project management plan. For example, activity that
             will reduce the probability of negative consequences
             associated with project risks; e.g.; these preventive
             actions are recommended by the QA process during
             process analysis.
         *   Updates. These change requests are made as part of
             controlling a new or modified idea being implemented.
             For example, the update request could be for a project
             document and plan with that intention, i.e., implement
             the idea.
106   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management



      Caution! Most of these change requests are to keep the project execution aligned with project
      management plan.


      These change requests to the Perform Integrated Change Control process
      and the approved requests come back as an input to the Direct and Manage
      Project Work process for implementation.
      Updates. As a result, or after the implementation of approved change
      requests, you may need to change some elements of the project management
      plan, such as any project baseline, resource management plan, requirements
      management plan, or communication management plan. You may also need to
      modify any of the input process documents to reflect the project work done
      and changes implemented.
      The project work will produce documents and information, which you will
      need to store in the knowledge databases repository. This way, you will be
      updating organizational process assets.


      Note The key benefit of the Direct and Manage Project Work process is that it provides overall
      management of the project work and the resulting deliverables in an integrated way. This improves
      the odds of project success.


      The Direct and Manage Project Work process is a high-level umbrella process
      under which other executing processes are running, which will be discussed
      in forthcoming chapters. However, all these processes need to be monitored
      and controlled.
      In the monitoring and controlling process group, the Monitor and Control
      Project Work process and the Perform Integrated Change Control process
      belong to the project integration management knowledge area.


      Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
      Monitor and Control Project Work is the high-level process for monitoring and
      controlling the project's progress to ensure that the project is on its way to
      meeting the objectives laid out in the project management plan. Monitoring and
      controlling here means tracking, reviewing, and reporting the project progress.
      You monitor by collecting data on or measuring some project aspect and
      assessing how the measurements and trends would affect project performance.
      You control by determining change--e.g.; corrective or preventive actions or
      modifications to the plan--following up with action, and then checking whether
      the actions taken have resolved the problem.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth          107



Some of the major tasks performed during this process include the following:
        *    Monitor the project performance by comparing it against
             the project management plan in terms of parameters
             such as cost, schedule, and scope.
        *    Evaluate performance to determine whether it needs to
             be controlled by taking corrective or preventive actions.
        *    Monitor the project by analyzing raw performance data
             to support status reporting, progress measurement, and
             predictions.
        *    Monitor risks by tracking and analyzing the already
             identified project risks and by identifying new risks.
        *    Controlling risks by managing the execution of risk
             response plans when the risks occur.
        *    Maintain an accurate and timely information base
             regarding the project as it progresses.
        *    Monitor and control changes and monitor the
             implementation of approved changes, such as from the
             performance data.


Tip The most important overall goal of the Monitor and Control Project Work process is to
make sure that the project remains aligned with the organization's business need from which it
originated.


The Monitor and Control Project Work process is illustrated in Table 3-6.

Table 3-6. The Monitor and Control Project Work Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                                 Tools and Techniques Output
1. Project management plan            1. Expert judgment    1. Work performance reports
2. Project documents                  2. Data analysis      2. Change requests
3. Work performance data              3. Decision making    3. Updates: project management
4. Agreements                         4. Meetings              plan, project documents,
                                                               organizational process assets
5. Enterprise environmental factors
6. Organizational process assets
108   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
      The major inputs to this process are the project management plan, to look
      for any aspect of the project, and work performance data for analysis that
      comes from directing and managing the project work. We also have project
      documents, including 1) milestone list with scheduled dates for specific
      milestones to check if they are being met; 2) project schedule forecasts to
      determine if the project is within defined schedule tolerance ranges; 3) basis
      of estimates for information on how the various estimates are made and
      how they can be used to determine responses to variances; 4) cost forecasts
      for project's past performance, used to determine if the project is within the
      defined budget tolerance ranges and to identify any necessary change requests;
      5) issue log shows who is responsible for resolving specific issues by a target
      date; 6) assumptions log for information on assumptions and constraints
      identified as affecting the project; 7) change log that contains the status of all
      change requests; 8) risk register for information on threats and opportunities
      that could possibly impact project execution; 9) risk report for information
      on the overall project risks and also on specific individual risks, such as risk
      sources; 10) quality reports for information on quality management issues,
      corrective actions, recommendations for project, processes, and product
      improvements, and summary of findings from the Control Quality process;
      11) lessons learned register for information on effective responses for
      variances, as well as corrective and preventive actions.
      You will learn the details of all these in the chapters ahead.
      Enterprise environmental factors used as inputs to this process include the
      project management information system, infrastructure for facilities and
      equipment and so forth, the risk tolerance level of the stakeholders, and
      industry and government standards. The organizational process assets that
      can be used to perform this process include financial control procedures,
      management procedures regarding issues and defects, risk control procedures,
      the process measurement database, and knowledge database repository for
      lessons from past projects.


      Tool and Techniques for Monitor and Control Project Work
      The tools and techniques used for the Monitor and Control Project Work
      process are meetings, decision making, expert judgment, and data analysis. You
      already know about meeting management by now.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth   109



Decision-making techniques. Depending on the organization, project, and
subject matter; different decision-making techniques may be used such as the
following:
        *    Decision by Voting. This can take different forms--by
             simple majority, by two-thirds majority, or by open or
             unanimous voting. In a voting system calling for a plurality,
             a group or option carrying the largest vote wins even if it's
             not a majority. This situation arises when there are more
             than two alternatives. A plurality with two alternatives
             is simply a majority method. One vote can represent an
             individual or a group.
        *    Autocratic Decision Making. This technique is where
             one individual makes the decision instead of the entire
             group.
        *    Multicriteria Decision Analysis. This is the analytical
             technique used to make a decision. In this technique, we
             have a set of predefined criteria, and we use a number of
             systematic analytical methods to evaluate the requested
             changes. Then, we make the decision by comparing the
             analysis result to already chosen criteria.
Expert Judgment and Data Analysis. Expert judgment can be sought
if needed in areas relevant to this topic, such as contract management, risk
management, technical knowledge of focus area of the project, decision-making
techniques, and any of the data analysis methods listed in Table 3-7.
Table 3-7. Data Analysis Methods Listed for the Monitor and Control Project Work Process

Any Technique            Need                                                   Chapter
Cost-benefit analysis    Helps to determine the best corrective action in       7
                         terms of cost in case of project deviations
Earned-value analysis    To get an integrated perspective on scope, schedule,   7
                         and cost performance
Root-cause analysis      To find out the main reasons of a problem; e.g.;       11
                         identify the reasons for a deviation as well as the
                         areas the project manager should focus on to
                         effectively achieve the project objectives
Trend analysis           Forecast future performance based on past and          3, 7
                         present results
Variance analysis        Determine and analyze the differences (or variance)    7
                         between planned and actual performance
Alternatives analysis    Selects a corrective action, a preventive action, or   5
                         both to implement as a response to deviation
110   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      Output for Monitor and Control Project Work
      The output items of this process are described in the following.
      Work Performance Reports. The raw work performance data, a main
      input into this process, is turned into information by data-analysis techniques
      that are then presented in work performance reports. These reports are
      distributed in physical or electronic form among the appropriate stakeholders
      for various purposes, such as to raise awareness, help make decisions, and take
      action. Status reports and progress reports are two common examples of
      work performance reports. To help the stakeholder effectively comprehend
      the information, these reports can use appropriate presentation tools, such
      as tables, charts (e.g.; reserve burndown charts), histograms (e.g.; defect
      histograms), and graphs (e.g.; earned value and trend line graphs).
      Change Requests. You will be comparing the work performance data or
      the analysis thereof with the planned performance. The deviation will produce
      some change requests, such as to adjust project scope, product scope, quality
      requirements, or schedule or cost baselines. Change requests may necessitate
      the collection and documentation of new requirements. We already have
      discussed such changes in detail in the Direct and Manage Project Work
      process coverage.


      Caution! Original change requests, such as in project scope, product scope, or cost line,
      if approved, can trigger other changes, such as those to the project management plan, project
      documents, or product deliverables.


      Project Document Update. Based on the results of data analysis, any input
      document may be updated. For example, new risks identified will be recorded
      in the risk register, new issues will go into the issue log, and changes in cost
      forecasts will modify the cost forecasts document.


      Caution! Monitor and Control Project Work is a high-level umbrella process. Most of its tasks
      are actually performed using the lower-level, more-specific processes discussed in the upcoming
      chapters.
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth   111




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.2

   Q1. The performance of a project is measured against which planning element?
   Q2. Can you name four baselines?


As you have learned, change requests arise from monitoring and controlling
the project work and from directing and managing project work, and may
originate from any other source, such as the stakeholders. These requests
must be processed through the integrated change control process, formally
called the Perform Integrated Change Control process.


Performing Integrated Change Control
The Perform Integrated Change Control process is all about processing change
requests, which includes evaluating them; deferring, rejecting, or approving
them; and managing the implementation of approved changes and the changes
resulting from this implementation.
A project rarely runs exactly according to the project management plan,
and therefore deviation will inevitably occur. The change requests can come
from evaluating the project performance to bring the project in line with the
project management plan, or they can come from other sources, such as the
stakeholders. Regardless of where they originate, it is the project manager's
responsibility to manage all the changes, which includes getting the changes
rejected or approved, ensuring the approved changes get implemented, and
changing the affected plans and documents accordingly.
Note other things about changes and this process:
      *    The Perform Integrated Change Control process is used
           to manage changes to the project from project initiation
           through project closure.
      *    Process Changes. Depending on the project, performing
           organization, and the particular request, the authority to
           determine whether it be deferred, rejected, or approved
           might lie with the project manager, the sponsor, or some
           kind of committee, such as a change control board
           (CCB). The CCB may consist of individuals from upper
           management and other stakeholders.
112   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


              *    Even after CCB approval, an approved change request
                   may require the approval of other stakeholders, such as
                   customer or sponsor.
              *    As noted earlier, to incorporate the approved changes,
                   some other changes may be necessary, such as updating
                   the project baseline (cost, schedule, and scope) to
                   maintain their integrity.


      Tip Especially in a startup organization, you will notice quite often that changes make their
      way through the back door--for example, a product manager talking to an engineer directly and
      introducing changes. Do not consider yourself an opponent of changes by default, but you do need
      to manage changes and make sure each change goes through the integrated change control
      process. So, when it comes to changes, the key word is control, and not necessarily oppose.


      Table 3-8 shows the integrated change control process. The change requests
      that need to be approved are the obvious input to this process.

      Table 3-8. The Perform Integrated Change Control Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
      Output

      Input                                    Tools and Techniques Output
      1. Project management plan               1. Expert judgment        1. Approved change
      2. Project documents                     2. Change control            requests
      3. Work performance reports              3. Data analysis          2. Updates: project
                                                                            management plan,
      4. Change requests                       4. Decision making
                                                                            project documents
      5. Enterprise environmental factors      5. Meetings
      6. Organizational process assets



      Tip The key benefit of this process is that the changes get documented; they are considered,
      deferred, rejected, or approved; approved ones are implemented in the entire context of the
      project; and changes resulting from the implementation are managed. This reduces the risk that
      would prevail absent this process.



      Input to Integrated Change Control
      Each requested change and recommended action must be processed through
      the Integrated Change Control process. The approved changes have their
      effects on the project management plan, and therefore the plan needs to
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      113



be updated accordingly. The following are the input items to the Integrated
Change Control process.
Project Management Plan. This is needed for change-related information.
The change management plan contains information about managing the change
control process along with the roles and responsibilities of the change control
board (CCB) and the role of the project manager in the change request approval
process. The other relevant project plan component includes configuration
management and scope, schedule, and cost baselines. We also need the project
plan because some of its components may need to be updated as a result of
the applied changes.
Project Documents. The project documents that we may need for
information and updating include basis of estimates, requirements traceability
matrix, and risk report, discussed earlier.
Work Performance Reports. The performance report is input because
the reported performance deviations from the plan are important when
evaluating the resulting change requests. We described these reports in the
previous section.
Change Requests. These are obvious inputs. A requested change goes
through an approval process, where it can be approved, rejected, or delayed.
Enough has been said about these changes in this and previous sections. As said
earlier, change requests may include the following types of recommendations:
      *   Recommended corrective actions
      *   Recommended preventive actions
      *   Recommended defect repairs
These recommendations might arise from different sources, such as
performance evaluations, output of various control processes, and stakeholders,
as illustrated in Figure 3-2.
114   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


                                                                  Work
                                                              performance
        Other Monitor and                Direct and Manage        data    Monitor and Control
        Control Processes                   Project Work                     Project Work

                                       Change          Approved
                                       requests        change
                     Change                            requests         Change requests
                     requests
                                         Perform Integrated
                                          Change Control

                                                   Change
                                                   requests



                                            Stakeholders


      Figure 3-2. Big picture of change control

      Enterprise Environmental Factors. The enterprise environmental factors
      that can influence the integrated change control process include organizational
      governance; contracting and purchasing constraints; legal and regulatory
      requirements and constraints; and government and industry standards.
      Organizational Process Assets. The following items in the organizational
      process assets can influence the change control process:
             *    Organizational Procedures. Your organization may
                  have proper procedures related to change control--for
                  example, how to modify documents, such as plans; how
                  to process (evaluate, approve, or reject) changes; and
                  how to implement the approved changes.
             *    Project Files. Project files from previous projects may
                  be a useful input to the change control process in order
                  to learn from the past.
             *    Change Knowledge Base. This is the knowledge base
                  that can be used for configuration management, such
                  as official company standards and policies and project
                  documents; i.e., changes in different versions of them.
      So, what tools and techniques are available to process these requests and
      recommendations?
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       115




Tools and Techniques for Integrated Change Control
The main tools used in this process are discussed next.
Expert Judgment and Meetings. Expert judgment can be made on the
topics such as technical expertise of the stakeholders to evaluate change
requests; risk management; configuration management; and legal issues,
legislation, regulations, and procurement. The project manager or project
management team can also hold meetings with experts and the change control
board to evaluate changes and make approval and rejection decisions.
Change Control Tools. The change control tools are actually manual
or automated tools for both configuration control and change control.
Configuration refers to a specific arrangement of elements in a particular
figure, form, or combination. Some examples include the setting of options
in a computer program, distribution of electrons in a particular atom, and
spatial arrangement of atoms in a molecular bond. Configuration control is
mainly about deliverables and processes--for example, facilitating to identify,
document, report, verify, and audit them--whereas change control is mainly
about change--facilitating to identify, document, postpone, reject, approve, and
track changes to the deliverables, baselines, project documents, and so forth.
Data-Analysis and Decision-Making Techniques. These techniques are
used to assess the change requests and decide whether to postpone, reject, or
approve them. The data-analysis techniques may include alternatives analysis
to help make decisions about which corrective actions, preventive actions,
or both to implement as a response to deviation, if the change request is
accepted; cost-benefit analysis to determine if the change implementation is
worth its cost; and so on.
We can easily apply decision-making techniques by using voting, autocratic
decision making, and multicriteria decision analysis, which were discussed in
the section on the tools and techniques for the Monitor and Control Project
Work process.

Output from Integrated Change Control
The changes that are processed through the Integrated Change Control
process will be deferred, rejected, or approved. As a result of the approved
changes, the project management plan and project document might need to
be updated. Accordingly, the following are the output items of the Integrated
Change Control process.
Approved Change Requests. You must make sure not only that the
approved change requests are implemented through the Direct and Manage
Project Work process, but also that the status or info about the deferred
and rejected change requests are communicated to the stakeholders who
requested the change.
116   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      The dispositions of all change requests are recorded in the change log as a
      project document update.
      Project Plan and Project Document Updates. As a result of approved
      changes, components of the project management plan may need to be updated,
      along with the project scope, baselines, and any subsidiary plans. Also, project
      documents may need to be updated, such as the change log, which is used to
      record changes that happen during the project lifecycle.


      Caution! During document updates, changes to any baselines are made in reference to the
      last baseline version of baseline, thus keeping all the versions intact in order to preserve the
      integrity of the baselines for the purpose of having historical data of past performance.



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.3

          Q1. Many processes in the monitoring and controlling process group generate change
          requests. Name the process in this process group that is used to approve or reject the
          change requests.
          Q2. Name the processes and other sources that can generate the change requests.



      Managing Project Knowledge
      The Manage Project Knowledge process is used to help meet the project
      objectives and contribute to organizational knowledge and learning by creating
      new knowledge and using existing knowledge. Existing knowledge is also used
      in the process of creating new knowledge in the course of this process.


      Caution! From the definition of Manage Project Knowledge, it should be clear that managing
      knowledge is not just about recording or documenting the knowledge to share it, nor is it just about
      yielding the lessons learned to be used in the future projects.


      In this chapter, we have introduced the concepts of data, information, and
      knowledge. When any confusion arises, let's ask a question: what is the
      difference between data, information, and knowledge? Figure 3-3 presents a
      simple illustration of the relationship between these three concepts. Data
      are raw facts, such as that an activity was finished in 30 days of work, while
      information is the processed or interpreted data that have some use and
                                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth    117



implications, such as that an activity was finished in 30 days of work when it
was planned to be finished in 20 days of work. Both data and information can
be presented in plots. Information combined with our experience, intuition,
and existing knowledge produces knowledge with predictive ability, such as
that an activity was finished in 30 days of work when it was planned to be
finished in 20 days of work, so (adding other pieces of information) the project
will be 7 days late and will cost $2,000 more.

                         Processing                          Understanding
        Data                               Information                             Knowledge
                                                                  Experience

Figure 3-3. Relationship Between Data, Information, and Knowledge


Back to the Manage Project Knowledge process, which is performed
throughout the project. The flow of knowledge is an important part of
knowledge management. In fact, the most important task and challenge of
knowledge management is to create an environment where people trust each
other and are motivated to learn and share knowledge.
The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of the process are depicted in
Table 3-9.

Table 3-9. The Manage Project Knowledge Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                 Tools and Techniques           Output
1. Project management plan            1. Expert judgment             1. Lessons learned register
2. Project documents                  2. Information management      2. Updates: project
3. Project deliverable                3. Knowledge management           management plan,
                                                                        organizational process
4. Enterprise environmental           4. Interpersonal and team
                                                                        assets
   factors                               skills
5. Organizational process assets



Input to Manage Project Knowledge
The use the input items in this process is discussed in the following.
Project Management Plan and Project Documents. The project
documents relevant to this process that can be used include 1) the lessons
learned register to learn about effective practices in knowledge management
and to add new ones; 2) project team assignments for information on
the skill set and experience currently available in order to figure out missing
knowledge needed for the project; 3) the resource breakdown structure
for information on the team's composition; again, this may indicate the available
118   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      and missing but required knowledge for the project; and 4) the stakeholder
      register for details about the already identified stakeholders that may reveal
      what knowledge or skills they have.
      Project Deliverables. These are needed to figure out what knowledge is
      needed to produce them, and also to figure out the lessons learned.
      The Enterprise Environmental Factors. The enterprise environmental
      factors that can influence the Manage Project Knowledge process include
      1) knowledge expertise in the organization; 2) the culture of the
      organizational and project stakeholders, which will influence the evaluation
      and sharing of knowledge; 3) geographic distribution of facilities and
      resources; this will help determine tools and techniques for knowledge flow--
      obtaining, providing, and sharing knowledge; and 4) legal and regulatory
      requirements and constraints; e.g.; confidentiality of project information
      will influence the knowledge flow.
      The Organizational Process Assets. Some organizational policies,
      processes, and procedures may influence knowledge management, such
      as authorized technology and social media; confidentiality and access
      to information; and the use of copyrighted information. Also, personnel
      administration, such as employee development and training records and skill
      set records, may reflect attitudes toward learning and sharing knowledge.
      Furthermore, organizational communication requirements may have an
      influence too. For example, formal and strict communication requirements help
      learning and sharing knowledge, while an informal environment may be more
      effective for improving the existing knowledge, creating new knowledge, and
      integrating knowledge from diverse stakeholders. Knowledge and information
      transfer procedures apply to reviews before, during, and after projects and
      project phases to identify, capture, and share lessons learned from the current
      project and other projects.
      Obviously, the knowledge database repository is another organizational
      process asset that helps with knowledge management.


      Tools and Techniques for Managing Project
      Knowledge
      Two major types of tools and techniques used for this process are information
      management and knowledge management. All of them, however, are discussed
      here.
      Expert Judgment. Expert judgment may be sought on topics in the areas of
      information and knowledge management, including the available tools in these
      areas and relevant information and knowledge from other projects.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       119



Information Management. This type of tool helps people connect to the
information sources where they can store, obtain, and share information. Some
examples are project management information; system library services; and
the lessons learned register and tools to store, edit, and retrieve entries into
and from this register. E-mails, web browsers, podcasts, online communities of
subject matter experts, and other such web applications are some additional
examples.
Knowledge Management. This type of tool helps people connect to
share data, information, and knowledge and to work together to create new
knowledge. Some examples are meetings, including virtual or online meetings;
networking, including face-to-face and online social media; online forums
in which to ask and answer questions; knowledge-sharing events such as
seminars, conferences, and knowledge fairs; and learning workshops.
Interpersonal and Team Skills. These skills were already discussed in this
and the previous chapter. However, leadership, networking, active listening,
facilitation, staying on the topic, and being respectful and courteous to people
are particularly important.


Output of Managing Project Knowledge
The output of this process is discussed next.
Lessons Learned. The main output from managing project knowledge is
the lessons learned from the project, which are recorded into the lessons
learned register, a document that is created the first time we run this process,
or earlier, and updated subsequently. This can be a well-structured document
that links certain fields to each category, such as description of the situation,
impact on the project, recommendations, and proposed and implemented
actions. The categories, for example, may be the risks realized, challenges
faced, problems, and opportunities. To ensure the efficiency of capturing the
content and its effectiveness, appropriate technology such as audio, pictures,
and videos can be used.
Updates. At end of the project or project phase, lessons learned are
transferred to the lessons learned repository in the knowledge database of
the organization; i.e., this component of the organizational process assets
is updated. Other organizational process assets in addition to the lessons
learned repository may also be updated. Other updates may also happen as a
result of this process.
120   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management



      Tip The key benefits of the Manage Project Knowledge process is that new knowledge is
      created or existing organizational knowledge is improved, and in the process of this creation or
      improvement the existing knowledge is used. Moreover, the created or improved knowledge is
      used in the organization's operations and in future projects or future phases of the current project.


      The project deliverables that have been accepted through the scope verification
      process still need to go through final transition to the appropriate party, such as
      the customer or the sponsor. In other words, the project needs proper closure.


      Performing Project Closure
      Closing the project means finalizing all activities across the project by using
      the Close Project process. The formal name of the project closure process
      is Close Project or Phase because it can also be used to close a phase in
      a multiphase project. Project closure includes ensuring that all the planned
      work is completed, the planned outcome has been delivered, the project or
      phase information is archived with the organization, and team resources are
      released. You also need to determine and coordinate the procedures required
      for verifying and documenting the project deliverables.
      The items that describe what the project was planned to deliver and what
      it has delivered would be the obvious inputs to the process of closing the
      project. The process is illustrated in Table 3-10 with its input, tools and
      techniques, and output.

      Table 3-10. The Close Project or Phase Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques         Output
      1. Business documents                 1. Expert judgment           1. Final project outcome
      2. Project charter                    2. Data analysis             2. Final report
      3. Procurement documents              3. Meetings                  3. Updates: lessons learned
      4. Agreements                                                         register and other project
                                                                            documents, organizational
      5. Project management plan
                                                                            process assets
      6. Project documents
      7. Accepted deliverable
      8. Organizational process assets



      Tip Not only the completed projects, but also the terminated projects must be formally closed
      using the processes of the closing process group.
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth   121




Input to the Close Project Process
You need a list of project deliverables that have been verified through the
Verify Scope process and will go through the transition procedure. The
project management plan contains guidelines on how to close the project.
These and other input items are discussed in the following list:
      *   Two Business Documents and Project Charter. The
          business case document and the benefits management
          plan document are used to verify if the deliverables are
          aligned with the business need and if the expected benefit
          would still justify the project that has been executed.
          The project charter document is needed to verify if the
          project success criteria and the approval requirements
          and so forth have been met.
      *   Agreements and Procurement Documentation.
          These will be needed to verify the fulfilment of
          procurement and agreements, to be used in lessons
          learned session, and to close the contract.
      *   Project Management Plan. This defines how to close
          the project and will be useful in establishing the project
          closure procedure. The project management plan is also
          used in verifying and accepting the project deliverables
          because it explains what deliverables are expected. Note,
          however, that the Validate Scope process to verify scope
          belongs to the scope management knowledge area and
          monitor and control process group, and will be covered
          in the next chapter.
      *   Project Documents. As you can imagine, we need
          quite a few project documents in this process for the
          purpose of verification, compliance, completion, evidence,
          evaluation, lessons learned session, and archive. For
          example, we need the issue log to verify that there is
          no open issue; basis of estimates to evaluate how the
          estimates compared to the actual result regarding items
          such as duration, cost, and resources; requirements
          documentation as evidence of compliance; and change log
          for lessons learned and archive. Other examples may be
          assumptions log, lessons learned, milestones list, project
          communications, quality control measurements, quality
          report, and risk register documents.
122   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


             *    Accepted Deliverables. This refers to the deliverables
                  that have been verified through the validate scope process,
                  discussed in the next chapter. That means these deliverables
                  meet the scope requirements acceptance criteria and are
                  accepted by the customer or sponsor. In case of a phase
                  or cancelled project, these may also include incomplete
                  deliverables. The deliverables may be represented here by
                  approved product specifications, delivery receipts, work
                  performance documents, and so on.
             *    Organizational Process Assets. These can include
                  project closure guidelines or requirements--for example,
                  regarding product validation and acceptance criteria,
                  final project audits, project evaluations, contract closure,
                  and knowledge transfer. Also, you can learn from the
                  historical information what kind of project documents
                  you need to archive and in what detail you want to
                  review the project to gather and store lessons learned.
                  Your organization may also have a transition criteria or
                  procedure for handing the product of the project to the
                  appropriate party.
      These input items provide information about what the project was supposed
      to deliver and what it has delivered. You use this input and some tools and
      techniques to carry on the project closure.


      Caution! It's important to understand the flow of project deliverables through different
      processes. They are generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process, verified through
      the Quality Control process, accepted by the customer through the Validate Scope process, and
      transitioned to the appropriate party through the Close Project or Phase process.




      Tools and Techniques for the Close Project Process
      The tools and techniques used for closing the project are data analysis, expert
      judgment, and meetings. Data analysis may use techniques such as document
      analysis, regression analysis, trend analysis, and variance analysis. Document
      analysis refers to using documents to obtain or extract the information relevant
      to this process, such as organizational assets improvement, lessons learned,
      and knowledge archived for future projects. Regression analysis is used to
      determine the relationship between different project variables impacting the
      project outcome. That information will be useful for the projects. The other
      two techniques, trend analysis and variance analysis, are shown in Table 3-7.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           123



Expert advice may be obtained on topics related to closing the project.
There will be lots of meetings regarding the project closure activities, such as
closing the contract, validating the exit criteria, confirming the acceptance of
deliverables, evaluating the stakeholders' satisfaction, holding lessons learned
sessions, wrapping up, and celebrating.

                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.4

    Q1. Name the processes used to generate:
        a.   Lessons learned register
        b.   Lessons learned
    Q2. For what do we need data analysis during the Close Project process?



Caution! The formal name of the process to close the project or a phase of it is Close Project
or Phase. However, like other processes, I also refer to it by informal names, such as close project
or project closure. You should know the formal name of each process and then be able to recognize
from context when it's being referred to in an informal way. This will help you in the exam, and
more importantly in real-world project management.



Output of the Close Project or Phase Process
Project closure accomplishes three main elements--completion of all
the closing procedures; final acceptance of the project deliverables by the
customer, including handing over the deliverables to the appropriate party;
and reviewing the project and archiving project-related documents. This is
reflected in the following output items.
Final Project OutcomeTransition. This means that the project outcome--
i.e., product, service, or results--has been delivered and transitioned (handed
over) to the appropriate party to maintain and support it throughout its
lifecycle. An appropriate party could be, for example, another organization or
a different department or group in the same organization.
Final Report. This presents a brief review and summary of different project
aspects in the context of project performance. For example, the project
aspects could include scope, cost, and quality objectives. It can state the
criteria used to evaluate the scope and cost, whether that criteria was met
by the final outcome, and what the reasons were for any variance. Similarly, it
can include what criteria were used to evaluate the overall project quality and
124   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      product quality, and the reasons for quality variances. Moreover, the report
      can summarize the procedure and results of final project outcome validation.
      Updates of Lessons Learned Register and Organizational Process
      Assets. The project closure process updates project documents and the
      organizational process assets.
            *    Project Documents. The lessons learned are entered
                 into the lessons learned register. They can cover any
                 project-related topics. Any other project document may
                 also be updated. Every ongoing document has at least one
                 update: final version.
            *    Organizational Process Assets. Documents and
                 lessons learned from the project are added to the
                 organization's knowledge database for various purposes,
                 such as the following:
                 *    For the record
                 *    To help for future projects
                 *    To support the product or service from the project
                      under closure
      This includes all types of important documents, from project documents such
      as the project management plan and documents regarding scope, schedule,
      cost, baseline, etc. to documents about lessons learned and knowledge
      accumulated throughout the project lifecycle; and from project closure
      documents regarding scope validation, agreements, and transfer and customer
      acceptance of the final product, etc., to operational and support documents such
      as those needed in order to operate and support the product or service
      resulting from the project under closure.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.5

         Q1. What is the first process you perform in managing a project?
         Q2. What do you need before you can begin initiating your project?
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth          125




Making Project Management Common Sense
By now, you must have noticed some of the common inputs, tools and
techniques, and outputs. Let's make them part of the project management
common sense.
Enterprise Environmental Factors and Organizational Process
Assets. The enterprise environmental factors (EEF) and organizational
process assets (OPA) are very common inputs to the processes. If you master
the EEFs and OPAs discussed in the previous chapter and applied in this
chapter, then knowing the definition of a process, you should be able to figure
out what EEFs and OPAs the process would need as input. They would be
needed to help produce the output. Also note that sometimes OPAs are
needed because they need to be updated as part of the process output.
Project Documents. The same is true for project documents. If you know
the names of most of the project document and what they include, then by
knowing the definition of a process, you should be able to tell what project
document the process would need as input. Again, the process may need a
document to help produce output, including the case where the output item
is to update the document.
Expert Judgment and Meetings. There are common tools and techniques
for many processes. Knowing what the process is supposed to do reveals
the topics involved, and those are the topics that may possibly need expert
judgment on stating the obvious. Similarly, by knowing the project topics
and activities it will become clear to you what kinds of meetings you will be
holding during the process. And general rules of good meeting management
remain the same--timely invitations to appropriate stakeholders, running the
meeting on agenda, starting and finishing on time, and follow-up action.
So, the coverage of these common inputs, tools and techniques, and output
items in the upcoming chapters will assume that you have developed the skills
just described.


Tip Although the standard project processes are the same for each organization, the details
and the manners in which they are implemented might be different for different organizations.
Each organization can develop its own implementation details, which consist of items such as
detailed steps for how to carry on the project processes, templates, meetings, and procedures.
126   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


      Summary
      The project is initiated, planned, and executed in pieces, and all those
      pieces are related to each other and need to come together. That is where
      integration management comes in, which includes developing the project
      charter, developing the project management plan, directing and managing
      project work, monitoring and controlling project work, performing integrated
      change control, managing project knowledge, and closing the project or a
      phase of the project. You develop the project charter based on two business
      documents, namely business case and project benefit management plan, hence
      interfacing the project with the organization's business need and with the
      project charter. Then, you develop the project management plan by taking
      the project charter and output of many other planning processes as input. The
      project management plan becomes an input to all other integration processes.
      This virtually means that executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing the
      project are equivalent to implementing the project management plan.
      As a project manager, you manage project execution using the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process, which will generate change requests that
      must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process
      that in turn sends approved change requests back to the Direct and Manage
      Project Work process for implementation. The Direct and Manage Project
      Work process also produces the work performance data that is used by
      the Monitor and Control Project Work process to generate performance
      reports and more change requests. These and the change requests directly
      from stakeholders also must be processed though the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process. Moreover, directing and managing project work also
      generates deliverables, which, after verification and validation, become input
      to the Close Project or Phase process.
      The lessons learned are the output of two processes: Manage Project
      Knowledge and Close Project or Phase. The lessons are learned throughout
      the project by performing the Manage Project Knowledge process, and not
      only at the end of the project or phase.
      Road Ahead. This chapter together with the previous two chapters has
      presented the big picture of project management by exploring the project
      management framework and the environment in which the project is
      performed, as well as overviewing project management through all five stages
      of the project in terms of the integration management processes. As in many
      fields, in project management we measure progress or performance relative
      to baselines. In Part II of this book, we will meet two interrelated baselines--
      scope baseline and schedule baseline--while exploring the management
      of three important interrelated aspects of a project: scope, schedule, and
      resources.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth        127




Exam's Eye View
Comprehend
*Executing a project means implementing the project management plan developed during
 project planning.
*Directing and managing project work involves managing various technical and
 organizational interfaces in the project to facilitate smooth execution of the project work.
*The execution of the project is managed in an integrated way by performing the process
 called Direct and Manage Project Work, a high-level umbrella process for the executing
 stage, which generates the project deliverables.
*The two major output items of the Direct and Manage Project work process are project
 deliverables and work performance data, sometimes also wrongly called performance
 information.
*You monitor and control the project in an integrative way by using two processes:
 Monitor and Control Project Work and Perform Integrated Change Control.
*All the individual monitor and control processes, such as monitor risk, control quality,
 and control schedule, can generate change requests, which must be processed through
 the integrated change control process, in which each of these change requests will be
 deferred, rejected, or approved.
*Only the approved change requests should be implemented, i.e., processed, through the
 Direct and Manage Project Work process.
*You, the project manager, manage the project closure.
*Before going through project closure, the deliverables must be checked for their scope
 through the Validate Scope process and accepted by the customer or sponsor.

Look Out
*Two business documents, business case and benefit management plan, are the main input
 into developing the project charter, which acts as an interface or link between project
 objectives and the organization's strategic objectives.
*The change requests come from any monitor and change process or directly from stakeholders,
 but they must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
*The performance reports, generated by the Monitor and Control Project Work process,
 are an input to the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
*Approved change requests must be implemented by performing the Direct and Manage
 Project Work process.
*The lessons learned are the output of two processes: Manage Project Knowledge and
 Close Project or Phase.
*The lessons are learned throughout the project by performing the Manage Project
 Knowledge process, and not only at the end of the project or phase.
*Not only the completed projects, but also the terminated projects, must be formally
 closed using the processes of the closing process group.
*The same process is used to close both a phase of a project and the project itself: Close
 Project or Phase.
128   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management



      Memorize
      *The project charter is the document that formally authorizes a project, names a project
       manager with authority level, and identifies the project sponsor.
      *All subsidiary project management plans, baselines, and some other documents are
       integrated into one plan called the project management plan. The rest of the documents
       used in a project are simply called project documents.
      *The project management plan is an input to the all the integration management processes
       except two: Develop Project Charter and Develop Project Plan.
      *Work performance data (sometime wrongly called work performance information) is an
       input to the Monitor and Control Project Work process.
      *Change requests are an output of the Monitor and Control Project Work process and the
       Direct and Manage Project Work process, but they can also come from other monitor
       and control processes and directly from stakeholders.
      *The Perform Integrated Change Control process is used to approve, reject, or postpone a
       change request.
      *They are generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process, verified through the
       Quality Control process, accepted by the customer through the Validate Scope process,
       and transitioned to the appropriate party through the Close Project or Phase process.
      *The customer or project sponsor signs the final project outcome acceptance and closure
       documents.



      Review Questions
             1. Which of the following issues the project charter
                document?
                  A. The sponsor or performing organization's higher
                     management
                  B. Any stakeholder
                  C. The customer
                  D. The project manager
             2. What document is the result of the integration
                management process in the project initiation process
                group?
                  A. Business case
                  B. Project charter
                  C. Project benefit management plan
                  D. Preliminary scope statement
                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth   129



3. The project charter is important for which of the
   following reasons?
    A. It authorizes the sponsor.
    B. It names the project manager and authorizes the
       project manager to use the organization's resources
       for the project.
    C. It identifies all the stakeholders.
    D. It analyzes the stakeholders.
4. Which of the following is not included in the project charter?
    A. High-level risks
    B. High-level product requirements
    C. Budget summary
    D. Project schedule
5. You have been named the project manager for a project
   in your company codenamed Kill the Bill. The project
   must complete before Thanksgiving Day this year. This
   represents which of the following project characteristics?
    A. Assumption
    B. Constraint
    C. Schedule
    D. Risk
6. Which of the following is true about assumptions in
   project initiation?
    A. Because assumptions are a part of the project charter
       that you did not write, you don't need to validate
       them. Just assume the assumptions are true, and if the
       project fails, it's not your fault.
    B. Because assumptions represent risk, you must
       validate them at various stages of the project.
    C. An assumption is a condition that has been verified
       to be true, so you don't need to validate it.
    D. You must not start a project until all the assumptions
       have been proven to be true.
130   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


           7. What is not true about the Manage Project Knowledge
              process?
               A. It generates the lessons learned register.
               B. It generates the lessons learned.
               C. It is performed at the end of project or phase.
               D. It uses project deliverables.
           8. Every change request must be processed through which
              process?
               A. Perform Integrated Change Control
               B. Project charter and stakeholder register and Direct
                  and Manage Project Work
               C. Monitor and Control Project Work
               D. Process Change Requests
           9. The process or processes used to learn lessons from a
              project are:
               A. Manage Project Knowledge
               B. Direct and Manage Project Work
               C. Monitor and Control Project Work
               D. Close Project or Phase
          10. Which of the following is not the output of directing and
              managing project work?
               A. Accepted deliverables
               B. Issue log
               C. Work performance data
               D. Change requests
          11. The integrated change control process is used to manage
              changes to the project at which stage?
               A. From initiating through closing
               B. Planning only
               C. Executing only
               D. Monitoring and controlling only
                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth   131



12. A project manager is getting the risk-related
    recommended corrective actions approved. Which of the
    following processes is the project manager involved in?
     A. Perform Integrated Change Control
     B. No process
     C. Risk identification
     D. Monitor and Control Project Work
13. You have just received approval from the change control
    board to implement a few change requests. What process
    are you going to execute for that to happen?
     A. No process is needed
     B. Direct and Manage Project Work
     C. Perform Integrated Change Control
     D. Monitor and Control Project Work
14. Walking down the hallway, you heard a program manager
    saying to a project manager, "You need the performance
    reports to run this process." Which process might the
    program manager be referring to?
     A. Monitor and Control Project Work
     B. Perform Integrated Change Control
     C. Close Project or Phase
     D. Evaluate Performance
15. You heard a functional manager saying, "We are going to
    skip the closing stage. There is no need for formalities in
    this project; it's a total waste of time." For which kind of
    projects is it appropriate to skip the closing stage?
     A. Technical projects
     B. Small and simple projects
     C. Cancelled project
     D. No projects
132   Chapter 3 | Project Integration Management


          16. Which of the following stakeholders can authorize the
              closure of a project?
               A. Project manager
               B. Customer
               C. Project sponsor
               D. Functional manager
          17. You are preparing to close a project you have been
              managing. Which of the following is not an input to the
              Close Project or Phase process?
               A. Project charter
               B. Project management plan
               C. Project deliverables
               D. Project benefit management plan
                                                                PA R T


                                                                 II

Scope, Schedule,
and Resources
Congratulations! You have already seen the big picture of project management
as described in Part I. You can't wait to begin executing. But hold on! I have a
couple of questions for you. First, when you are executing your project, how
will you know that you are on the right track? Second, during the execution,
how will you know that the project is performing in such a way that it will
end in success? The answer to both these questions is: baselines. You define
your project in terms of baselines and measure its progress or performance
by comparing the project result with baselines, and the deviations from the
baselines measure how much the project is off track.
What will be done in the project and what will not be done define the project
scope baseline. Work that needs to be done in order to implement this
baseline needs to be scheduled. That gives rise to the schedule baseline, which
then needs resources to implement it.
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             4

Project Scope
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 9 percent of the exam,
equivalent to about 12 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how that helps in generating the output, and what a given tool or
technique does in a given process.
You should be very clear about the elements and their purposes inside
each component of the scope baseline: scope statement, Work Breakdown
Structure (WBS), and WBS dictionary.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how
the tasks can be tailored and adapted as needed, and recognize an agile
environment in action; for example, continual assessment generates change
requests which lead to changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_4
136   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Scope Management:
         1.Understand the six project management processes in the project scope management
           knowledge area.
         2.Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the six processes in
           project scope management.
         3.Identify key concepts and tailoring consideration for project scope management and
           key roles in scope management.
         4.Identify the purpose and elements of a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) for both
           product and project scope.
         5.Understand project scope management for agile/adaptive projects, including the use
           of prototypes.


      After the project has been initiated, as discussed in the previous chapter, you
      need to develop a project management plan, which becomes the primary
      source of information for how the project at hand will be executed, monitored
      and controlled, and closed. The project plan development involves developing
      subsidiary plans, of which one important plan is the scope management plan.
      How important is the scope management plan? If a product is not in the scope,
      it will not and should not be produced. Before you start defining the scope,
      you need to know what the project and product requirements are. In other
      words, you need to collect requirements based on the needs and expectations
      of the stakeholders and in line with the project objectives. Once you have
      defined the scope based on these requirements, it needs to be broken down
      into concrete, manageable tasks that can be assigned and performed. This is
      accomplished through what is called the work breakdown structure (WBS).
      Planning and controlling the project scope is crucial to the success of the
      project. Without it, the project can easily go off track. The primary purpose of
      project scope management is to ensure that the required work (and only the
      required work) is performed to complete the project successfully. If changes
      in the work requirements are made, they must be controlled--that is, the
      scope must be controlled. Also, before the outcome of the project is offered
      for acceptance, its scope must be validated with the customer or the sponsor;
      for example, to ensure the product has all the features that are promised in
      the scope statement.
      In the preceding two paragraphs, we described project scope management in
      nutshell. So, the central issue in this chapter is managing the project scope. To
      be able to wrap your mind around this issue, you will explore three avenues:
      collecting requirements; defining project scope and creating WBS based on
      it; and verifying and controlling scope. Needless to say, all of this is done
      according to the plan; specifically, the scope management plan, in this case.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth         137




Managing Scope: Big Picture
The project scope is defined as the work that must be performed to deliver
a product with a given scope. The product scope is the set of functions
and features that characterize a product to be delivered by the project.
The scope--i.e., product scope and project scope--refers to both what is
included in the project and what is not. In other words, scoping a project
means drawing boundaries around it. The importance of managing the project
scope cannot be overemphasized, because it has a profound impact on the
overall success of the project.


Caution! By project scope we usually mean the project product scope and the scope of the
work required to produce that product. However, keep in mind that in PMBOK the project scope
only refers to the work required to deliver the product, and does not include product scope.




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.1

   Among the following attributes, identify which are part of product scope and which are
   part of the project scope, according to PMBOK.
       A.   Develop software modules to support website.
       B.   The user can only access this website after logging in.
       C.   The drug should not have more than two side effects.
       D.   The drug must be developed within one year.
       E.   The drug must be tested in-house before it goes to the Food and
            Drug Administration.


The major goal of scope management is to ensure that the required work and
only the required work is included and performed in the project. As shown
in Figure 4-1, this goal is accomplished by the following functions of project
management:
       *    Plan Scope Management. This process is performed
            to develop a document called the scope management plan,
            which contains information on how to define, control,
            and validate the scope; i.e., the project and product scope.
       *    Collect Requirements. This is the process performed to
            collect, determine, and document the project and product
            requirements and plan to manage those requirements.
138   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


             *    Define Scope. This process is performed to develop a
                  detailed description of the project and the product in the
                  sense of what is included and what is not.
             *    Create Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). This
                  process is used to develop the work breakdown structure
                  in which deliverables, and hence work to produce them,
                  are broken down into smaller manageable tasks that can
                  be assigned to team members. This is done starting with
                  the scope.
             *    Validate Scope. This is the process used to formalize
                  the acceptance of the completed and already verified
                  project deliverables.
             *    Control Scope. Used to monitor the status of the
                  scope--i.e., project scope and product scope--and to
                  manage changes to the scope baseline.
      Figure 4-1 illustrates the high-level view of the logical connections between
      these processes. More high-level information about these processes is
      presented in Table 4-1.


                            Scope Management Plan

                                                   Collect
                                                Requirements
                                                         Stakeholder requirements
                                                         documentation


                                                  Define Scope

                                                         Project scope statement


                                                  Create WBS


                                 Scope baseline                  Scope baseline


                                     Verify Scope           Control Scope


      Figure 4-1. A high-level view of interactions and data flow between different components of
      scope management. All processes are performed according to the scope management plan.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth         139




Table 4-1. Processes of Scope Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Scope                 Process Group       Major Output                    Performed
Management
Process
Plan scope            Planning            Scope management plan,          Once or at
management                                requirement management          predefined project
                                          plan                            points
Collect               Planning            Requirement                     Once or at
Requirements                              documentation,                  predefined project
                                          Requirement traceability        points
                                          matrices
Define Scope          Planning            Project scope statement         Iteratively
Create WBS            Planning            Scope baseline                  At predefined
                                                                          project points
Control Scope         Monitoring and      Work performance                Throughout the
                      Controlling         information                     project
Validate Scope        Monitoring and      Accepted deliverables, work As needed
                      Controlling         performance information,
                                          change requests


Before we can manage the scope, we need to develop the scope management plan.


Developing the Project Scope Management Plan
Before performing the five scope management processes, you must develop
the scope management plan, a blueprint that will show how to develop, control,
and validate the scope. As mentioned previously, this plan is developed using
the Plan Scope Management process, illustrated in Table 4-2.

Table 4-2. The Plan Scope Management: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                  Tools & Techniques        Output
1. Project charter                     1. Expert judgment        1. Scope management plan
2. Project management plan             2. Alternative analysis   2. Requirement
3. Enterprise environmental factors    3. Meetings                  management plan
4. Organizational process assets


You must develop this plan in the context of the purpose of the project,
which is documented in the project charter, where you will also find a
high-level project description and high-level requirements along with other
relevant information, such as assumptions and constraints. Also, you will need
140   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      the project management plan in the input for the quality management plan,
      details of the project lifecycle, and a development approach. All three will
      impact how you plan the scope management. Development approach refers
      to the development approach or approaches adapted for this project, such
      as agile, waterfalls, or iterative. The plan scope management process will
      also be influenced by EEFs (Enterprise Environmental Factors) like personnel
      administration, culture, and infrastructure of the organization, along with
      marketing conditions. Of course, speaking of OPAs (Organizational Process
      Assets), this plan will be developed by following the organizational policies and
      procedures, and you will make use of historical information, including lessons
      learned from past projects.
      As far as tools are concerned, in the process of developing a scope management
      plan you will use expert judgment on relevant topics and meetings with the
      appropriate stakeholders, such as project sponsor and some project team
      members. We also want to explore various techniques that can be used to
      collect requirements, define and elaborate scope from the requirements,
      and validate the scope on the finished product--the alternative analysis. Of
      course, another data analysis method could also be considered to accomplish
      the same goal.
      As a result of applying these tools on the input, we get the scope management
      plan and the requirement management plan, described next.


      Requirement Management Plan and Scope
      Management Plan
      The requirement management plan basically describes the collect requirements
      process: how to collect, determine, and document the project and product
      requirements and plan to manage those requirements. It addresses questions
      like the following:
            *    How does one prioritize requirements?
            *    What kind of metrics will be used and why?
            *    How does one plan, track, and report requirement-
                 related activities?
            *    How will the changes will be traced, initiated, tracked, and
                 their impact by analyzed?
      Similarly, the scope management plan describes the "how to" details regarding
      the rest of the scope management processes: define scope, create work
      breakdown structure, control scope, and validate scope.
      Before you can actually define and develop the scope, you need to have a very
      crucial item in place: stakeholder requirements, which form the basis of the
      scope.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth           141




Caution! It's important to realize that product scope and project scope are not independent.
Product scope is the set of functions and features that fully define the product, and project scope
is the work required to deliver the product. So, the product scope more or less determines the
project scope.


The project scope management plan and requirement management plan
become part of the project management plan.


Collecting Requirements for the Project
The project success is defined as the delivery of the planned outcome with
full scope, on time, and within the schedule. To realize this success, it's very
important that there is an agreement on what exactly is being delivered with
what requirements. A requirement is a condition, characteristic, or capability
that a specific outcome of the project must have. For example, an online
banking website is an outcome of the project, and the condition that it must
record the number of users that visit the site each day is a requirement, as is
that the user login must be secure. Requirements may come from different
sources, such as from standards, specifications, and contracts. Stakeholder
expectations and needs within the context of the project objectives materialize
into requirements.


Note Generally speaking, project requirements should include the product requirements.
However, many organizations distinguish between project requirements and product requirements,
in which case project requirements include strictly project-related requirements, such as schedule
and delivery requirements, business-related requirements, and other project management
requirements, whereas product requirements include the product-related requirements, such as
requirements related to product performance, security, and defects.


You need to do some requirements planning, which includes:
        *    Defining and documenting the project requirements
        *    Defining and documenting the product requirements
        *    Managing the requirements throughout the project
142   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management



      Tip How effective you are in capturing requirements will determine how effective you are in
      getting agreement on these requirements from the stakeholders and in managing the stakeholders'
      expectations and needs. Also, these requirements go right into the foundations of the WBS, along with
      the deliverables. Therefore, collecting requirements effectively is critical for the success of the project.


      You collect requirements by using the Collect Requirements process, illustrated
      in Table 4-3 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output. Input includes
      all the relevant documents--i.e., plans and project documents and business
      documents--where you can get all the high-level information regarding
      project and product requirements. Based on the information provided so far
      in this book, you can easily guess that these documents are:
               1. Business document: business case
               2. Project charter
               3. Agreements
               4. Plan documents: Requirement management plan and
                  scope management plan, covered in the previous section,
                  and the stakeholder engagement plan, which will be useful
                  in managing the requirements.
               5. Project document: Assumptions log for assumptions
                  about project, product, stakeholders, etc.; the lessons
                  learned register for information on which requirement-
                  collection techniques have been effective so far; and
                  stakeholder register, which provides information about
                  stakeholders and requirements.


      Table 4-3. The Collect Requirements Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                      Tools & Techniques                       Output
      1. Project charter                         1. Expert judgment                       1. Requirement
      2. Project management plan                 2. Data gathering                           documentation
      3. Business documents                      3. Data presentation and analysis        2. Requirement
                                                                                             traceability
      4. Agreements                              4. Prototyping
                                                                                             matrix
      5. Enterprise environmental factors        5. Context diagrams
      6. Organizational process assets           6. Decision making
                                                 7. Interpersonal and team skills


      The stakeholder engagement plan and stakeholder register will be covered in
      an upcoming chapter on stakeholder management.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth     143



Of course there are some EEFs and OPAs that influence the requirement
collection process. This is left as an exercise for you in Study Checkpoint 4.2.
Just ask yourself what factors and assets can be the source of requirements
or can help you reach them.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.2

   Make lists of enterprise environment factors and organizational process assets that
   can influence the Collect Requirements process.


So, these input items provide us with the high-level requirements and high-
level project and product information from which requirements may be drawn.
Next, we need to analyze these requirements and information by using some
tools and techniques to do the following:
      1. Extract the final refined set of requirements.
      2. Manage them.


Tools and Techniques for Collecting Requirements
You collect the requirement-related data, present it, analyze it, and make
decisions about requirements or tools. You perform these tasks by using
some techniques. If you need help with these techniques, you can always use
tools of expert judgment.


Data-Gathering Techniques
The following are some examples of data-gathering techniques that can be
used depending on the project need.
Observation and Conversation. Observation is a technique in which the
requirements about a product or project process are gathered by directly
observing the user using the product or performing the process. In other
words, the process or product is observed in action in the real world with
people on the job. For that reason, this technique is also called job shadowing.
Depending on the situation, the observer can simply observe the user doing
the job or can participate in it. Of course, conversation and articulation skills
will matter here.
144   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Interviews, Questionnaires, and Surveys. An interview is typically
      performed by asking pre-determined and on-the-spot questions and recording
      the responses. Depending on the situation, interviews may take several
      forms, such as one-on-one, multiple interviewees, or multiple interviewers.
      For example, by interviewing subject matter experts and individuals who
      ran similar projects before, you may identify and define some features and
      functions of the project deliverables.
      When you want to cover a large number of respondents quickly, questionnaires
      and surveys will be more appropriate. These are based on a written set of
      questions.
      Focus Groups and Facilitated Workshops. A focus group is a set
      of prequalified stakeholders and subject matter experts that are brought
      together with the purpose of learning about their opinions, expectations, and
      attitudes about a product, service, or result that will be the output of the
      project. Generally speaking, a moderator facilitates the interactive discussion
      to make this experience more conversational than one-on-one interviews.
      A facilitated workshop is a session that brings together cross-functional
      stakeholders to focus on defining product requirements. It generally proves to
      be an effective technique for quickly defining cross-functional requirements and
      reconciling differences among the stakeholders regarding the requirements.
      These workshops also help in developing trust and improving communication
      among the stakeholders, therefore fostering relationships that could help the
      project to succeed.
      Benchmarking. Benchmarking is comparing practices, products, or services
      of a project with those of some reference projects for the purpose of learning,
      improving, and creating the basis for measuring performance. We will learn
      more about it an upcoming chapter on quality management.
      Brainstorming. This is a creative technique generally used in a group
      environment to gather ideas as candidates for a solution to a problem or an
      issue without any immediate evaluation of these ideas. The evaluation and
      analysis of these ideas happens later. Obviously, this technique can also be used
      to collect requirements.


      Data-Presentation and -Analysis Techniques
      When you have requirement-related data, it needs to be presented for review
      and analysis.Various data-presentation techniques may be used, some of which
      will be discussed next.
      Affinity Diagram. This is a technique in which a large number of ideas
      or data are classified into different groups using some criteria. Then, the
      relationships among these ideas are explored. This facilitates an effective and
      efficient review and analysis.
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       145



Idea/Mind Mapping. This is a visual technique in which various ideas, such
as those collected through brainstorming, are mapped around a central or key
concept in order to expose commonalities and differences among them. In
this way, one can understand the existing ideas better, consolidate them, and
generate new ideas. Mapping also helps when classifying ideas into groups by
discovering relationships among them. In addition to project management, this
technique is also used in other areas, such as personal, family, and education. It
helps in summarizing, clarifying, and revising ideas.
Nominal Group Technique. This technique combines brainstorming with
discussion and ranking ideas by voting or scoring. Here are the steps:
      1. For a given problem, a group member creates her/his own
         ideas in private.
      2. A moderator presents all ideas anonymously in one place
         to the group.
       3. All presented ideas are discussed to better understand them.
      4. Each member scores each idea privately on a scale, e.g.;
         from 1 to 5.
Higher-ranking ideas can be processed again through these steps. At the end,
the best-ranked idea or ideas are selected.
These techniques can be used to prioritize the requirements.
Also, different data-analysis techniques can be used, such as document analysis,
which involves accessing the relevant documents, studying them, and extracting
the relevant information, in this case the requirements, from them. In this
process, the relevant document is any document with requirement-related
information, such as project product marketing material, agreements, business
plan, and request for proposals.


Prototyping
A prototype is a working model of a product put together without developing
the actual product, such as a small-scale or toy product, mock-ups, computer-
generated models, and computer simulations, e.g.; Monte Carlo simulation.
Organizations usually make prototypes when developing a proof of concept.
Prototypes can also be used to collect requirements by experimenting with
the prototype and letting stakeholders experiment with it and offer feedback.
It's more tangible than the abstract idea of a product. Prototypes can be
improved and modified based on the feedback from the stakeholders. In this
way, prototypes support the progressive elaboration process of developing
requirements.
146   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Context Diagrams
      A context diagram is a very useful tool for determining the requirements of a
      product, as it presents the product scope visually by showing how the business
      system is used. In other words, a typical context diagram shows two kinds of
      components: parts of the system that users can access, and users, also called
      actors. Actors play two kinds of roles: entering the input into the system and
      receiving the output from the system. One actor can play one or both roles.
      Figure 4-2 presents a very simple example of a context diagram of an online
      learning system, where arrow direction shows which way the information flows.



                                                       Exams and
           Teachers                 Lessons             Scoring            Students



                                               Login


                                                                           External
                                     User
       Administration                                  Payment             Payment
                                    Profile                                 System


      Figure 4-2. Context diagram of an online learning system



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.3

         Assuming that the online learning system in Figure 4-2 is managed by a company
         with its own teachers:
         Q1. Name internal actors
         Q2. Name external actors


      Decision-making Techniques
      Decision making is, in general, a process used to collectively assess and
      evaluate multiple alternatives in terms of expected outcomes. The decision
      usually results in taking specific action. In this process, you will need to make
      decisions--e.g.; identify/generate, classify, and prioritize project and product
      requirements. There are multiple methods available to make decisions that
      were discussed in Chapter 3.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       147




Interpersonal and Team Skills
In applying the data-collection techniques, interpersonal and team skills will
be needed, such as conversational and articulation skills, running facilitation
works, and using nominal group techniques. All these techniques are discussed
in the sections on data gathering, presentation, and analysis.
You use one or more of these techniques on the input to generate the output
of the Collect Requirements process.


Output of Collecting Requirements
During the process of collecting the requirements, you will produce
two documents: stakeholder requirements document and requirements
management plan.


Requirement Documentation
This documentation consists of a list of requirements and any necessary
details for each item in the list. The details of the requirements and the format
of the document depend on the project and the rules within the performing
organization. The following are some essential elements of the requirement
document.
For effective management, you can organize the requirements into different
categories.
Business Requirements. It describes the business need for which the
process was started; e.g.; the overall purpose of the project, such as the
opportunity being seized or the business problem being solved.
Project Requirements. These are about the project-related processes,
needs, and conditions, such as milestone data and other conditions in the
contract.
Solution Requirements. These are of two types: 1) functional requirements,
referring to the functionality of the project outcome--e.g.; what the product
does, its feature; and 2) non-functional requirements, such as compliance,
compatibility, support, reliability, safety, and performance.
Stakeholder Requirements are based on the needs of all or part of the
stakeholders.
Quality Requirements such as not allowing more than three bugs per
software module.
Support and Training Requirements such as the product will be released
with a manual.
148   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Impact of the Requirements. This element describes the impact of
      requirements on the project and on entities external to the project, such as
      different groups in the organization.
      Some requirements will start out vague due to a lack of detailed information,
      but will progressively become more well defined as more detailed information
      become available.


      Caution! The final version of each requirement must be well defined and not vague. As
      a test, always ask this question: how will I be able to measure or test it? Only then it can be
      used for baselining. Also, make sure that a requirement is consistent within itself and with other
      requirements.


      Requirements are usually traced and tracked using a tool called the
      requirements traceability matrix.
      RequirementsTraceability Matrix. As the name suggests, the requirements
      traceability matrix is a table that traces each requirement back to its origin,
      such as product or business objective, and tracks its progress throughout the
      project lifecycle. Linking a requirement to the business objective underlines
      its value. Tracking the requirement throughout the lifecycle of the project
      ensures that it will be delivered before the project is completed. So, this
      table becomes a very useful tool to remind the team how important these
      requirements are, when they are going to be implemented, and how we are
      progressing in implementing them. The requirements traceability matrix links
      each requirement to, for example,
              *    business need, opportunity, and objective;
              *    project objectives and deliverables;
              *    the project scope and the product scope and deliverable;
              *    the product design, development, and testing; and,
              *    for high-level requirements, to their details.
      Key information about a requirement can be stored in the form of its attributes,
      such as a unique identifier, description, owner, source, priority, status, and
      completion date.
      The requirements become the basis on which you develop the scope.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth         149




Defining the Project Scope
The project charter is developed during the initiation stage of the project.
As you move to the planning stage, during the development of the scope
management plan and the requirement document, also called requirement
documentation, you have enough information about the project and the
product to start defining the project scope.


Note When we say scope or project scope it generally includes both the scope of the project
and the scope of the product that it will deliver unless stated otherwise.


The scope is defined by using the Define Scope process illustrated in Table 4-4.

Table 4-4. Define Scope: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                 Tools & Techniques             Output
1. Project charter                    1. Expert judgment             1. Project scope
2. Scope management plan              2. Data and product analysis      statement
3. Project documents                  3. Decision making             2. Project document
                                                                        updates
4. Enterprise environmental factors   4. Interpersonal and team
5. Organizational process assets         skills



Input to Scope Definition
The purpose of the Define Scope process is to figure out the detailed
descriptions of the project and its product. Therefore, the following documents
are the obvious input to this process.
        *    Project Charter. This is needed for high-level project
             and product descriptions and approval requirements.
        *    Scope Management Plan. This is needed for
             information on how the scope will be defined.
        *    Project Documents. These include requirement
             documentation, assumptions log, and risk register.
Here are some examples of the organizational process assets that can be
helpful in defining the scope:
        *    Template for project scope statement
        *    Scope-related project files from the previous projects
150   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


             *    Lessons learned from previous projects or from previous
                  phases of this project
             *    Policies and procedures relevant to defining the project
                  scope
      This process will be influenced by almost the same enterprise environment
      factors as in the case of the Collect Requirements process.


      Tip It's critical to the success of the project that you determine the scope correctly--only
      the required features and functions for the product and only the required work to produce those
      features and functions; nothing less, nothing more.


      Once you have input for the scope definition, you apply the tools and
      techniques discussed next to define (or redefine) the project scope.


      Tools and Techniques for Scope Definition
      This section will discuss the tools and techniques used in the scope definition
      process.
      Expert Judgment. You can use help from relevant experts in the organization
      to develop parts of the detailed project scope.
      Product Analysis. To hammer out the details of the product scope, you
      might need to perform product analysis, which can include techniques
      such as product breakdown, requirement analysis, system analysis, system
      engineering, value analysis, and value engineering. The goal is to translate the
      project objectives into tangible deliverables that meet the requirements. Each
      application area has different product-analysis methods to accomplish this.
      Data Analysis. Scope includes both product description and the kind of
      project work needed to deliver that product. Analysis is performed to find the
      best approaches to defining and performing project work. One such analysis
      technique is alternatives analysis, which can be used to evaluate the different
      methods for implementing the requirements to help one pick the best one.
      Decision-making Techniques. One or more of these techniques, described
      in Chapter 3, such as multicriteria, can be used to set criteria for requirements,
      schedule, cost, resources, and so forth. The goal here would be to explore and
      refine the scope.
      Interpersonal and Team Skills. Of course, in the business of project
      management, you often use these skills. In this process, for example, you would
      use facilitation skills in facilitated workshops with stakeholders.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth        151



You apply these tools or techniques to the input to hammer out the output
of the scope definition process.


Output of Scope Definition
Depending on the input, the scope definition process can generate two kinds
of output: the project scope statement, which contains the original scope
definition, and approved updates to some project documents. Recall that
the project scope statement is a component of the baseline used to manage
change requests to the project.


Caution! The project scope statement contains both the project scope and the project
product scope.



Project Scope Statement
The key output item of the Define Project process is the project scope
statement, which includes the project scope as well as the product scope. It
basically describes what needs to be accomplished by the project: product
and work to generate the product. It provides a documented basis for the
following:
      *    Developing a common understanding among the
           stakeholders about the project scope
      *    Doing detailed planning
      *    Creating WBS
The specific elements that may be included in the project scope statement are
discussed in the following list:
      *    Product Scope Description. Product scope is
           defined as description of features, functions, and other
           characteristics a project product.
      *    Product Acceptance Criteria. This defines the
           process, criteria, and conditions for accepting the
           completed products that the project will deliver.
152   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


              *    Project Assumptions and Constraints. Assumptions
                   and constraints are initially included in the project charter.
                   However, at this stage, you have more information
                   about the project and therefore can revisit the initial
                   assumptions and constraints; you might be able to identify
                   more assumptions and constraints. You should document
                   the specific assumptions related to the project scope and
                   also analyze their impact in case they turn out to be false.
                   Due to the uncertainty built into them, assumptions are
                   potential sources of risk.
                   Constraints related to the project scope must also be
                   documented in the scope statement. Because constraints
                   limit the team's options, the constraints' impact on the
                   project must be evaluated. The constraints can come
                   from various sources, such as a predetermined deadline
                   (also called hard deadline) for the completion of the
                   project or a milestone, limits on the funds available for
                   the project, and contractual provisions.
              *    Project Deliverables. A deliverable is a unique and
                   verifiable project outcome, such as a product, a capability
                   to provide a service, or a result. It may be required to be
                   produced to complete a project, a process, or a phase
                   of the project. The deliverables may also include related
                   material, such as manuals and other documentation. The
                   scope statement provides the list of deliverables and
                   their descriptions.
              *    Project Exclusions. This involves drawing boundaries
                   around the project by specifying what is included and
                   what is not, especially focusing on the gray areas where
                   stakeholders may make their own assumptions, different
                   from each other's. It generally identifies what is excluded
                   from the project, which helps to manage stakeholder
                   expectations.


      Tip You must be able to make a distinction between objectives, deliverables, and requirements.
      For example, in a project to launch a website, the site is a deliverable. That the site must print a
      warning message at the login time is a requirement, and that the site should increase the company
      revenue by 3 percent is an objective.
                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth   153



The project scope statement serves the following purposes:
      *   It serves as a component of the baseline that will be used
          to evaluate whether a request for a change or additional
          work falls within or beyond the scope of the project;
          hence, helps with avoiding scope creep.
      *   In general, it helps with making project decisions
          throughout the lifecycle of the project.
      *   By providing a common understanding of the project
          scope, the scope statement helps bring the stakeholders
          onto the same page in their expectations.
      *   Because the scope statement describes the deliverables
          and the work required to create those deliverables, it
          is used to create a WBS, which helps in scheduling the
          project.
      *   It serves as a guide for the project team to do more-
          detailed planning.
As a result of this process, some documents would need to be updated.


Project Document Updates
In the process of defining the project scope, you may end up modifying the
existing requirements or adding new requirements. You may also learn more
about the stakeholders. Also, some assumptions may no longer be true.
Accordingly, the documents that may be updated as a result of defining the
scope include the following:
      *   Requirement documentation
      *   Requirement traceability matrix
      *   Stakeholder register
      *   Assumptions log
      *   Stakeholder register
154   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.4

         In the following table, match each item in the first column with an appropriate item in
         the second column:

      A. The software product must run on both Microsoft           1. Project deliverable
         Windows and Apple Macintosh.
      B. An online education website                               2. Project constraint
      C. The drug must be developed within six months.             3. Product requirement
      D. The software module must not have more than 10 bugs.      4. Project management
                                                                      requirement
      E. Project manager must have a PMP certification.            5. Product acceptance criteria


      In a nutshell, the project scope statement specifies the scope of the project
      in terms of the project outcome specified by its characteristics and the way
      it would be produced and delivered by the project. From the perspective
      of actually performing the work, the scope statement is still a high-level
      document. To be able to schedule the project, identify and assign resources,
      and manage the project successfully, these deliverables need to be broken
      down into manageable tasks. This is accomplished by creating an entity called
      the work breakdown structure (WBS).


      Caution In defining scope, we don't use all the requirements that were collected; instead, we
      consider only those that made it to requirement documentation after analysis.




      Creating a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
      What is the secret behind accomplishing seemingly impossible tasks in any field?
      The answer is to break down the required work into smaller, manageable pieces.
      This is also a very important process in project management. To be able to
      actually execute the project, the project scope is broken down into manageable
      tasks, thereby creating a work breakdown structure (WBS). In other words, a
      WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchy of the work that must be performed to
      accomplish the objectives of and create the deliverables for the project.
      Table 4-5 shows the input, tools and techniques, and output of creating the
      WBS. The project scope statement contains the list of deliverables and
      product description. The requirement documentation describes the product
      and project requirements. Information in these two items provides the basis
      for creating WBS, and scope management tells us the "hows" of developing
      the WBS.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   155



Table 4-5. The Create WBS Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                   Tools & Techniques      Output
1. Scope management plan                1. Expert judgment      1. Scope baseline
2. Project documents: project           2. Decomposition        2. Project document
   scope statement, requirement                                    updates
   documentation
3. Enterprise environmental factors
4. Organizational process assets


You should always consider organizational process assets while going through
this and several other processes. You can, for almost any process, close your
eyes and see the relevant organizational policies and procedure, relevant
templates, and relevant project files and lessons learned from previous projects.
In this case, relevant means related to WBS. Depending on the application
field or specific industry of your project, there may be industry standards for
creating WBS. That standard is an example of an EEF for this process.
You can always make use of expert judgment on topics relevant to the process,
but the main technique that you will need to create the WBS is decomposition.


Decomposition
Decomposition is a technique for subdividing the project deliverables into
smaller, manageable tasks called work packages. The WBS is a hierarchical
structure of an inverted tree with work packages at the lowest level of each
branch, the leaves. A level can be broken down into sublevels. The depth or
height of the tree or decomposition depends on the size and complexity of
the project. Different deliverables may have different levels of decomposition,
as shown in Figure 4-3, a simple example of WBS, where the lines are called
branches and the boxes are called nodes or packages; the lowest packages are
called work packages.
156   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


                                            Website
                                          Development
                                            Project


      User Experience                     Server Frontend                  Server Backend



            Order of Web                                 Request
                               Request handler                                     dbBean
               pages                                    processor


                                                                                  Database
              Mockups                  Servlet one           Bean one
                                                                                   schema



              Graphics                 Servlet two           Bean two          Database tables



                                                            Bean three


      Figure 4-3. An example of WBS. The work packages are represented by the dark boxes
      at the end of each branch. Servlet and Bean refer to the programs that will need to be
      developed.

      You decompose the scope by executing the following steps:
             1. Identify the deliverables and the work involved by analyzing
                the project scope statement and requirement documentation.
             2. Understand the relationships among the deliverables.
             3. Structure and organize the first level (just below the root
                of the hierarchical tree) of the WBS hierarchy. Based on
                the project at hand, you can use one of the following
                approaches; e.g.; use the deliverables as the components
                in the first level or use the phases of the project as the
                components in the first level.
             4. Decompose the upper level                   into    more-detailed
                components for the lower level.
             5. Keep decomposing to lower levels until necessary and
                sufficient decomposition has been achieved.
             6. Assign identification codes to the WBS components.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth           157



As the work is decomposed to lower levels of detail, work components
become more concrete and manageable. However, you should avoid excessive
decomposition because it will lead to a large number of work packages, and it
will not be possible to manage all of them effectively. In other words, excessive
decomposition leads to inefficient use of management and other resources.
Necessary and sufficient decomposition is the key.


Tip During decomposition, the components are defined in terms of how the project work will
actually be executed and controlled. You must verify the correctness of the decomposition at each
level by requiring that the lower-level components are necessary and sufficient to the completion
of the corresponding higher-level deliverables.


While using the technique of decomposition, remember a useful concept or
trick: rolling wave planning. It's a fancy term that refers to handling a deliverable
or its subcomponent that cannot be decomposed further currently because
we don't know the details about it yet; for example, it is to be executed far
in the future. We leave the decomposition of such a deliverable at a level
allowed by the available information and wait on further decomposition until
more information becomes available. Yes, it is an example of progressive
elaboration.
The WBS document is the key item of the Create WBS process, but there are
some other output items as well.

Output of Creating WBS
During the Create WBS process and when putting together the scope baseline,
and the main output of the create and we may discover that the content of
some document needs to be updated; e.g.; assumptions and constraints in the
assumptions log and requirements in requirement documentation.


Scope Baseline
The main output of the Create WBS process, scope baseline, consists of the
project scope statement,WBS, and WBS dictionary. These components of the
scope baseline are discussed next.
Project Scope Statement. This document includes project and product
scope description, project deliverables, product acceptance criteria, and
project assumptions and constraints.
158   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Work Breakdown Structure. As explained earlier, the WBS is a deliverable-
      oriented hierarchical structure that decomposes the project scope and
      deliverables into the work packages that will be executed by the project team
      to create the planned deliverables and in this way accomplish the planned
      project objectives. The project manager creates this document with the help
      of the project team.
      Work Packages and Control Account. Remember, at the lowest part of
      each branch in WBS we have work packages, each of which is assigned a
      unique identifier. To this identifier is attached information about schedule,
      resources, and cost for this work package, and it acts as a code of account. In
      other words, each work package represents a deliverable or a component of
      it, with schedule, resources, and cost attached. Using one or more such points
      or codes of account, information on schedule, resources, and cost for a group
      of work packages can be summed or integrated and managed. This way, each
      package control point becomes a part of what is called the control account
      for that group of work packages. A control account represents a control
      management point where scope, schedule, and cost are integrated for the
      purpose of monitoring and controlling the performance; e.g.; comparing with
      earned value.


      Caution A control account may contain one or more work packages, but a work package
      can have membership in only one control account. This means that a control account is in some
      package above the work packages and contains all the work packages below it in the branch to
      which it belongs.


      A control account may include one or more planning packages.
      Planning Package. This is a WBS component or package used for planning
      one or more work packages. Obviously, it should be below the control account
      package to which it belongs and above the work packages that it's going to plan.
      WBS Dictionary. This is a supporting document for the main WBS
      document to provide details about the components of the WBS. The details
      about a component might include elements such as a code of account identifier,
      description of work involved, quality requirements, acceptance criteria, list of
      milestones schedule, cost estimates, required resources, contract information,
      if any, and the organization or group responsible for this component.


      Tip As you can guess, most of the information in the WBS dictionary is generated by other
      processes.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           159




Note Do not confuse the WBS with other information breakdown structures, such as
the organizational breakdown structure (OBS), which provides a hierarchy of the performing
organization and can be used to identify organizational units for assigning the WBS work packages.
Remember, the end goal of the WBS is to specify the project scope in terms of work packages; this
is what distinguishes the WBS from other information breakdown structures.



Caution! The PMP exam expects you to know the ropes around the formal standard
terminology. For example, if I say project plan, you should be able to figure out that I'm referring
to project management plan. Another example: If I say "defining scope," you should be able to
translate it to the Define Scope process, the same way you will translate the planning stage to the
Planning process group.



                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.5

    Q1. What is the difference between management control point and control account?
    Q2. What is the difference between control account and code of account?


The mantra before developing the WBS is as follows: If it's not in the WBS it
will not be done. The mantra after developing WBS should be: If it's not in the
scope baseline it will not be done.
The approved version of the scope baseline becomes a component of the
project management plan and can be changed only through the formal
change control procedure, i.e., running the processes. It plays a crucial role in
determining many aspects of the project, such as schedule, cost, quality, and
procurement. In other words, it's very important that scope is monitored and
controlled.


Controlling Scope
Controlling the project scope is all about keeping a tab on the status of the
project scope and product scope as well as managing changes to the scope
baseline. While controlling the scope, you focus on the following tasks:
        *    Watch out for scope creep. Determine whether it has
             happened and correct the situation. Scope creep refers
             to scope changes applied without processing them though
             the change control process.
160   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


              *     Process the scope change requests through the integrated
                    change control process for approval.
              *     Manage the implementation of scope changes after
                    approval, as well as their impact across the project.


      Tip In real life, scope creeps occur for various reasons. For example, perhaps a development
      engineer thought something was a cool feature to implement, or the customer spoke directly with
      the engineer to make a request for a minor additional feature, or various other similar situations. If a
      scope creep has taken your project off track by affecting schedule, resources, cost, and so on, you
      need to take corrective action to get the project back on course. You should also investigate how
      the scope creep happened and take steps to prevent it in the future--for example, by educating
      team members about the proper scope change process.


      Given the input, tools and techniques, and output in Table 4-6 for this process,
      the following is a brief account of how the output is generated from the input
      by using tools and techniques:
              1. Scope baseline contains the WBS and the WBS dictionary
                 and tells us what the approved scope is. We have the
                 scope management plan to tell us how to control the
                 scope.
              2. Compare the actual work performance data with the
                 performance measurement baseline by using the variance
                 analysis.
              3. Compare the scope aspect of the work performance data
                 with the scope baseline by using variance analysis.
              4. Use the trend analysis tool on project performance over
                 time to determine if it's improving or getting worse.
              5. Steps 2, 3, and 4 will generate two main output items:
                    a. Work performance information that includes how
                       the actual project scope performance is progressing
                       compared to the scope baseline.
                    b. This comparison may generate change requests to
                       bring the project on track; e.g.; request to change
                       scope, schedule, or cost baselines.
                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   161



6. We will manage these changes using the change
   management plan and configuration management plan
   discussed in previous chapters.
7. Use requirement documentation to detect any requirement-
   related deviation from the scope baseline and use the
   requirement traceability matrix to link the impact of any
   change to project objectives.
8. As in the previous chapter, all change requests are
   processed through the integrated change control process
   for approval, and only approved changes are implemented
   by using the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
9. In the Control Scope process (see Table 4-2), the input
   item work performance data includes information about
   received, approved, implemented, and validated change
   requests. Change requests generated in this process will
   require updating some documents, such as the following:
    a. Scope baseline for scope change, and scope management
       plan to record how to manage those changes.
    b. Schedule baseline, cost baseline, and performance
       measurement baseline because changes in scope
       baseline or any of these baselines may trigger changes
       in the rest of the baselines in this set of baselines.
    c. In addition to these plan document updates, some
       project documents may also need to be updated,
       including lessons learned register with effective scope
       control techniques, requirement documentation with
       additional, changed, and removed requirements, and
       requirement traceability matrix to make it consistent
       with requirement documentation.
162   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Table 4-6. The Control Scope Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques Output
      1. Project Management Plan:           1. Data analysis:       1. Work performance
        * Scope baseline                      * Variance analysis      information
        * Performance baseline                * Trend analysis      2. Change requests
        * Scope management plan                                     3. Project management plan
                                                                       updates:
        * Requirement management plan
                                                                      * Scope management plan
        * Change management plan
                                                                      * Baselines: Scope,
        * Configuration management plan
                                                                        schedule, cost,
      2. Work performance data                                          and performance
      3. Project documents                                              measurement.
        * Requirement documentation                                 4. Project document updates:
        * Requirement traceability matrix                             * Requirement
        * Lessons learned register                                      documentation
      4. Organizational project assets                                * Requirement traceability
                                                                        matrix
                                                                      * Lessons learned register


                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.6

          Q1. List some of the organizational process assets that will influence the Control
          Scope process.
          Q2. Why do you need a lessons learned register in the input of the Control Scope
          process?


      The scope monitoring and controlling ends with validating scope for
      acceptance of project deliverables.


      Validating the Scope of Project Deliverables
      Validating scope is the process of formally accepting the completed project
      deliverables, which have already been verified for their correctness by using
      the control quality process. Before you hand over the project deliverables
      to the appropriate party mentioned in the project management plan, such
      as the customer or the sponsor, you need to validate with the party that the
      deliverables actually meet the planned scope.
                                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth             163




Caution! You should perform the Validate Scope process with the appropriate party even if
the project is terminated; that is, ended before completion. In that case, you would verify and
document the level and extent of the project and product scope that was completed. At the very
least, it will help the close project process; e.g.; for the record, project review, and lessons learned.


Validating the scope of the project deliverables includes inspection, also
called audits, product review, and walkthrough, depending on project and
organization. The purpose is to ensure that all deliverables are completed as
planned and therefore as expected.
The process used in validating the scope is formally called Validate Scope, and
its input, tools and techniques, and output are given in Table 4-7. It may be
described in terms of the following steps.
        1. Use the scope management plan to find out the planned
           procedure of accepting the deliverables.
        2. Study the quality reports about verified deliverables to
           find issues and recommendations. Also, information
           in the lessons learned register can be used to improve
           the validation procedure in terms of efficiency and
           effectiveness.
        3. Compare the requirements in the requirement
           documentation with the actual work performance data,
           which contains information on how much the actual
           work complies with the planned requirements.
        4. Use requirement management plan and requirement
           traceability matrix for information on how validate to the
           requirements.
        5.    Also, compare the actual result to the scope baseline.
        6. Deviations and non-compliance found in steps 2, 3, and 4
           may generate change requests such as requests for defect
           repairs as an output.
        7. Of course, in steps 2, 3, and 4 you were using an inspection
           technique that also creates the output item called work
           performance information, which records validation status
           information such as which deliverables have been
           accepted and which have not, and why.
164   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


              8. Validated deliverables form the output item accepted
                 deliverables and are handed over to the appropriate party,
                 such as the customer or the sponsor, after being signed
                 off by them.
              9. Update the affected documents such as requirement
                 documentation and requirement traceability; see
                 checkpoint 4.7.

      Table 4-7. The Validate Scope Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques Output
      1.Verified deliverables               1. Decision making        1. Accepted deliverables
      2. Work performance data              2. Inspection             2. Work performance
      3. Project Management Plan:                                        information
        * Scope baseline                                              3. Change requests
        * Scope management plan                                       4. Project document updates:
        * Requirement management plan                                   * Requirement
                                                                          documentation
      4. Project documents:
                                                                        * Requirement traceability
        * Requirement documentation
                                                                          matrix
        * Requirement traceability matrix
                                                                        * Lessons learned register
        * Lessons learned register
        * Quality reports



      Caution! Do not confuse scope validation with quality control or scope verification performed
      using quality control, which is primarily focused on checking the correctness of the deliverables
      and other quality requirements; scope validation is about ensuring that the entire scope with the
      requirements with have implicated.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth    165




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.7

   Q1. The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are used to validate scope.
   Where are they in Table 4-5?
   Q2. The Verify Scope process belongs to which process group?
   Q3. From Table 4-5, you know that project documents requirement documentation,
   requirement traceability matrix, and lessons learned register are updated during the
   Validate Scope process. Using your knowledge about these documents, what do you
   think they are updated with in the process?
   Q4. Which process will be performed first: quality control or validate scope?


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      1. Requirements are the basis on which we develop the scope
         that leads to WBS, the work required, which requires a
         schedule and determines cost. That way, requirements
         play a crucial role in determining the schedule, cost,
         quality, and procurement.
      2. The project scope statement consists of both project
         scope and product scope. The WBS, WBS dictionary, and
         project scope statement constitute the scope baseline,
         an output of the Create WBS process, against which the
         actual work results are compared.
      3. To avoid scope creep and to ensure that the scope is
         implemented, you need to control the scope. Also, the
         scope of the project outcome needs to be validated
         before the acceptance of verified product.

Summary
Project scope management includes processes that are used to ensure that
the project includes all the required--and only the required--work. They
ensure the work is done in a certain way, i.e., with a schedule, to deliver a
product with certain characteristics. Of course, you need to plan this work
and its way, and also the product characteristics. So, what we are talking
about here is called scope management. It contains planning processes that
end up in an established scope baseline against which the actual work results
are measured. To control the planned scope, and to ensure that it has been
implemented, we have two processes from the monitoring and controlling
process group.
166   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Using documents such as the project charter and quality management plan,
      we develop a scope management plan and a requirement management plan,
      which tell us how to develop, control, and validate the scope of the project
      and product, called scope or sometime project scope. Based on the scope
      management plan and the requirement management plan, we use the Collect
      Requirement process to collect project and product requirements and put them
      into requirement documentation, and also to create a requirement traceability
      matrix to monitor the requirements by linking them to project objectives,
      deliverables, status, and so forth. This requirement documentation is used
      for the rest of the scope processes, a reflection of the fact that requirements
      directly or indirectly affect multiple project aspects, including scope, schedule,
      cost, risk, and procurement. With requirement documentation in our hands,
      we use the Define Scope process to develop the project scope statement, a
      document that consists of both project scope and product scope.
      The project scope statement, along with requirement documentation, is used
      to create the WBS, a hierarchical structure in which the project scope is
      broken down into manageable tasks, which can be assigned to team members.
      The process Create WBS also creates the WBS dictionary, which offers details
      for the WBS component such as schedule milestones, cost estimate, and
      quality requirements.
      The WBS, WBS dictionary, and project scope statement constitute the scope
      baseline, an output of the Create WBS process, against which the actual work
      results are compared. The scope is controlled by the Control Scope process,
      and the scope of verified deliverables is validated using the Validate Scope
      process.
      Road Ahead. Now that you have project scope--i.e., project and product
      scopes--figured out, you are one step closer to starting project execution.
      Before we start project execution, we will need to develop a schedule for it.
      We will show how to do so in the next chapter.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       167




Exam's Eye View
Comprehend
*The scope management plan developed from the project charter is a blueprint that will
 show how to develop, control, and validate the scope.
*The stakeholder register generated by the Identify Stakeholders process is an input item
 to collecting requirements, and so is the project charter.
*The requirement documentation generated by the Collect Requirements process is an
 input to defining the project scope.
*The project charter and the requirement documentation are input items to the Define
 Scope process that is used to develop the project scope statement.
*The project scope statement and requirement documentation are input items to creating
 the WBS.
*The scope baseline consists of project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary and is
 generated by the Create WBS process.
*Requirements, themselves and through the project scope statement, WBS, and WBS
 dictionary, i.e., scope baseline, affect just about all important aspects of a project, such as
 schedule, resources, cost, quality, procurement, and risk.

Look Out
*Do not confuse project scope with product scope. The product scope consists of the
 features and functions that characterize a product to be delivered by the project, whereas
 the project scope is composed of the work that must be performed (and only that work)
 to deliver products with specified features.
*The project scope statement contains both the project scope and project product scope.
*All change requests generated by controlling scope or any process must be processed
 through the Integrated change Control process for approval, and only approved changes
 should be implemented by using the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
*The Validate Scope process is used on the project deliverables already verified by the
 Quality Control process; the goal is to get deliverables accepted by the appropriate party,
 such as customer or sponsor.
*The scope statement, the WBS document, and the WBS dictionary combined constitute
 the scope baseline against which the actual work results are compared.

Memorize
*Most of the information in the WBS dictionary is generated by other processes and not
 by the Create WBS process.
*Control accounts are the points in the WBS at which scope, schedule, and cost are
 integrated for the purpose of monitoring and controlling the performance.
*The Plan Scope Management process generates two plans: scope management plan and
 requirement management plan.
168   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


      Review Questions
           1. Which of the following is a false statement about the WBS?
               A. A control account may have many code of account
                  identifiers.
               B. You should keep decomposing WBS components
                  to lower levels until necessary and sufficient
                  decomposition has been achieved.
               C. Each work component appears in the WBS once and
                  only once.
               D. The work packages should appear from left to right
                  in the order in which the work will be performed.
           2. Which of the following is done first?
               A. Creating the scope statement
               B. Creating the WBS
               C. Creating the requirement documentation
               D. Creating the project charter
           3. The WBS is the output of which of the following
              processes?
               A. The Create WBS process
               B. The Define Scope process
               C. The Develop WBS process
               D. The Project Initiating process
           4. The project scope statement is the output of which of
              the following processes?
               A. The Create WBS process
               B. The Define Scope process
               C. The Create Project Scope process
               D. The Project Initiating process
                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth   169



5. Which of the following is a false statement about the
   output of the plan scope management process that
   creates the project scope management plan?
   A. It describes how to verify the project scope.
   B. It describes how to control the project scope.
   C. It doesn't describe how to manage the requirements.
   D. It describes how to define the product scope.
6. What are the components in the lowest level of the WBS
   hierarchy collectively called?
   A. Work packages
   B. Control accounts
   C. Phase
   D. Milestones
7. Choose what is included in the project scope statement:
   A. Project scope
   B. Product scope
   C. Assumptions and constraints
   D. Some things that the project is not going to do
8. Which one of the following constitutes the project scope
   baseline?
   A. The WBS document and the scope statement
   B. The scope statement
   C. The WBS document
   D. The WBS, the WBS dictionary, and the scope
      statement
9. Who creates the WBS?
   A. The project manager alone
   B. The upper management in the performing organization
   C. The customer
   D. The project manager with help from the project team
170   Chapter 4 | Project Scope Management


          10. Which of the following is not included in the project
              scope statement?
               A. Project assumptions and constraints
               B. The WBS
               C. Product description
               D. Project deliverables
          11. You are in the process of developing the requirement
              management plan for your project. You will develop this
              plan:
               A. By performing the Develop Requirement Plan process
               B. By performing the Plan Scope Management process
               C. There is no process for it.
               D. During the initiation stage of the project
          12. You are in the planning stage of a project. Walking down
              the hallway, your supervisor mumbles, "Don't forget job
              shadowing." Job shadowing is a technique used in:
               A. Defining the project scope
               B. Collecting product requirements
               C. Creating the WBS
               D. Developing the stakeholder management strategy
          13. You are planning the scope for your project. You have just
              created the requirement documentation after meeting
              with the stakeholders and studying the project charter
              and so forth. This requirement documentation can be
              used in developing:
               A. Project scope statement
               B. The WBS
               C. The work performing information
               D. The project scope statement and the WBS
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   171



14. Which of the following is the correct order of running
    processes? Choose all that apply.
     A. Develop Project Charter, Collect Requirements, and
        Create WBS
     B. Collect Requirements, Control Quality, and Validate
        Scope
     C. Identify Stakeholders, Define Scope, and Collect
        Requirements
     D. Collect Requirements,Validate Scope, Control Quality
15. You have selected a node in the hierarchy of the WBS
    that you will use to compare schedule, cost, and scope
    with the earned value in order to measure the project
    performance. This node or component in the WBS is
    called:
     A. Code of accounts
     B. Control account
     C. Management account
     D. Performance node
16. You are the project manager for a software product, and
    your project is in the execution stage. You have learned
    that Maya, a developer, has started adding some new
    features to the deliverable she is working on. What is the
    best action for you to take?
     A. Tell Maya to delete the code corresponding to these
        features because this is a scope creep, and scope
        creeps are not allowed.
     B. Learn from Maya what those features are and how
        much time they will take and then make necessary
        updates to the WBS, the WBS dictionary, and the
        schedule. Also tell Maya that in the future she should
        get approval from you before adding any new features.
     C. Determine where the request for the new features
        came from and process the change request through
        the integrated change request process.
     D. Contact Maya's functional manager and ask the
        manager to replace Maya with another developer.
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             5

Project Schedule
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 9 percent of the CAPM exam,
equivalent to about 12 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how that helps in generating the output, as well as what a given tool
or technique does in a given process.
You should be very clear about the purpose and procedures related to
sequencing activities and should be able to interpret various types of network
diagrams to identify critical path activities and so forth.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how
the tasks can be tailored or adapted to your needs, and recognize an agile
environment in action; for example, continual assessment generates change
requests which lead to changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_5
174   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Schedule Management:
         1.Define the six project management processes in the project schedule management
           knowledge area.
         2.Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the six processes in
           project schedule management.
         3.Solve simple network diagram problems and perform basic scheduling calculations.
         4.Identify considerations for agile/adaptive environments in project schedule
           management.


      At its core, a project consists of two main components: the project work that
      needs to be performed and the schedule to perform that work. As you learned
      in the previous chapter, the overall project work--i.e., the project scope--is
      broken down into smaller, more manageable components. These components
      in the WBS are called work packages. However, a work package might not be
      a suitable item to assign to an individual to perform. So, work packages can
      be rearranged or decomposed into smaller components called activities. A
      project schedule contains not only the activities to be performed, but also the
      order, or sequence, in which the activities will be performed and the start and
      finish dates. The sequencing of activities is constrained by the dependencies
      among the activities. A realistic project schedule can be created from the
      bottom up by identifying the activities, estimating the resources needed for
      the activities, and determining the time that each activity will take with the
      given resources available. The schedule, once developed and approved, needs
      to be controlled to stay on track. All these tasks belong to what is called
      project schedule management.
      So, the main issue in this chapter is schedule management. To enable you
      to wrap your mind around this issue, we will explore the following three
      avenues: generating or collecting the data about the project schedule, such as
      determining activities and their characteristics, including dependencies among
      activity, resource requirements, and activity durations; building a project
      schedule from the data on the activities; and controlling the schedule.


      Project Schedule Management: Big Picture
      Developing and controlling the project schedule so as to complete the project
      work in time is what schedule management all about. To complete a project,
      you need to perform some activities to produce the project deliverables.
      To make that happen, you need to estimate resources for the activities and
      schedule the activities. But before all this can happen, you need to identify the
      activities. One thing more: all this should happen as planned.
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth         175




Note The process of estimating activity resources belongs to the resource management area
and will be discussed in the next chapter.


Although all this sounds like common sense, it makes sense to define the
following terms so we are all on the same page:
       *    Activity. A component of project work.
       *    Activity Duration. The time measured in calendar
            units between the start and finish of a schedule activity.
       *    Schedule Activity. A scheduled task (component of
            work) performed during the lifecycle of a project.
       *    Logical Relationship. A dependency between two
            project schedule activities or between a schedule activity
            and a schedule milestone.
       *    Schedule Milestone. A milestone is a significant point
            (or event) in the life of a project, and a schedule milestone
            is a milestone on the project schedule. A milestone refers
            to the completion of an activity, marking possibly the
            completion of a set of activities, and therefore has zero
            duration. The completion of a major deliverable is an
            example of a milestone.
Project time management includes the processes required to complete the
project in a timely manner. Figure 5-1 presents the flow diagram for the time
management processes that lead to schedule development.
176   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management



       Schedule Management Plan

                                          Create WBS


                                                    Scope baseline



                                        Define Activities

                           Activity                                    Activity
                           list                     Activity           list
                                   Milestone
                                   list             list
                                                               Activity resource
             Sequence                  Estimate Activity requirements              Estimate Activity
             Activities                    Resources                                   Duration

                               Activity resource          Activity duration
                    Network    requirements               estimates
                    Diagrams


                                               Develop
                                               Schedule

                                                    Project schedule


                                       Control Schedule



      Figure 5-1. The schedule management processes that lead to schedule development. The
      processes shown in gray are not from the schedule management knowledge area.

      The usages of these processes are listed here:
             *    Plan Schedule Management. Plans how to develop,
                  execute, and control the project schedule.
             *    Define Activities. Identifies the specific schedule activities,
                  or pieces of work, that must be performed to produce the
                  project deliverables.
             *    Sequence Activities. Puts the activities to be scheduled
                  in a sequence by identifying the dependencies among them.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth          177



        *    Estimate Activity Duration. Estimates the time in
             units of work periods required for each schedule activity's
             completion. A work period is a measurement of time
             when the work is in progress; it is measured in hours, days,
             or months, depending upon the size of the activity. This
             estimate is performed for given resources.
        *    Develop Schedule. Develops the project schedule
             by analyzing schedule activity sequences, schedule
             activity durations, resource requirements, and schedule
             constraints.
        *    Control Schedule. Monitors the status of the project's
             progress to manage the resulting changes in project
             schedule and hence in the schedule baseline.
These processes are listed in Table 5-1 along with their process groups and
the major output from each process.

Table 5-1. Processes of Scope Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Time Management        Process Group       Major Output           Performed
Process
Plan Schedule          Planning            Schedule               Once at predetermined
Management                                 management plan        project points
Define Activities      Planning            Activity list,         Throughout the process
                                           milestone list
Sequence Activities    Planning            Project schedule       Throughout the process
                                           network
Estimate Activity      Planning            Activity duration      Throughout the process
Durations                                  estimates
Develop Schedule       Planning            Project schedule       Throughout the process
Control Schedule       Monitoring and      Work performance       Throughout the process
                       Controlling         measurements


Note The underlying philosophy of project management for schedule development is to first
develop the schedule based on the work required to complete the project tasks, and then see
how you can make it conform to other constraints, calendar requirements, and strategic goals of
the organization. You build the schedule through cold, hard mathematical analysis, and you don't
just accept whatever schedule goals come down the pipeline from elsewhere, such as from the
customer or the project sponsor.
178   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      In a nutshell, the path to schedule development includes defining activities,
      arranging the activities in the correct logical order, and getting the resources
      estimate for the activities. In other words, the work necessary for completing
      the project is expressed in terms of activities and the resources required to
      complete those activities. But, like anything you do in project management,
      you have to plan schedule management.


      Planning Schedule Management
      As mentioned earlier, the Plan Schedule Management process is about planning
      how to develop, execute, and control the project schedule. This process is
      performed using the input and tools and techniques shown in Table 5-2 to
      generate a schedule management plan.

      Table 5-2. The Plan Schedule Management process: Input, tools and techniques, and output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques      Output
      1.Project charter                     1.Data analysis           Schedule management
      2.Project Management Plan:            2.Meetings                plan
        *Scope management plan              3.Expert judgment
        *Product development approach
         management plan
      3.Enterprise environmental factors
      4.Organizational project assets


      I will explain how to perform this process in terms of the following steps that
      you take to develop the schedule management plan from input and tools and
      techniques.
              1. Start with the scope management plan, which provides
                 some information on how to develop the schedule.
              2. Study the document on product development approach. As
                 the schedule you want to develop is for producing the
                 product, this approach will help in almost all aspects of
                 schedule management, including estimating techniques,
                 scheduling tools, and schedule-controlling techniques. It
                 will help in determining the general scheduling approach.
              3. Don't forget the milestone information from the project
                 charter; you have to include that in the plan.
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth     179



      4. Make a list of the different methods or approaches that
         you come up with from steps 1 and 2 accounting in
         step 3. By scheduling, we mean schedule management,
         all the way from defining activities to developing and
         controlling the schedule.
      5. For planning a given process, use data-analysis techniques,
         such as alternative analysis, to pick one or a combination
         of methods from the list from step 4. Also, we can use
         such data-analysis methods to strike the appropriate
         balance between schedule details and time taken to
         update the schedule.
While executing the preceding five steps, you can also hold meetings with
appropriate stakeholders such as the project sponsor and those who have
responsibilities regarding the schedule or will be affected by it. Of course, you
can seek expert judgment on related topics, such as schedule development
and control, scheduling software tools, and scheduling methods.
Knowing this much about this process, you should be able to figure out the
EEFs and OPAs for it; see Study Checkpoint 5.1.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.1

   Q1. Using your knowledge of enterprise environmental factors and the plan schedule
   management process, make a list of EEFs that would influence this process.
   Q2. Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the plan schedule
   management process, make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.


The output of these efforts just described generates the schedule management
plan.


Schedule Management Plan
The schedule management plan document records how to develop, execute,
and control the project schedule. Table 5-3 describes it in terms of some
questions and answers.
180   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Table 5-3. Schedule Management Plan

      Questions                          Schedule Management Plan
      What is the chosen schedule        Describes the chosen methods and tools for the
      development model?                 development of the schedule
      What are the organizational        Refers to the WBS being used in this project as
      procedure links?                   a framework for schedule development. Purpose:
                                         provides consistency in work scope and scheduling that
                                         work.
      How do you maintain the chosen     Describes the processes used to record the schedule
      schedule model?                    progress status and update the schedule model
      What are the lengths of time-      Specify the lengths of time-boxed periods for release,
      boxed periods?                     iterations, and waves. A time-boxed period is the
                                         duration for which a team works to finish a certain
                                         amount of work in a steady fashion.
      What are the units of              Defines units of quantities: hours, days, or months for
      measurement?                       time; meters/yards for length, and kilograms/pounds for
                                         weight.
      What is the level of accuracy?     Specify the accuracy or uncertainty in estimating the
                                         countable and measurable variables; i.e., It will take
                                         255 days to complete this activity; here, 5 days is level
                                         of accuracy.
      What are the rules of              Describes the rules for measuring the performance
      performance measurements?          of various quantities; e.g.; performance in schedule is
                                         measured in terms of magnitude of variations from the
                                         original schedule baseline.
      What are the control thresholds?   Specify the allowed maximum performance variance
                                         above which an action request will be triggered.
      What are the frequency and         States the frequency and reporting formats for various
      reporting formats?                 reports.



      Note The time-boxed periods are used in projects with adaptive lifecycles. They help you
      avoid scope creep by making the team focus on essential works within the scope.


      With the schedule management plan in your hands, the first step toward
      schedule development is defining activities.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth    181




Defining Activities
Activities are pieces of work that need to be performed to produce the
project deliverables. However, first we need to identify them, and we do that
using the Define Activities process, which has the input, tools and techniques,
and output shown in Table 5-4.

Table 5-4. The Define Activities Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                 Tools and Techniques       Output
1.Project Management Plan:            1.Decomposition            1.Activity list
  * Schedule management plan          2.Rolling wave planning    2.Activity attributes
  *Scope baseline: scope statement,   3.Expert judgment          3.Milestone list
   WBS, WBS dictionary                                           4.Change requests
2.Enterprise environmental factors                               5.Updates:
3.Organizational project assets                                     *Scope baseline
                                                                    *Cost baseline


The main steps to perform this process, using the information from Table 5-4,
are described in the following sections.


Raw Data for Defining Activities
This process identifies activities, or pieces of work, that will need to be
completed in order to deliver the project outcome. In the previous chapter,
we covered WBS all the way up to work packages; that is where identifying
project activities starts. So, the starting point for defining activities is the
lowest level of the WBS that contains work packages. Basically, each work
package is broken down into one or more activities.
Recalling that WBS is derived from the project scope statement. The items
described in the following hold that data or information that we need in order
to identify activities.
Project Scope Baseline. The following three components of the project
scope baseline are needed to define activities:
        *   WBS and WBS dictionary. The work packages in the
            WBS are decomposed into project activities. To define
            activities in detail so that you can assign appropriate
            resources to them, you need details about the work
            packages, which are provided in the WBS dictionary.
182   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


             *    Project Scope Statement. The WBS is built from the
                  project scope statement. While dealing with the WBS, you
                  might need to go back to the project scope statement.
                  The following elements of the project scope statement
                  are especially important to consider while identifying
                  activities:
                  *   Assumptions related to the activities or schedule
                      planning, such as work hours per week
                  *   Constraints that will limit the schedule options, such
                      as predetermined deadlines on project milestones
                  *   Project deliverables, to ensure everything is covered
                      in the WBS work packages


      Tip The WBS dictionary also contains the milestone dates, which traveled all the way from
      the project charter.


      In order to perform this process effectively, we must be aware of the following
      EEFs and OPAs that can influence the process:
             *    Enterprise Environmental Factors. The enterprise
                  environmental factors relevant to identifying schedule
                  activities include project management information
                  systems and project scheduling software tools,
                  published information from commercial databases, and
                  organizational structure and culture.
             *    Organizational Process Assets. The following
                  are examples of organizational process assets that can
                  influence the process or be useful in the process of
                  identifying activities:
                  *   Organizational policies related to activity planning
                  *   Organizational procedures and guidelines used in
                      defining activities
                  *   Templates and other information from previous
                      projects that is used in defining activities
                  *   Knowledge base of lessons learned from previous
                      rojects regarding activity lists
      So, we use the raw data of the information discussed in this section to generate
      the output of the Defining Activities process.
                                                                CAPM(R) in Depth        183




Generating the Output of Defining Activities
The key output item of the activity definition process is a comprehensive
list of all the activities that need to be performed to produce the project
deliverables. This is obtained by breaking down the work packages using the
decomposition and rolling wave techniques discussed in the previous chapter.
Activities make up the core of a project. So, it's very important to identify
and define them correctly so as to make the project schedule efficient and
effective. Expert judgment is a very important tool that can be used in this
process. For example, during the process of decomposing the work packages
into schedule activities, you can use the help of team members and other
experts who are experienced in developing WBS and project schedules. In
addition to this, you can hold meetings with relevant stakeholders.
This and other output items are discussed in the following list.
Activity List. This is a list of all the activities that are necessary and sufficient
to produce the project deliverables; each activity is assigned its own unique
identifier within the WBS. In other words, these activities are derived from
the WBS and hence are within the scope of the project. Also, the scope of
each schedule activity should be described in sufficient detail and in concrete
terms so that the team member responsible for it will understand what work
needs to be performed. Examples of schedule activities include a chapter of
a book, a function of a computer program that will accomplish a well-defined
task, and an application to be installed on a computer.
Activity Attributes. In addition to the scope description, each activity also
has some attributes assigned to it, as follows:
       *   Unique activity identifier (ID) and WBS ID
       *   Activity description
       *   Assumptions and constraints related to this activity, such
           as imposed deadline
       *   Predecessor and successor activities
       *   Resource requirements
       *   Team member responsible for performing the work and
           information about the work; for example, where it will be
           performed.
Some attributes are assigned not at once, but over time. The attributes
are used to arrange the activities in the correct order (sequencing) and to
schedule them.
184   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management



      Caution! The Define Activities process generates the final output as activities and not
      deliverables. Therefore, ideally speaking, the WBS and the WBS dictionary should be generated
      before defining activities. However, practically speaking, the activity list, the WBS, and the WBS
      dictionary can be developed concurrently.


      Milestone List. This list comes from the WBS dictionary. Recall, a schedule
      milestone is a point in time by which a certain amount of project work will
      be finished. It may include the completion of a major deliverable. They can be
      mandatory or optional, and can be built into the schedule.
      Change Requests and Updates. Deliverables are broken down into work
      packages, which are subsequently broken down into activities in a rolling wave
      or progressive elaboration fashion. This may create the need to modify the
      baseline, which may affect the cost baseline. But, to make a change to any
      baseline, you must create a change request, which would be processed through
      the Perform Integrated Change Control process. If the change is approved and
      implemented, the scope baseline and cost baseline documents may need to be
      updated accordingly.


      Tip You create the WBS and decompose the work packages to project activities with the help
      of the project team. Even though the schedule is not yet developed and the resources are not fully
      assigned, the project team in some initial form will be there. When decomposing a work package
      into activities, involve the individuals who either are familiar with the work packages or will be
      responsible for them.



      Note Rolling wave planning is an example of progressive elaboration, which was discussed
      in Chapter 4.


      Before you can schedule them, the identified activities need to be arranged in
      the correct order, which is called sequencing.

      Sequencing Activities
      The activity sequencing process is used to arrange the schedule activities in
      the appropriate order, which takes into account the dependencies among the
      activities. For example, if activity B depends upon the product of activity A,
      then activity A must be performed before activity B. So, the activity sequencing
      has a two-pronged goal--to identify the dependencies among the activities
      and to order the activities accordingly. Table 5-5 shows the activity sequencing
      process in terms of its input, tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth     185




Note One main advantage of sequencing activities is that it is a way to handle project
constraints in the most efficient manner.


Table 5-5. The Sequence Activities Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                             Tools and Techniques          Output
1.Project Management Plan:        1.Determining dependencies    1.Project schedule
  *Schedule management plan 2.Precedence diagramming              network diagrams
  *Scope baseline: scope      method (PDM)                      2.Updates:
    statement, WBS, WBS           3.Applying leads and lags        *Activity list
    dictionary                    4.Project management             *Activity attributes
2.Project documents:                information system             *Milestone list
  *Activity list                                                   *Assumptions log
  *Activity attributes
  *Milestone list
  *Assumptions log
3.Enterprise environmental
  factors
4.Organizational project assets


The main goal of this process is to generate schedule network diagrams.


From Activities to Project Schedule Network
Diagrams
The main steps of this process, using the information from Table 5-5, are
described in the following:
        1. Study any related program and portfolio plans; they may
           reveal some dependencies among activities.
        2. From the schedule management plan, find out the information
           on sequencing activities, such as methods to be used, level of
           accuracy, and other criteria.
        3. Examine the scope baseline, from which the activities were
           derived, including WBS and WBS dictionary, deliverables,
           and assumptions and constraints, to collect any information
           that could help to extract the relationship between the
           activities.
186   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


            4. Use the assumptions log to study how the assumptions
               might influence the relationship between activities. For
               example, if an assumption is that an event would happen
               by a certain date, on which the start of activity B depends,
               and it does not happen, then activity B has to be delayed,
               which in turn may give rise to early and late starts for
               some activities, called leads and lags, covered in the next
               section.
            5. From the milestone list, collect the milestones that already
               have scheduled dates because that will influence their
               relationship with other activities.
            6. Using the information from step 1 through step 5 and
               information from the activity attributes document,
                a. determine the dependency relationship between the
                   activities listed in the activity list, and
                b. generate the project schedule network diagrams
                   using the tools and techniques discussed in the next
                   section.

      Tools and Techniques for Generating Project
      Schedule Network Diagrams
      Dependency determination is the prerequisite to determining sequencing.
      Therefore, most of the tools and techniques used for sequencing are focused
      on determining and displaying the dependencies.

      Determining and Integrating Dependencies
      These types of dependencies describe the logical relationships between
      activities. Where do these relationships come from? To answer this question,
      the dependencies can be grouped into three categories, as follows:
            *   Mandatory Dependencies. These are the dependencies
                inherent to the activities or required by law and a contract.
                For example, that a software program must be developed
                before it can be tested is inherent to these activities.
                Mandatory dependencies are also referred to as hard logic
                or hard dependencies.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth     187



      *    Discretionary Dependencies. These are the
           dependencies followed at the discretion of the project
           team. For example, it was possible to perform activities
           A and B simultaneously or to perform A after B was
           finished, but the team decided, for whatever reason, to
           perform B after A was finished. Some of the guidelines
           for establishing discretionary dependencies can come
           from the knowledge of best practices within the given
           application area and from the previous experience
           of performing a similar project. Discretionary
           dependencies are also referred to as soft logic,
           preferential logic, or preferred logic.
      *    External Dependencies. An external dependency
           involves a relationship between a project activity and
           a non-project activity--that is, an activity outside the
           project. For example, in a movie production project, think
           of a project activity that involves shooting scenes with
           lots of tourists skiing. This scene is planned to be shot at
           a skiing resort during the skiing season.This is an example
           of an external dependency.
      *    Internal Dependencies. An internal dependency involves
           a relationship between two project activities that are under
           the control of the project. For example, it convenient for the
           team to perform B after A.
Careful readers may have realized that all of these categories are not exclusive;
there may internal and external mandatory dependencies, and internal and
external discretionary dependencies. This is integration.
The dependency between two schedule activities is an example of the logical
relationships defined earlier in this chapter. Logical relationships can be
displayed in schematic diagrams, called project schedule network diagrams, or
just network diagrams for brevity. A common method used to develop network
diagrams is called the precedence diagramming method (PDM).


Precedence Diagramming Method (PDM)
To properly sequence the schedule activities, you need to determine the
dependencies among them. As illustrated in Figure 5-2, a dependency
relationship between two activities is defined by two terms: predecessor and
successor. In other words, when two activities are in a dependency relationship
with each other, one of them is a predecessor of the other, and the other one
is the successor. In Figure 5-2, activity A is a predecessor of activity B, and
activity B is successor of activity A. That means A must start before B.
188   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management




      Figure 5-2. Predecessor/successor relationship between two activities

      By definition, the successor activity must start after the predecessor activity
      has already started. But exactly when can the successor activity start after the
      predecessor activity has already been started? Well, both the predecessor
      and the successor have a start and a finish, and there are at maximum four
      possible combinations between the start and finish points of the predecessor
      and successor activities. Accordingly, there are four kinds of dependencies,
      also called precedence relationships or logical relationships, listed here:
             *    Finish to Start. The initiation of the successor activity
                  depends upon the completion of the predecessor
                  activity--that is, the successor activity cannot be started
                  until the predecessor activity has already been completed.
             *    Finish to Finish. The completion of the successor
                  activity depends upon the completion of the predecessor
                  activity--that is, the successor activity cannot be
                  completed until the predecessor activity has already been
                  completed.
             *    Start to Start. The initiation of the successor activity
                  depends upon the initiation of the predecessor activity--
                  that is, the successor activity cannot be initiated until the
                  predecessor activity has already been initiated.
             *    Start to Finish. The completion of the successor activity
                  depends upon the initiation of the predecessor activity--
                  that is, the successor activity cannot be completed until
                  the predecessor activity has already been initiated.
      The precedence diagramming method (PDM) is the method used to construct
      a project schedule network diagram. It does so by connecting the activities in
      a schedule to each other by their logical relationships. In a diagram, a box (for
      example, a rectangle) is used to represent an activity and an arrow is used
      to represent a dependency between two activities. The boxes representing
      activities are called nodes. Figure 5-3 presents an example of a network diagram
      constructed using PDM, in which activity A is a predecessor of activity B; activity
      C is a predecessor of activities D and G; and D is a successor of C; and so on.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth           189




Figure 5-3. An example of a project schedule network diagram constructed by using the
precedence diagramming method (PDM)

In this diagram, only C and I have more than one successor. In general, PDM
supports all four kinds of precedence relationships discussed earlier, but the
most commonly used dependency relationship in PDM is finish-to-start. The
start-to-finish relationship is rarely used.
Applying Leads and Lags. In the real world, some activities may need or
lend to what are called leads and lags in order to accurately or effectively
define the logical relationships. For example, the finish-to-start dependency
means that the successor activity starts when the predecessor activity finishes.
Applying a lead means you allow the successor activity to start before the
predecessor activity finishes, and applying a lag means you start the successor
activity a few days after the predecessor activity finishes. Sometimes, you
might need to make such adjustments in the schedule for effectiveness and
efficiency. Of course, leads and lags are measured in units of time, such as days.


Caution! The project management information system (PMIS) can be used as a tool to produce
and display the project schedule network diagrams. It can also be counted as part of the input to
the Sequence Activities process because it is an enterprise environment factor.



                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.2

    Q1. What is the most common logical relationship used in schedule network diagrams?
    Q2. What is the least common logical relationship used in schedule network diagrams?
    Q3. Make a list of EEFs and OPAs that could influence the process of scheduling
        activities.
190   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      We have already described the main output of this process: project schedule
      network diagrams. As a result of the discovery of relationships among
      activities, the documents listed in the output column of Table 5-5 may need to
      be updated. During the process of sequencing activities, you may identify new
      necessary activities, split an activity into two, modify activity attributes, add
      new attributes, or identify a risk related to an activity. Accordingly, you may
      need to modify the project documents, such as activity list, activity attributes,
      and risk register.
      Once the activities have been identified and the resources required to perform
      them have been gathered, as shown in the next chapter, you have enough
      information to begin estimating the time needed to complete each activity,
      which is called the activity duration.


      Estimating Activity Duration
      Activity duration is the time between the start and finish of an activity. Activity
      duration is estimated in work periods by using the Estimate Activity Durations
      process for the given resources assigned to the activity. A work period is a
      measurement of time when the work is in progress; it is measured in hours,
      days, or months, depending upon the size of the activity. This estimate can
      be converted to calendar units of time by factoring in the resource's passive
      time, such as holidays. For an example, suppose you have estimated that it will
      take one programmer four days (with eight work hours in a day) to write a
      program. You also know that the work will start on a Friday and there will be
      no work on Saturday and Sunday. Therefore, the activity duration estimate is
      four days (or 32 hours) measured in work periods and 6 days measured in
      calendar units.
      Table 5-6 shows the input, tools and techniques, and output for the activity
      duration estimating.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth         191




Table 5-6. The Estimate Activity Durations Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                  Tools and Techniques        Output
1.Project Management Plan:             1.Analogous estimating      1.Activity duration
  *Schedule management plan            2.Parametric estimating       estimates
  *Scope baseline: scope statement,    3.Three-point estimating    2.Basis of estimates
   WBS, WBS dictionary                 4.Alternative analysis      3.Updates:
2.Project documents:                   5.Reserve analysis             *Activity attributes
  *Activity list                       6.Decision making              *Assumptions log
  *Activity attributes                 7.Expert judgment              *Lessons learned
  *Milestone list                                                      register
                                       8.Meetings
  *Assumptions log
  *Risk register
  *Team assignments
  *Resource calendars
  *Resource requirements
  *Resource breakdown structure
3.Enterprise environmental factors
4.Organizational project assets


Performing the Estimate Activity Durations process means: 1) extract the
information, activities, resources, and any other estimate-related information
from the input types shown in Table 5-6, and 2) estimate duration for each
activity by applying the tools given in Table 5-6. You do this according to the
schedule management plan, which also tells you about what accuracy level
to use for these estimates and any other criterion. You can also examine
the assumptions log and risk register for assumptions and risks that may
potentially impact the activity durations. For example, you may be assuming
that a technology will be installed before the project starts, which would make
certain activities complete faster. What if the installation doesn't happen?
Collecting the activity and resource information is discussed in the following
sections.


Activity and Resources Information for Duration
Estimation
As mentioned earlier, to estimate the activity duration, you will need
information about the activity, resource requirements for the activities, and
the resources available for the activities. Let's look at some sources of this
information, as listed in Table 5-6.
192   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Activity List and Activity Attributes. These documents will provide a
      list of activities whose durations need to be estimated, as well as activity
      attributes, which will help in estimating the durations. For example, if activity
      attributes tell us activity A would be performed before activity B, and if part of
      what is done during A can be used in B, then it will shorten the duration of B.
      Project Scope Baseline. The technical details of the WBS dictionary in the
      scope baseline may affect the duration of some activities. Some assumptions
      and constraints in the project scope statement, another component of the
      scope baseline, can affect activity duration estimates as well. For example,
      there might be an assumption that part of the work related to an activity has
      already been performed in a previous project and can be used in this project.
      If the assumption is true, the activity duration will be less than otherwise.
      An example of a constraint might be that a specific work package must be
      finished before a predetermined deadline. This will put a maximum limit on
      the duration for activities corresponding to this work package.
      Activity Resource Requirements. The activity durations, by definition,
      are estimated for given resources. In other words, the work periods required
      to complete an activity depend on the resources assigned to the activity. For
      example, suppose it will take four work days to complete an activity that
      involves having two programmers write two programs. If only one programmer
      is available, it will take roughly eight work days to finish this activity, given both
      programmers are skilled. However, while assigning additional resources to an
      activity, always consider the following:
             *   Sometimes assigning additional resources might reduce
                 the overall efficiency and productivity. For example, think
                 of two engineers with different skill levels assigned to
                 work on interrelated components of an activity.
             *   Most of the activities have a threshold beyond which
                 assigning additional resources does not help. For example,
                 installing an operating system on machines; each given
                 machine will take the same amount of time regardless of
                 how many system administrators have been assigned to
                 this activity.
      Resource Breakdown Structure, Resource Calendar, and Team
      Assignments. Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical
      structure that displays the identified resources by category and type. The
      resource calendar, finalized (or modified) during the activity resource
      estimating, contains the type, quantity, availability, and capability of each
      resource, including the skills of a human resource, which must be considered
      during activity duration estimating. For example, an experienced programmer
      can finish the same program in less time than a beginner can. This is where
      team assignments come into play.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   193



Also, capability and quantity of available resources, both human and material,
can affect the activity duration estimate. For example, if an activity will take
four work days for an engineer to finish, and the engineer can work only four
hours a day on this activity, it will take eight calendar days to finish.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.3

   Q1. Describe which EEF can influence the process of estimating activity durations.
   Q2. Describe which OPA can influence the process of estimating activity durations.


The activity duration estimate is a non-trivial task, and there are various tools
and techniques available to perform this task effectively and reliably. We next
apply these tools to the information collected in this section to estimate the
duration.


Tools and Techniques for Activity Duration
Estimating
The project schedule depends upon the activity duration estimates. The
duration estimates of activities on the critical path will determine the finish
date of a project for a given start date. However, there might be many
uncertainties involved in the estimate. For example, two programmers, due
to the differences in their experience, will take different amounts of time to
write the same program.
The good news is that there are a number of tools and techniques that you
can use in activity duration estimating.
Analogous Estimating. Analogous estimating techniques estimate the
duration of an activity based on the duration of a similar activity in a previous
project. The accuracy of the estimate depends upon how similar the activities
are and whether the team member who will perform the activity has the same
level of expertise and experience as the team member from the previous
project. This technique is useful when there is not enough detail information
about the project or a project activity available--for example, in the early
stages of a project. This technique can be applied to the whole project or a
part of it.
194   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Parametric Estimating. This is a quantitative technique used to calculate
      the activity duration when the productivity rate of the resource performing
      the activity is available. You use a formula such as the following one to calculate
      the duration:

                 Activity duration = Units of work in the activity/
                 Productivity rate of the resources
      For example, if your team is assigned to the activity of repairing 40 miles of
      road, and you know from data that the average rate for repairing such a road
      by a similar team was half a mile per day, then the duration calculation can be
      performed as follows:
                    Activityduration = 40 miles / ( 0.5 miles / day ) = 80 days

      Three-point Estimating. This method addresses the issue of uncertainty
      in estimating the activity duration. The uncertainty in the duration estimate
         can be calculated by making a three-point estimate in which each point
                   corresponds to one of the following estimate types:
            *    Most-likely Scenario. The activity duration is calculated
                 in the most practical terms by factoring in the resources
                 likely to be assigned and realistic expectations of the
                 resources, dependencies, and interruptions.
            *    Optimistic Scenario. This is the best-case version of
                 the situation described in the most-likely scenario.
            *    Pessimistic Scenario. This is the worst-case version of
                 the situation described in the most likely scenario.
      The spread of these three estimates determines the uncertainty. The resultant
      duration is calculated by taking the average of the three estimates. For example,
      if the duration for an activity is estimated to be 30 days for the most-likely
      scenario, 27 days for the optimistic scenario, and 33 days for the pessimistic
      scenario, then the average duration is 30 days and the uncertainty is  3 days,
      which can be expressed as follows:
                                     duration = 30  3 days
      It's equivalent to saying that the activity duration is 30 days, give or take three
      days.
      In general, the duration value is obtained by adding the three values and dividing
      by three. However, the most-likely scenario may be given more weight than
      the other two scenarios. Therefore, the expected duration can be calculated
      by using the following formula:
                                  te = ( nt m + to + t p ) / ( n + 2 )
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth       195



where te is the expected duration, tm is the duration in the most-likely sce-
nario, to is the duration in the optimistic scenario, tp is the duration in the
pessimistic scenario, and n is the weight given to the most-likely scenario.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.4

   In the program evaluation and review technique (PERT), the most-likely scenario is
   given a weight of 4 as compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and
   optimistic scenarios. The pessimistic estimate for an activity is 20 days, the optimistic
   estimate is 10 days, and most-likely estimate is 15 days. Calculate the expected
   estimate using the PERT technique.


Bottom-up Technique. This technique is used when it's difficult to estimate
the duration of an activity; for example, it's big in size or complicated. This
technique decomposes the activity into smaller pieces, estimates the durations
of those pieces, and aggregates all those duration values into one final value.
Alternative Analysis and Decision-Making Techniques. These techniques
have been discussed several times in this book so far. Their basic ideas remain
the same, but you can apply them to different situations. For estimating activity
duration, you can use alternative analysis to estimate durations at different
levels of resource capabilities, skills, and tools, then compare the results from
different levels. Based on this comparison, hiring and buying decisions can be
made using decision-making techniques.
Reserve Analysis. Reserve analysis is used to incorporate a time cushion
into your schedule; this cushion is called a contingency reserve, a management
reserve, or a schedule reserve buffer. The whole idea is to accommodate the
possibility of schedule risks. One method of calculating the contingency
reserve is to take a percentage of the original activity duration estimate as
the contingency reserve. It can also be estimated by using quantitative analysis
methods. Later, when more information about the project becomes available,
the contingency reserve can be reduced or eliminated.
Expert Judgment and Meetings. Expert judgment can be used to estimate
the whole duration of an activity when not enough information is available. It
can also be used to estimate some parameters to be used in other methods--
for example, what percentage of the original activity duration estimate should
be used as a contingency reserve--and in comparing an activity to a similar
activity in a previous project during analogous estimating.
Of course, meetings with relevant stakeholders will be useful.
196   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Note that, in general, a combination of techniques is used to estimate the
      duration of an activity. For example, you can use the analogous technique and
      expert judgment to estimate the productivity rate of resources, and then use
      that productivity rate in parametric analysis to calculate the activity duration.
      At the end of this road, you will have activity duration estimates with some
      document updates.


      Output of Activity Duration Estimating
      Guess what the main output of the activity duration estimating process is.
      Yes, you are right--it is the activity duration estimates! Regardless of which
      technique you use, these estimates are quantitative assessments of the required
      time units to finish activities, such as five days or ten weeks. As shown earlier,
      you can also assign an uncertainty to the estimate, such as 202 days, to say
      that the activity will take at least 18 days and at most 22 days. In addition to this,
      more information about the basis of these estimates should be documented; for
      example, how the estimates were made, what the assumptions and constraints
      were, and what the uncertainty is, including confidence level.
      The duration of an activity is an attribute of the activity. Therefore, you must
      update the activity attributes, originally developed in the Define Activities
      process, to include the activity durations. Also, the assumptions made in
      estimating the durations will require the update of the assumptions log
      document. Last, you can update the lessons learned register with what
      techniques worked better than others.
      By using the various processes discussed in this chapter, you have identified
      activities, arranged them in proper sequence, determined resource requirements
      for them as discussed in next chapter, and estimated their durations. All these tasks
      and accomplishments are a means to an end called project schedule development.


      Developing the Project Schedule
      The project work is composed of individual activities. The processes
      previously discussed in this chapter deal with the activities--defining activities,
      sequencing activities, and estimating activity durations--and so is the process
      of estimating resource requirements for the activities, covered in the next
      chapter. By using these processes, you work out a few schedule-related pieces
      at the activity level, which come together as the project schedule when you
      crank them up through the schedule development process, formally called
      Develop Schedule. Until you have a realistic project schedule, you do not have
      a project. A project schedule has activities sandwiched between the project
      start date and the project finish date. Table 5-7 shows the Develop Schedule
      process in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth       197



Table 5-7. The Develop Schedule Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                Tools and Techniques      Output
1.Project Management Plan:            1.Schedule network       1.Project schedule
  *Schedule management plan             analysis               2.Schedule baseline
  *Scope baseline                     2.Critical path method    3.Schedule data
2.Project documents:                  3.Schedule compression 4.Project calendar
  *Activity list                      4.What-if scenario        5.Change requests
                                        analysis
  *Activity attributes                                          6.Plan updates:
                                      5.Resource optimization
  *Resource requirements                                          *Project schedule plan
                                      6.Resource leveling
  *Resource calendars                                           7.Cost baseline
                                      7.Simulations
  *Project team assignments                                     8.Project document
                                      8.Applying leads and lags   updates:
  *Duration estimates and basis
   of estimates                       9.Project management        *Activity attributes
                                        information system
  *Project schedule network                                       *Duration estimate
   diagrams                          10.Agile release planning
                                                                  *Resource
  *Milestone list                                                   requirements
  *Assumptions log                                               *Assumptions log
  *Risk register                                                 *Risk register
  *Lesson learned register                                       *Lessons learned
3.Agreements                                                      register
4.Enterprise environmental factors
5.Organizational project assets

All the processes discussed in this chapter so far had a common goal: schedule
development. This is directly and indirectly apparent from the input items in
Table 5-7, which we use to extract the essentials for developing the project
schedule.


Collecting Information for Schedule Development
The following output items from the schedule-related processes discussed in
this chapter directly support the schedule development process:
        *   Activity list and activity attributes
        *   Project schedule network diagrams showing the
            dependencies among activities
        *   Activity resource requirements and resource calendars
198   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


            *    Activity duration estimates
            *    Global Information. The WBS and WBS dictionary will
                 provide detail about the project deliverables, which are
                 the real reason for the schedule. The schedule development
                 plan will show "how" and what type of information--e.g.;
                 what method and tools--should be used to create the
                 schedule. Don't lose sight of this big picture while figuring
                 out the schedule details.
            *    Basic Activity-Related Information. The activity list
                 shows all the activities that need to be scheduled, and
                 activity attributes help with the details of working out a
                 schedule. The duration estimates document gives the
                 activity duration estimates in work periods and the basis
                 of estimates tells how these were obtained. The resource
                 requirement document shows details about the resources
                 assigned to each activity on which these estimates depend.
            *    Activity Relationship-Related Information. The
                 information about dependencies among the activities
                 and in which order they should be performed can
                 be extracted from: 1) Schedule network diagrams; 2)
                 milestones list with hardcoded, i.e., fixed, dates; and 3)
                 resource calendars showing the availability of resources
                 along the timeline.
            *    Risk-Related Information. This can be extracted from
                 scheduled assumptions in the assumptions log, which may
                 lead to risk, and schedule-related risks in the risk register.
                 This information will help with risk mitigation by applying
                 the contingency reserve, explained earlier in the chapter, in
                 the project schedule.
      Also, project-related agreements and contracts may have some information--
      e.g.; fixed deliverable dates--that you must consider while developing the
      schedule.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.5

         Q1. Describe how assumptions and constraints--e.g.; in the project scope
         statement--can affect the schedule and what you can do about it.
         Q2. List EEFs and OPAs that can influence the process of schedule development.

      Once we have extracted this information from the input, we can transform it
      into a project schedule by using the tools and techniques listed in Table 5-7.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       199




Applying Tools and Techniques for Schedule
Development
Once you have the information talked about in the previous section in network
diagrams for the activities, as well as the activity duration estimates, you are
well equipped to start scheduling the project. Starting with network diagrams
and activity duration, you move to put the information pieces together while
dealing with issues like the following:
      *   The actual start date
      *   Uncertainty on the availability of resources
      *   Identification of and preparation for activities on the
          critical path
      *   Risks involved, or "what if" scenarios
      *   The hard start/finish dates for activities or for the
          project that came down the pipeline from very important
          stakeholders
In the following, we will show how to use various tools and techniques to
address these and other issues or concerns while hammering out the project
schedule.


Schedule Network Analysis
The schedule network analysis is a wrapper technique used to generate a
project schedule model using multiple techniques, such as critical path
method, resource optimization, and simulation models. All of these and more
techniques are discussed in the following sections.


Critical Path Method
This is the schedule network analysis technique used to identify the schedule
flexibility and the critical path of the project schedule network diagram. The
critical path is the longest path (sequence of activities) in a project schedule
network diagram. Because it is the longest path, it determines the duration
of the project, and hence the finish date of the project given the start date.
An example will explain this. Consider the network diagram presented in
Figure 5-4. The boxes in the figure represent activities, such as activity
A followed by activity B, and the number on top of a box represents the
duration of the activity in time units, such as days.
200   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management




      Figure 5-4. An example of a project schedule network diagram. The duration of an activity
      is represented by the number shown on top of the box that represents the activity.


      Table 5-8 shows the calculations for the duration of each path of the network
      diagram by adding the durations of the individual activities on the path. You
      can see from Table 5-8 that the path Start-F-G-H-Finish is the critical path
      because it is the longest path in the diagram, at 21 days. This means if the
      project start date is January 2, the project finish date will be January 23--i.e.,
      2+21--given that the duration is shown in calendar time units.

      Table 5-8. Path Durations Calculated from the Network Diagram Shown in Figure 5-4

      Path                           Durations of Activities            Path duration
      Start-A-B-Finish               5+3                                8
      Start-C-D-E-Finish             5+4+5                              14
      Start-C-G-H-Finish             5+6+8                              19
      Start-F-G-H-Finish             7+6+8                              21
      Start-I-G-H-Finish             5+6+8                              19
      Start-I-J-H-Finish             5+4+8                              17


      The second important step of the critical path method is to identify the
      flexibility in the project schedule by calculating the early and late start and
      finish dates of each activity on each path. The schedule flexibility of an activity
      is measured by the positive difference between the late start date and the
      early start date for the activity; this is called float time or total float.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth    201



Table 5-9 shows calculations for the early and late start and finish dates and
the float time for each activity in the network diagram being analyzed. The
early start and finish dates of activities on a path are calculated by using the
forward-pass method, which means you start your calculations from the start
point (left-most) and make your way forward. As an example, consider the
path Start-A-B-Finish in the network diagram shown in Figure 5-4. Because A
is the first activity on the path, its early start is day 0. Because B depends on
the completion of A, and A takes five days to finish, the early start date for B
is the early start date of A plus the duration of A--that is, 0+5 = 5. The late
start and finish dates are calculated using the backward-pass method, which
means you start your calculations from the finish point. The project finish date
determined by the critical path is day 21, given that the project start date is
day 0. Because activity B has a duration of three days, it must be started no
later than day 18 (21-3=18). Therefore, day 18 is the late start date of activity
B. Activity A has a duration of five days, so, given that B must start on day 18, A
must not start later than day 13; i.e., (18-5=13). Therefore, the late start date
for A is day 13. The float times are calculated as follows:
            Float time for A = late start - early start = 13-0 = 13
            Float time for B = late start - early start = 18-5 = 13


Table 5-9. Early and Late Start and Finish Dates for Activities in the Network Diagram
Shown in Figure 5-5

Activity       Early Start    Early Finish   Late Start      Late Finish    Float Time
A              0              5              13              18             13
B              5              8              18              21             13
C              0              5              2 (not 7)       12             2
D              5              9              12              16             7
E              9              14             16              21             7
F              0              7              0               7              0
G              7              13             7               13             0
H              13             21             13              21             0
I              0              5              2 (not 4)       9              2
J              5              9              9               13             4
202   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Note that each of the activities on the critical path (F, G, and H) has a float
      time of zero. This obviously is a source of schedule risk.


      Note Each activity on a critical path has zero float time, and therefore poses a schedule risk.
      Therefore, you must monitor the activities on all critical paths very closely during the execution of
      the project.



      Resource Optimization
      Resource optimization refers to optimizing the use of available resources
      to finish the project within the planned start and finish dates. This may be
      done by adjusting the activities' dates as shown in the following two example
      techniques.
      Resource Leveling. Resource leveling is applied to the schedule that has
      already been analyzed using other methods, such as the critical path method,
      and hence we know the project start and finish dates, as well as start and
      finish dates and floats for activities. This techniques adjusts the start and finish
      dates of activities, using the already assigned resources to finish the project
      within the planned start and finish dates. The following are some examples
      of situations in which critical resources are being shared and thus where
      resource leveling may help:
              *    Resources are available only at specific times.
              *    Resources are available in limited quantities.
              *    Resources are assigned to multiple activities to be
                   performed at the same time.
              *    Resources need to be used at a constant rate.
      To deal with such situations, this technique adjusts the start and finish dates
      of activities by using the activity floats. In this interplay between activities
      and resources, a part of the resources from one activity may be assigned to
      another; hence, the name resource leveling.
      Resource Smoothing. In this technique, like in resource leveling, you adjust
      the activities so as to finish the project within start and finish dates for given
      assigned resources by using activity floats. Unlike resource leveling, you cannot
      change the critical path of the project. What trick is possible? The key is the
      total float; you cannot change the start and end dates of the paths, but you can
      delay the activities within their free float and total float of the path.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth          203




Caution! Due to the change in the activity durations, resource leveling can result in a change
of critical paths. Resource smoothing may not always optimize the use of resources.




Simulations and "What if" Scenario Analysis
In addition to the main techniques to develop the project schedule, which I
already discussed, there are some other tools and techniques for developing
the project schedule that I will discuss in this section.
"What if " Scenario Analysis. The purpose of "what if" scenario analysis
is to calculate the effects of a specific scenario on the schedule--for example,
how the schedule will be affected if a vendor does not make the delivery
of a major component on the promised date. Because a "what if" scenario
by definition represents uncertainty, this analysis often leads to risk planning,
which might include changing the schedule or changing the network diagram
to get a few activities out of harm's way if possible.
As you have seen, the critical path method is used to develop a schedule for
given resources, whereas a method called the critical method that method
factors in the uncertainty of the availability of the resources. The resource
leveling technique is used to move the resources around to meet the resource
needs of the activities that must be accomplished by a specific date. In other
words, in an ideal world in which the required (or planned) resources are
guaranteed, you do not need the critical chain method and resource leveling;
just the critical path method will do.
Simulations. In any field, simulation models are used when calculable
theory is not available or when dealing with a multitude of parameters and
options that mean exact calculations are not feasible. Regarding the schedule,
simulation models--e.g.; Monte Carlo models--are used to estimate the
combined effect of all sources of uncertainty, or risk, on project objectives.
When using the Monte Carlo model for this purpose, you can use multiple
activity durations with different sets assumptions, constraints, and risks to
simulate the combined effect and produce different affects.


Caution! The PMBOK levels simulations and "what if" scenario analysis as data analysis
techniques. One may make the case that data analysis is also involved in other techniques
discussed here.
204   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Applying Leads and Lags
      Just like in the activity sequencing process, leads and lags can be applied during
      the development of the project schedule. If you applied some leads and lags
      during the activity sequencing process, it is time to consider whether you need
      to adjust those. This adjustment might be necessary to create a realistic schedule.
      Let's assume you have used the critical path method to determine the schedule
      for a project.You have also applied other techniques, such as the critical chain
      method and resource leveling. The final realistic schedule that you have come
      up with has an unacceptable project duration (the length of the critical path).
      What do you do? This is where the schedule compression technique comes
      to your rescue.


      Schedule Compression
      Schedule compression is an attempt to shorten the project schedule without
      changing the project scope. It may be necessary in order to deal with schedule-
      related constraints and objectives. It is true that you, the project manager,
      build the schedule through cold, hard mathematical analysis and you don't just
      accept whatever schedule goals come down the pipeline from elsewhere, such
      as from the customer or the project sponsor. However, once you have the
      schedule built through analysis, you can attempt to accommodate some critical
      stakeholder expectations or hard deadlines, such as a predetermined project
      finish date. I have already discussed one such method, called resource leveling,
      to accommodate hard deadlines for activities. In this section, I will discuss two
      more methods for schedule compression: crashing and fast tracking.
      Crashing. This is a schedule compression technique in which cost and
      schedule tradeoffs are analyzed to decrease the project duration with minimal
      additional cost. A number of alternatives are analyzed, including the assignment
      of additional resources. Approving overtime is another example of crashing.
      This option may increase the cost.
      Fast Tracking. This is a schedule compression technique used to decrease
      the project duration by performing project phases or some schedule activities
      within a phase in parallel that would normally be performed in sequence. For
      example, testing of a product can start when some of its components are
      finished, rather than waiting for the whole product to be completed.
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth           205




Tip Crashing usually involves assigning more resources, hence increasing the cost. However,
guard yourself against the misconception that additional resources will linearly improve the
performance. For example, if one programmer can develop a program in eight days, it does not
necessarily mean that two programmers will develop the same program in four days, because
there will be overheads, such as the initial less-productive stage of the newly assigned resource,
the time taken to reallocate the work, the interaction among the resources, and so on.



Agile Release Planning and PMIS
These two tools can be used to help present the project schedule and related
items. Agile release planning refers to the release of a high-level schedule
timebound with the product roadmap. This release only looks out into the
near future, accommodating the ideas of iteration and product evolution.
A project management information system (PMIS) that includes schedule
software can be used to generate the schedule and schedule-related items,
such as project network diagrams, bar charts, and histograms.
After you apply these techniques on information extracted from the input,
you obtain the project schedule and related items, as will be discussed in the
following section.


Output of the Schedule Development Process
The planned project schedule is an obvious output of the schedule development
process. This and other output items are discussed in this list.
Project Schedule. The project schedule includes a planned start date and a
planned finish date for each schedule activity. The schedule will be considered
preliminary until the resources have been assigned to perform the activities
according to the schedule. Although a schedule for a simple project might be
presented in a tabular form, typically a project schedule is presented in one of
the following graphical formats:
        *    Project Schedule Network Diagram. These diagrams
             present the schedule activities on a timescale with start
             and finish dates for each activity; hence, they show the
             dependencies between activities. Because they show the
             dependencies, which is the logic, they are also called logic
             charts.
206   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


            *    Bar Chart. In these charts, the activities are represented
                 by bars, with each bar showing the start date, the finish
                 date, and the duration of the activity. They are easy to
                 read and are often used in presentations.
            *    Milestone Chart. These are typically bar charts
                 representing only the milestones, not all the schedule
                 activities.
      Schedule Baseline. This is a specific version of the project schedule that
      is accepted and approved by the appropriate stakeholder, such as the project
      sponsor. This schedule baseline becomes part of the project plan. The actual
      project work results are compared against this baseline to measure the
      project's progress. Any proposed change to this baseline must go through
      standard change procedures--the Integrated Change Control process.
      Project Calendars. These calendars contain information about work days,
      shifts, times of the days, and activities available for the project.
      Schedule Data. This is the supporting data for the project schedule and
      consists of the following:
            *    Schedule activities, schedule milestones, activity attributes,
                 and documentation of all identified assumptions and
                 constraints
            *    Resource requirements by time period
            *    Alternative schedules--for example, schedules based on
                 best-case and worst-case scenarios
            *    Schedule contingency reserves


      Tip The schedule data may be enriched with items such as delivery schedules, order
      schedules, and resource histograms, depending on the nature of the project.


      This data is used to create the baseline version of the schedule.
      Change Request and Updates to Documents. Modification requests
      for project scope or schedule will generate change requests, which must be
      processed through the Integrated Change Control process. Because schedule
      development is an iterative process, over time the way the schedule is
      developed may change, so the schedule development plan will need to be
      updated. Also, schedule changes such as new activities may affect the cost, so
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth           207



the cost baseline may need to be updated. Similarly, the project documents
listed in the output column of Table 5-7 may need to be updated for changes
obvious to figure out. For example:
        *    Resource Requirements. The schedule development
             process--e.g.; resource leveling--may change the initial
             estimate for the types and quantities of the required
             resources.
        *    Activity Attributes. Resource requirements or any
             other activity attributes that have changed must be
             updated during this process.
        *    Assumptions Log and Risk Register. During schedule
             development, the change in assumptions about activity
             durations, needed resources, and so forth may be revealed.
             This will cause changes to the risk assessment. Hence, the
             assumptions log and risk register will need to be updated.


Note Project schedule development is an iterative process. For example, it might be necessary
to review and revise the duration and resource estimates for some activities to create a project
schedule that will be approved. The approved project schedule will act as a baseline against which
project progress will be tracked.


As mentioned earlier, the approved project schedule is used as a baseline to
track the project's progress. To some extent, the schedule development (or
modification) continues throughout the project execution as a result of the
approved changes and the risk occurrences.
208   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.6

          Lora Nirvana is the project manager for the Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB)
          project. Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item
          in the second column.

      Output of the Develop Schedule process         Description
      A. Schedule data                               1. A bar chart that includes all the activities of
                                                         the project and also includes milestones. Lora
                                                         points out this bar chart to the project sponsor
                                                         to show where they are in the execution of
                                                         the project.
      B. Project document updates                    2. A bar chart hanging on the calendar that has
                                                         never changed once it was approved. Lora
                                                         compares the current bar chart with this bar
                                                         chart to show the progress.
      C. Schedule                                    3. O
                                                         n a bar chart, Lora points to the dates when
                                                        she will have the DNA sample isolated and
                                                        purified, when she will get the DNA sample run
                                                        through the genetic analyzer, when she will
                                                        receive the results from the analyzer, and when
                                                        the results will be published on the Internet.
      D. Schedule baseline                           4. A fter realizing that their chosen vendor has a
                                                         track record of sending the DNA analysis kits
                                                         late, Lora writes something into the risk register.



      Once the schedule is developed and approved, it needs to be controlled
      throughout the lifecycle of the project.


      Controlling Schedule
      Schedule control has a three-pronged goal: 1) monitor the status of the project
      to see if it's progressing according to the planned schedule, and if it's not, 2)
      take action, such as changing resources or changing schedule; and 3) manage
      this change. As a project manager, you should be out in front of the project,
      performing the following tasks on regular basis:
             *      Determine the current status of the project schedule.
             *      Influence the factors that generate schedule changes.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth        209



        *   Determine whether the project schedule has changed--
            for example, if some activities are running late.
        *   Manage the changes as they occur.
        *   Detect or measure a schedule change by comparing the
            project execution results--i.e., work performance data--
            against the schedule baseline; both are major input items
            into the schedule control process, as shown in Table 5-10.

Table 5-10. The Control Schedule Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                        Tools and Techniques             Output
1.Project Management Plan:    1.Earned value analysis         1.Work performance information
   *Schedule management       2.Critical path method          2.Schedule forecast
    plan                      3.Variance analysis             3.Change requests
   *Schedule baseline         4.Iteration burndown chart 4.Plan updates:
   *Scope baseline            5."What if" scenario analysis      *Schedule management plan
2.Performance                 6.Project management               *Schedule baseline
  measurement baseline          information system               *Cost baseline
3.Project documents:          7.Trend analysis                5.Performance measurement
   *Project schedule          8.Resource optimization           baseline
   *Schedule data             9.Schedule compression          6.Project document updates:
   *Project calendar         10.Leads and lags                   *Project schedule
   *Resource calendars       11.Performance reviews              *Schedule data
   *Lessons learned                                              *Resource calendars
    register
                                                                 *Basis of estimates
4.Work performance data
                                                                 *Assumptions log
5.Organizational project
                                                                 *Risk register
  assets
                                                                 *Lessons learned register



Performing the Control Schedule Process
In the following, we explain the control schedule process in the form of its
main steps.
210   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Getting the Needed Information
      To control the project schedule, you need to know what to expect from the
      project, which is given in the schedule baseline, and you need to know how the
      project is actually performing, which can be found in the work performance
      data. These are the core input items needed. Of course, as we are controlling
      the schedule, all the needed schedule-related items on the schedule appear
      in the input column of Table 5-10. You will control the schedule as planned
      in the schedule management plan, which also contains information about the
      usage of reserve and the allowed frequency of schedule updates. For other
      information about deliverables, assumptions, and constraints necessary with
      schedule control, we need the scope baseline.

      Generating the Work Performance Information: Measuring
      Variance
      In this process, we generate the schedule-related work performance information
      by comparing the schedule-related actual results in the work performance data
      against the schedule baseline. This comparison produces the variance of start and
      finish dates, and hence also the durations of the activities. The work performance
      information document has this information to the work-package level.
      This information is produced by using one or often more of the techniques
      discussed next.
      Earned Value Analysis. These techniques are used to calculate the schedule
      variance (SV) and schedule performance index (SPI) and are discussed in detail
      in terms of cost in an upcoming chapter on cost management. In this process,
      you use these quantities to assess the variation from the schedule baseline.
      Variance Analysis. Performing a barebones schedule variance analysis, this
      technique is crucial to schedule monitoring because it reveals the deviation
      of the actual start and finish dates from the planned start and finish dates
      of schedule activities. It also reveals the variations of actual versus planned
      durations and floats. It might suggest corrective actions to be taken to keep
      the project on track.
      Performance Reviews. Performance reviews are simple reviews of project
      progress that compare the performance data with the schedule baseline.
      These comparisons use start and end dates and percentages of completed
      and remaining work to analyze the variances.
      Project Management Information System. The included schedule
      software can be used to generate the schedule and schedule-related items,
      such as project network diagrams, bar charts, and histograms. Since it already
      has the schedule-related information, it is able to provide the schedule variance
      (SV) information and also forecast the effect of this variance on the schedule
      model going forward.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       211




Generating Schedule Forecast
Schedule forecasts are predictions of the future state of the project if it
continues on the current path defined by the current schedule-related work
performance information. Forecasts are based on trends extracted from current
and past information. The variance analysis technique and PMIS also include
the ability to forecast the effect of variances on the project's future. You can
also use trend analysis techniques that compare the work performance data
with the schedule baseline over time. One such technique in called an iteration
burndown chart.
The iteration burndown chart technique works by keeping track of the
remaining project work over workings days. A very simple example presented
in Figure 5-5 illustrates this technique, where decreasing remaining work
is plotted against the accumulating working days, called iteration days. The
solid line represents the planned schedule in the baseline, which shows the
project being complete in 40 days. The bullet points in the figure represent
the performance data from the project execution. The dashed trend line
drawn through these data points predicts that the project is on track to being
completed in 47 days, a deviation or variance of 7 days.




Figure 5-5. Iteration burndown graphs
212   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      After we find out that the project has gone off track by measuring the deviation
      in terms of variance, the question is how to get the project back on track--in
      alignment with the schedule baseline.


      Bringing Project Back on Track: Generating Change
      Requests and Updates
      Having measured the schedule variations from the schedule baseline, there are
      only two ways to put the project back on track: 1) align the project with the
      schedule baseline without updating the baseline; and 2) update the baseline.
      Align the Project with Schedule Baseline Without Updating the
      Baseline. This can be done by using techniques already discussed while
      covering the schedule development process. The examples include resource
      optimization, schedule compression, lag and leads, and what-if scenario analysis.
      Update the Schedule Baseline. A schedule baseline update is an obvious
      way to align the project schedule with the schedule baseline. You can use
      trend lines and future forecasts as a guide to updating the baseline. Before
      the schedule baseline updates can be applied, change requests will need to
      be created, which must go through the standard approval process. Schedule
      change request will also trigger other change requests, such as those to the
      cost baseline. Work performance information produced in this process may
      also create non-schedule related change requests as well.
      As a result of these changes, some documents listed in the output column of
      Table 5-10 may need to be updated.


      Caution! Since schedule variance on the critical or near critical path directly impacts the
      project finish date, mainly these paths determine the project status. Therefore, the activities on
      these paths should be closely watched; even a short delay for the critical path may produce a
      bigger effect on the project end date than bigger delays on non-critical paths.



      Tip Remember that corrective actions are not about going back and fixing past mistakes.
      Rather, they're about ensuring that future results match with the plan. You can do this by influencing
      the future results, such as by expediting the execution or by changing the plan.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth     213




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.7

   Q1. Use your knowledge about the lessons learned register to figure out why we need
   it as input to the control schedule process.
   Q2. Knowing the schedule control process, make a list of organizational process
   assets that will influence this process.


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      *    Various schedule management processes are used to
           produce schedule data--a list of schedule activities and
           attributes for each activity, such as activity duration,
           previous and following activity, and also the required
           resources, determined by a resource management
           process.
      *    The schedule data is used to develop the project schedule,
           which is an iterative process due to the uncertainties in
           the schedule data and due to the changes made during
           project execution. Nevertheless, the approved version of
           the planned schedule is used as a baseline to track the
           project progress.
      *    The schedule needs to be controlled to keep the project
           on the track--i.e., in alignment with the schedule
           baseline. The major output items of the schedule control
           process are work performance information, schedule
           forecasts, and change requests resulting from comparing
           the schedule-related work performance data with the
           schedule baseline.

Summary
Project schedule development is a journey that begins with decomposing the
work packages in the WBS into project activities and ends with an approved
schedule for performing those activities, called the schedule baseline. The
schedule, once developed, needs to be controlled to keep the actual project
execution in sync with this baseline. Of course, all the schedule-related
processes are performed according to the schedule management plan
developed before using these processes.
214   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      The Define Activities process is used to decompose the work packages in
      the WBS into activities with attributes available at the time; the activities
      would later be scheduled. The resulting activity list is used by the activity
      sequencing process to generate schedule network diagrams, which display
      the dependencies among the activities. The network diagrams are constructed
      using the precedence diagramming method (PDM) along with other techniques.
      The activity list and attributes are also used to determine the resource
      requirements for the project. Given the available resources, you can estimate
      the activity duration--that is, the time it will take to perform the activity.
      All the pieces developed by these processes come together to develop
      the project schedule by using the Develop Schedule process via a host of
      techniques. You, for example, may start with using the critical path method
      to develop the project schedule from a network diagram. After you have this
      schedule, you can use schedule compression methods, such as fast tracking
      and crashing, to accommodate hard deadlines. Schedule development is an
      iterative process that can continue throughout the project execution due
      to approved changes and risk occurrences. However, the approved planned
      project schedule is used as a baseline to track the project's progress. You need
      to control the schedule to keep it aligned with the schedule baseline, which
      includes monitoring the status of the project's progress and controlling the
      changes to the schedule baseline.
      Road Ahead. The duration is an important attribute of an activity, as the
      schedule directly depends upon it. The duration is estimated for the given
      resources available for the activity. In the next chapter, we will discuss the
      process to estimate the activity resources along with other resource
      management processes.

      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *The schedule management plan is developed from the project charter, scope management
       plan, and the product development approach and is used as an input to all other project
       schedule management processes.
      *The major task of the Define Activities process is to generate the activity list by
       decomposing the work packages in the WBS into activities.
      *The major task of the Sequence Activities process is to determine the dependencies
       among the activities in the activity list, sequence them accordingly, and display that
       sequence in the network diagrams.
      *Network diagrams with activity durations assigned to each activity can be used to
       develop the schedule.
      *We need to know the activity resource requirements to estimate the duration for an
       activity.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth       215




Look Out
*Because deliverable are broken down into work packages and activities in progressive
 elaboration fashion, it may generate change requests to update scope and cost baselines.
*One main advantage of sequencing activities is that it is a way to handle project
 constraints in the most efficient manner.
*Activity duration is estimated for a given resource committed to the activity. Changing the
 quantity or capability of the resource will change the duration estimate.
*Each activity on a critical path has zero float time and thus poses a schedule risk.
 Therefore, you must monitor the activities on all critical paths very closely during the
 execution of the project.
*The approved version of the project schedule is called the project schedule baseline,
 against which the project's progress is tracked and measured by comparing the actual
 progress with the baseline.

Memorize

*Project mile schedule, an output of Define Activities, comes from the WBS dictionary, a
 component of the scope baseline.
*Dependencies have four attributes: internal mandatory dependencies, external
 mandatory dependencies, internal discretionary dependencies, and external discretionary
 dependencies.
*In PDM, finish-to-start is the most commonly used dependency relationship, whereas
 start-to-finish is the least used.
*Activity duration measured in work periods does not include holidays, whereas the
 duration measured in calendar units does. For example, the activity duration from Friday
 to the following Tuesday is three days when measured in work units and five days when
 measured in calendar units, given that no work is done on Saturday and Sunday.
*The approved project schedule, called the schedule baseline, becomes part of the project
 management plan.
*Fast tracking compresses the schedule by performing activities simultaneously that would
 otherwise be performed in sequence, whereas crashing compresses the schedule by
 assigning more resources.
*The schedule control process, by comparing the schedule-related work performance
 data with the schedule baseline, produces the work performance information containing
 schedule variance, i.e., deviation from schedule baseline, and schedule forecasts based on
 this and past performance.
216   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


      Review Questions
           1. Which of the following is the most commonly used
              network diagramming method?
               A. Critical path method (CPM)
               B. Simulations
               C. Precedence diagramming method (PDM)
               D. Arrow diagramming method (ADM)
           2. What is the crashing technique used for?
               A. Schedule Network diagramming
               B. Duration compression
               C. Cost reduction
               D. Activity sequencing
           3. Which of the following is a true statement about the
              critical path?
               A. Each activity on the critical path has zero float time.
               B. It controls the project finish date.
               C. It controls the project start date.
               D. It is the shortest sequence in the network diagram.
           4. In your research project on tourism, you must collect
              data before the tourist season ends because the project
              involves interviewing tourists. The data-collection activity
              has which of the following kinds of dependency?
               A. Mandatory
               B. External
               C. Internal
               D. Internal discretionary
           5. You know from a network diagram that Activity B cannot
              start until Activity A is finished. Which of the following
              are true?
               A. Activities A and B have a start-to-finish dependency.
               B. Activities A and B have a finish-to-start dependency.
               C. Activity B has a mandatory dependency on Activity A.
               D. Activities A and B are on a critical path.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   217



6. Why should you monitor the activities on the critical
   path more closely?
    A. Because each activity on the critical path has a zero
       float time and thereby poses a schedule risk.
    B. Because the activities on the critical path need to be
       performed before the activities on other paths.
    C. Because the activities on the critical path are critical
       to the organization's strategy.
    D. Because the activities on noncritical paths depend
       upon the activities on the critical path.
7. You estimate the duration of an activity as five days
   because an expert told you that it took five days to
   complete a similar activity in a previous project. Which of
   the following methods might the expert be using for this
   activity duration estimate?
    A. Parametric estimating
    B. Expert judgment
    C. Analogous estimating
    D. Delphi technique
8. You have developed the schedule for your project, and
   you've called the kickoff meeting. A team member who is
   responsible for an activity comes to you and tells you that
   the activity cannot be performed within the allocated
   time because some pieces were left out during activity
   definition. The revised estimate will add two more days
   to the activity duration, but the activity is not on the
   critical path. Which of the following actions will you take?
    A. Go to the team member's functional manager and
       find out whether the team member's estimate is
       correct.
    B. Accept the new estimate but do not change the
       schedule.
    C. Accept the new estimate and update the schedule
       accordingly.
    D. Put the new estimate through the integrated change
       control process.
218   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


           9. The amount of time by which an activity can be delayed
              without changing the project finish date is called:
               A. Float time
               B. Lag time
               C. Grace time
               D. Activity gradient
          10. You are the project manager of a project that is running
              behind schedule. The project sponsor is very unhappy
              at the new finish date that you proposed, but he has
              accepted it. However, you also requested extra funds to
              support the extended time of work, and the sponsor has
              refused to supply more funds and is threatening to cancel
              the project if you cannot finish the project within the
              planned budget. What are your options?
               A. Crashing
               B. Fast tracking
               C. Asking the executive management for a new sponsor
               D. Speaking with the customer directly without
                  involving the sponsor to see whether the customer
                  can increase the budget
          11. Consider the following network diagram. Which of the
              following is the critical path?
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   219



     A. Start-C-D-E-Finish
     B. Start-I-G-E-Finish
     C. Start-I-G-H-Finish
     D. Start-I-J-H-Finish
     E. Start-I-G-H-E-Finish
12. What is the float for Activity G in the network diagram
    in Question 11?
     A. 3
     B. 2
     C. 1
     D. 0
13. What is the length of the critical path in the network
    diagram shown in Question 11?
     A. 4
     B. 6
     C. 22
     D. 5
14. You use a three-point estimate for activity duration
    estimating. An activity has a duration of 9 days for an
    optimistic scenario, 18 days for a pessimistic scenario,
    and 12 days for the most-likely scenario. Which of the
    following will you take as the duration estimate if a weight
    of 4 is assigned to the most-likely scenario as compared
    to a weight of 1 for each of the optimistic and pessimistic
    scenarios?
     A. 13 days
     B. 12.5 days
     C. 12 days
     D. 18 days
220   Chapter 5 | Project Schedule Management


          15. Which of the following is not an input item to the Define
              Activities process?
               A. The WBS
               B. The activity duration
               C. The project scope statement
               D. The WBS dictionary
          16. Which of the following is not an output of the schedule
              control process?
               A. Recommended corrective actions
               B. Updates to the schedule baseline
               C. Schedule variations
               D. Work performance data
          17. The project charter is an input to which schedule
              management process?
               A. Define activities
               B. Sequence activities
               C. Plan schedule management
               D. Schedule development
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             6

Project Resource
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 8 percent of the CAPM exam,
equivalent to about 11 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how that helps in generating the output, as well as what a given tool
or technique does in a given process.
You should be very clear about organization charts--e.g.; an organizational
breakdown structure--assignment matrix, five general techniques for
managing conflict, and so forth.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how
the tasks can be tailored and adapted to your needs, and recognize an agile
environment in action; for example, continual assessment generates change
requests which lead to changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_6
222   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Resource Management:
         1.Define the six project management processes in the project resource management
           knowledge area.
         2.Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the six processes in
           project resource management.
         3.Identify key concepts and trends in project resource management, including tailoring
           and special considerations for agile/adaptive environments.
         4.Identify techniques for developing a team, managing conflict, and resolving resource-
           related problems.
         5.Understand the components of a resource management plan and data representation
           techniques for managing project resources.


      Executing a project requires resources, and executing a project successfully
      requires the optimal use of those resources. Therefore, coordinating and
      managing resources, including both human resources--also called team
      resources--and physical resources--i.e., material, equipment, facilities, and
      infrastructure--is an integral part of overall project execution. Identifying,
      acquiring, and managing these resources is called resource management. During
      project planning, you define roles and assign responsibilities to those roles, as
      project work is generally performed in the form of roles and responsibilities.
      Project roles, responsibilities of the roles, and reporting relationships among
      the roles need to be determined in order to perform a project. This is
      accomplished during the development of the resource plan. The roles need to
      be filled with qualified individuals. A team is a group of individuals who perform
      individual responsibilities and work interdependently on their independent
      assignments. From a scientific viewpoint, a team is a dynamic entity, and its
      dynamics are determined by the interaction among its members. Therefore,
      for the team to be successful, it has to be effective in both dimensions: its
      members must be competent in performing their individual assignments, and
      the interaction among them must be constructive overall. To ensure that, you
      need to continually develop and manage the project team. To obtain the right
      individuals for the project team and to develop and manage the team is an art,
      whereas an effective team's making the project a success is a science that will
      unfold itself automatically if you do the art part right.
      So, the core question in this chapter is how to build and manage a high-
      performance project team and optimize both team and physical resources
      by using resource management. In search of an answer, we will explore
      three avenues--developing the resource management plan, managing team
      resources, and managing physical resources.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth   223




Resource Management: Big Picture
In Chapter 5, you learned about creating and managing the project schedule. To
implement that schedule, you need resources, which are managed by project
resource management, whose big picture is illustrated in Figure 6-1. The
processes in gray boxes in this figure are external to resource management.
As shown in Figure 6-1, the Estimate Activity Resources process, a resource
management process, generates activity resource requirements, which are an
input to the Develop the Project Schedule process, which in turn is used to
estimate cost. The cost estimate is an input back to the Estimate Activity
Resources process, and also an input to Determine Budget, which generates
the cost baseline that is an input to Acquiring Resources. Note here the close
connection between resource management and cost management.


  Resource Management Plan
                                        Develop
                                        Schedule
                                                                 Project schedule
                                Resource
                                requirements            Resource
                                                        requirements
                                    Estimate Activity
                                                                          Estimate Costs
                                        Resources
                                                        Cost estimates
                                Resource
                                requirements                      Cost estimates

                                    Acquire Project     Cost baseline      Determine
                                      Resources                             Budget

                                                                    Physical resource
                                Project team                        requirements
                                assignments

                                                                             Control
    Develop Team                     Manage Team
                          Team                                              Resources
                      performance
                       assessment


Figure 6-1. Big picture of resource management; processes shown in gray boxes are
external to resource management

In resource management, first, the resource management plan is generated from
the project charter, project scope baseline, and requirement documentation,
and then becomes input to all other processes. After creating the resource
management plan, you identify and estimate team and physical resources;
224   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      acquire resources; develop and manage the team resources, and control the
      physical resources. You do that using following processes:
              *    Plan Resource Management. This process is used to
                   develop the resource management plan, which identifies
                   the project roles, assigns responsibilities to these roles,
                   and provides guides to how to perform the rest of the
                   resource management processes.
              *    Estimate Activity Resources. Estimates the types
                   and amounts of team and physical resources that will
                   be required to perform each schedule activity. Physical
                   resources are non-human resources such as facilities,
                   equipment, material, and supplies.
              *    Acquire Project Team. The process of obtaining the
                   team and physical resources estimated by the preceding
                   process.
              *    Develop Team. The process of developing an optimal
                   team by improving the individual competencies and
                   interactions among the individual team members, thereby
                   improving the team environment.
              *    Manage Project Team. The process of optimizing
                   the team--hence, project performance--by tracking the
                   performance of and providing feedback to the individual
                   team members, managing changes related to the team,
                   and resolving issues.
              *    Control Resources. The process of keeping planned,
                   assigned (i.e., allotted), and used physical resources
                   synchronized by ensuring that they are allotted, used, and
                   released immediately after use.


      Note As shown by Figure 6-1, resource management and cost management are closely
      connected. Also, the project team is a subset of the project stakeholders, so there is obviously an
      overlap between resource management and stakeholder management. You will notice that when
      we cover stakeholder management in the next section of this book.

      Table 6-1 lists the processes of resource management along with their process
      groups and major output.
                                                                CAPM(R) in Depth      225



Table 6-1. Processes of Resource Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Resource                Process Group     Major Output        Performed
Management Process
Develop                 Planning          Resource            Once or at predefined
Resource Plan                             management plan     points in the project
Estimate activity       Planning          Resources           Throughout the
resources                                 requirement         project
Acquire resources       Executing         Project staff       Throughout the
                                          assignments         project
Develop Project Team    Executing         Team performance    Throughout the
                                          assessments         project
Manage Project Team     Executing         Change requests


Resource management processes will be performed according to the resource
management plan.


Developing the Resource Plan
First, in order to avoid confusion, you must understand the logical relationships
among the project, team resource requirements, roles, and responsibilities as
illustrated in Figure 6-2. Roles are determined by the resource requirements,
and responsibilities are assigned to the roles to perform the project activities.
In a nutshell, project work is generally performed in the form of roles and
responsibilities. Project roles, responsibilities of the roles, and the reporting
relationships among the roles need to be determined in order to perform
a project. The use of the concept of role is that we can talk about it during
planning even before hiring a person who will play this role. So, a role is a
defined function to be performed by a team member, such as a programmer
or tester. The other issue that needs to be addressed before the project can
be performed is how and when the project team members will be acquired.
The resource planning process addresses these issues.
226   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management




      Figure 6-2. Relationship among project, project activity resource requirements, roles, and
      responsibilities


      Therefore, two of the main goals of the resource planning process are the
      following:
             *    Identify and document project roles, responsibilities for
                  each role, and reporting relationships among the roles.
             *    Develop the team resource management plan.
      All this planning will go into a document called the resource management plan,
      which is developed by the Plan Resource Management process illustrated in
      Table 6-2 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.


      Tip The main goal of the Plan Resource Management process is to develop a document that
      will answer the question: How do you identify the right resources in just the right amount and
      manage them for the successful completion the project?
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth         227



Table 6-2. The Plan Resource Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                             Tools and Techniques       Output
1.Project charter                 1.Data representation      1.Resource management
2.Project Management Plan:          *Hierarchical charts       plan
  *Quality management plan          *Responsibility matrix   2.Team charter
  *Scope baseline: scope            *Text-oriented formats   3.Project document
   statement, WBS, WBS                                         updates:
                                  2.Organization theory
   dictionary                                                   *Assumptions log
                                  3.Expert judgment
3.Project document:                                             *Risk register
                                  4.Meetings
  *Project schedule
  *Requirement document
  *Risk register
  *Stakeholder register
4.Enterprise environmental
  factors
5.Organizational project assets



Generating Resource Management Plan
In order to devise an approach for how to identify and manage resources, we
need to know what kind of resources we are talking about. This information
can be derived from the project requirements. So, the following are the main
steps one can take to generate a resource management plan by extracting
project requirements and related information from the input of this process.
Core Resources Information. Get this information from the requirement
documentation as it will largely determine the kind and amount of resources
needed for the project. It may also suggest how to manage those resources.
Also, get information about preapproved financial resources from the project
charter, which also contains a high-level description of the project and other
requirements, as well as a summary of milestones. From this info, you can
not only derive the resource requirements, but also how to manage those
resources.
Go to Root of Resources Requirement. Get information about deliver
ables from the scope baseline, from which information regarding the kinds and
amount of needed resources and how to manage them can be derived. Also,
the quality management plan contains info about the kind of resources needed
to implement the required quality and the level of resources to maintain it.
You use this information for two purposes: 1) to check on the information in
the requirement documentation, and 2) to derive new resource requirements.
228   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      What Will Impact Resources? Get information about threats and opport
      unities from the risk register, which may impact the need, availability, and
      management of resources. Also check into the stakeholder register to identify
      stakeholders who can impact the different aspects of the resources, such as
      the kinds and availability of resources.
      Generate Resource Management Plan. Use data presentation and other
      techniques to generate resource management plan.


      Tools and Techniques for Resource Planning
      At the heart of resource planning lies the art of converting the information
      about work packages or related activities and activity resource requirements
      into roles and responsibilities. For example, consider an activity in a project--
      writing a software program. The program will be written by a programmer,
      which is a human resource, in this case a team resource. However, before
      you even know the name of the programmer, for planning purposes you can
      work with this programmer as a role whose main responsibility is to write the
      program, later assigning a real individual to fill this role. This approach allows
      for planning before hiring. The tools and techniques used in creating the
      resource management plan, including determining the roles for the project,
      are discussed in the following.
      Data Presentation Techniques. These techniques can be used to identify,
      document, and communicate the roles of the project team members, the
      responsibilities assigned to the roles, and the relationships among the roles.
      The most popular way to implement these techniques is in the form of charts,
      which can fall into three categories--hierarchical, matrix, and text oriented.


      Tip Hierarchical techniques are suitable to represent high-level roles, while text formats can
      be used to describe the responsibilities in detail.


             *    Hierarchical. Hierarchical charts are the traditional way
                  to represent the reporting relationships in an organization
                  in a top-down format. Such a chart is also called an
                  organizational breakdown structure (OBS) and is arranged
                  according to the organization's existing departments,
                  units, or teams. The OBS approach used in resource
                  management will list project work packages or related
                  activities, as well as team members with their roles and
                  responsibilities for the project under each department.
                  We have already explored another hierarchical chart
                  called WBS in the chapter on scope management. Recall
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth       229



            that WBS breaks down deliverables into work packages,
            which can be used to show responsibilities at a high level.
            Another type of hierarchical chart is called the resource
            breakdown structure (RBS), which starts by dividing the
            team and physical resources into different categories and
            breaking them down further, providing increasingly more
            detail at each lower level. The idea is to break them into
            small enough pieces such that they can be assigned to
            work packages or related activities in the WBS. The RBS
            will be covered in the next section of this chapter.
       *    Assignment Matrix. This matrix is used to specify the
            relationships between activities or work packages, roles
            for performing those activities, and team members assig
            ned to the roles. Such a matrix is generally called a
            responsibility assignment matrix (RAM). Different matrices
            can show these relationships at different levels. For
            example, you can use the RAM to document resource
            requirements for each activity, as shown in Table 6-3. For
            example, the second row of Table 6-3 says it will take six
            developers, six workstations, and one server to perform
            activity B. You can also use RAM to document the specific
            responsibilities assigned to specific team members for
            the schedule activities, as shown in Table 6-4.

Table 6-3. An Example of a Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM) Depicting the
Resources Required to Perform Schedule Activities

Activity     Designer     Developer     Tester     Marketer     Workstation       Server
A            1

B                         6                                     6                 1

C                                       3                       3                 2

D                                                  2

E            1            1             1                       1


            Remember that the RAM can be used for various pur-
            poses at various levels. While the RAM in Table 6-3
            documents the resource requirements for the schedule
            activities, the RAM in Table 6-4 depicts the roles of team
            members with responsibilities for schedule activities and
            is called a RACI chart, where RACI stand for responsible,
            accountable, consult, and inform.
230   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


               *   Text-Oriented Formats. These formats are useful
                   when the team members' responsibilities need to be
                   described in greater detail. A text-oriented chart may
                   include information about role responsibilities, authority,
                   competencies, and required qualifications. In the real
                   world, these charts are known by different names, such
                   as job description and job responsibilities.


      Caution! Information about some responsibilities of the resources will be scattered across
      the project management plan. For example, the risk register lists the risk owners, and the
      communication management plan lists individuals responsible for some types of communications,
      such as status reports.


      Table 6-4. An example of a Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM) Depicting the Roles
      Assigned to the Team Members for Various Activities. Letters Are Used as Symbols to
      Represent Roles: R for Responsible, A for Accountable, C for Consult, and I for Inform.

      Activity          Susan           Cathleen          Pappu           Maya            Kiruba
      Design            R               A                 I               I               C
      Develop           I               I                 R               I               C
      Test              C               R                 A               I               C
      Deploy            I               I                 A               I               R


      The RAM in Table 6-4 is also called the RACI chart because it assigns four
      roles to team members for various activities: responsible (R), accountable
      (A), consult (C), and inform (I). For example, Susan has the responsibility
      of designing the product, Cathleen will be held accountable for the design,
      Kiruba will play the role of a consultant for designing the product, while Pappu
      and Maya will play the role of keeping everybody informed of the status and
      progress.


      Tip Each activity or task should have an owner who is responsible for its successful completion.
      For complex tasks and activities there may be more roles assigned to it, but there must be only
      one principle owner. Joint ownership usually gives rise to confusion, finger pointing, conflict, more
      overhead, and dilution of commitment.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      231



Organizational Theories. Various organizational theories provide inform
ation and insight on how people behave in a team or an organization, what
motivates team members, and the like. If you have knowledge of these theories,
it will help you plan resources quickly and more effectively. By understanding
organizational theories, you can also comprehend why different organizational
structures support different kinds of relationships among the organization's
members and different kinds of responses to the same situation.
To summarize, data presentation techniques such as those in hierarchical
and text-oriented form, as well as organizational theories, are the main tools
and techniques used to develop the resource management plan. Of course,
you can seek expert judgment on relevant topics, such as obtaining the best
sources of talent management and complying with government, organizational,
and union regulations. You will also be holding meetings for the resource
management plan.


The Resource Management Plan
The results of your efforts in resource management planning--the output of
the Plan Resource Management process--consist of a resource management
plan and team charter documents, described next.


Resource Management Plan
This document describes how to identify, obtain, manage, and release the
project resources, both human and physical. It categorizes them and describes
roles and responsibilities, reporting relationships among the roles, and skills
required to complete the project activities. The following are the main
elements of this document.
Identifying and Acquiring Resources. This plan recommends the methods
and ways to identify and obtain the right team and physical resources for the
project.
Roles and Responsibilities. This component contains roles and the respo
nsibilities assigned to each role. The schedule activities will be completed
by individuals working in certain roles and performing responsibilities that
come with those roles. So, roles and responsibilities are an important part of
resource management planning. While determining roles and responsibilities,
you must be clear about the following concepts:
      *   Role. In real life, most activities are performed by
          people playing certain roles, such as a parent, a teacher,
          or a student. Similarly, in project management, a role
          is essentially a set of responsibilities, such as the res
          ponsibilities of a developer, a tester, or a manager. A role
232   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


                   is assigned to a team member, who will perform the
                   responsibilities included in the role to complete one or
                   more project activities.
              *    Responsibility. A responsibility is a piece of work (task)
                   that must be performed as part of completing a project
                   activity. Responsibilities can be grouped together as a role
                   or assigned to a role.
              *    Competency. Competency is the ability of a team
                   member to play a certain role--that is, to perform the
                   responsibilities assigned to the role. While assigning a
                   role to a team member, you should know whether the
                   team member possesses the skills required to perform
                   the responsibilities of the role. You need to respond to a
                   mismatch with training, hiring, schedule changes, or scope
                   changes.
              *    Authority. Authority is a right assigned to a role that
                   enables the person playing the role to do certain things,
                   such as to apply project resources, make certain decisions,
                   sign approvals, or accept a completed deliverable. A
                   person with authority obviously can influence the team
                   work for the project. Poorly defined or undefined
                   authorities can cause confusion and conflicts.


      Tip Roles must be clarified by specifying the responsibilities and the authorities assigned to
      each role. A good match between the levels of responsibility and authority for each team member
      generally produces the best results. This gives the team members a sense of ownership. If you own
      it, you will less likely break it.


      In a nutshell, human or team resource planning accomplishes two main things:
      it determines roles with responsibilities to perform the activities, and it guides
      how to fill those roles with team members.
      Project Organizational Charts. A project organizational chart displays
      the project team members and the reporting relationships among them. The
      level of formality and detail of these charts depend upon the size and needs
      of the project at hand.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth       233



Team Resource Management Plan. This component of the resource
management plan recommends how to manage the team resources: identify
roles, acquire the staff to fill those roles, manage resources or team, and
release the resources. After you have determined the roles to perform the
activities, you need to identify individuals to fill those roles. The team resource
management plan describes when and how human resource requirements for
a project will be met. This component of the plan can include items such as
the following:
      *    Training Needs. If some team members lack the
           adequate level of skill needed for the project, a training
           plan can be developed as part of the project. General
           approach or strategies are provided on this.
      *    Team Development. Methods of team development
           are recommended.
      *    Recognition and Rewards. Recognition and rewards
           are good tools used to promote and reinforce desired
           behavior. However, to use these tools effectively, you must
           have clear criteria for rewards based on the activities and
           performance of team members. The potential candidate
           for a reward must have an appropriate level of control
           over the activity for which the reward will be offered.
           For example, if a team member is to be rewarded for
           completing the project within the budget, the team
           member must have an adequate level of control over the
           decision-making that affected the spending.

Team Charter
The purpose of the team charter document is to record the team operating
guidelines and rules to make the team effective. To that end, it includes items
such as communicating and meeting guidelines, conflict-resolution process,
decision-making process, and team values and agreement.
To make this document more effective, you should consider the following:
      1. This document should make clear what behavior is
         expected from the team members.
      2. The ground rule should be set up very early on for the
         smooth functioning of the team.
      3. If the whole team participates in developing the team
         charter, it would be easier to implement it.
234   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


            4. The charter should be reviewed from time to time to
               ensure continued and collective understanding.
            5. It should be made available to new members right away
               as part of the team orientation.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.1

         Use your knowledge of the Plan Resource Management process to answer the
         following questions:
         Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the Plan Resource Management process.
         Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the Plan Resource Management process.
         Q3. How can the assumptions log and risk register project documents be updated as
         a result of this process?


      Implementation of the resource management plan starts with estimating the
      resource requirements for project activities.


      Estimating Activity Resources
      In the previous chapter, we estimated the activities' durations given resource
      requirements, which we cover here. The resource requirements for project
      activities are estimated using the Estimate Activity Resources process. The
      main purpose of this process is to identify and estimate the following about
      both human and physical resources needed for each project activity:
            *    Features
            *    Types
            *    Quantities
      Table 6-5 shows the Estimate Activity Resources process in terms of its input,
      tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth     235



Table 6-5. The Estimate Activity Resources Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                                Tools and Techniques       Output
1.Project Management Plan:           1.Bottom-up estimating     1.Resource
  *Resource management plan          2.Parametric estimation      requirements
  *Scope baseline: scope             3.Analogous estimation     2.Basis of estimate
   statement, WBS, WBS               4.Alternatives analysis    3.Resource breakdown
   dictionary                                                     structure
                                     5.Project management
2.Project document:                    information systems      4.Updates to project
  *Activity list                                                  documents:
                                     6.Expert judgment
  *Activity attributes                                             *Activity attributes
                                     7.Meetings
  *Resource calendars                                              *Assumptions log
  *Cost estimate                                                   *Lessons learned
                                                                    register
  *Assumptions log
  *Risk register
3.Enterprise environmental factors
4.Organizational project assets


The first step in estimating activity resources it to collect data--i.e., the
relevant information from the input items in the Estimate Activity Resources
process.


Raw Data for Estimating Activity Resource
Requirements
As a first step toward estimating resource requirements of the project at the
activity level, collect the information about resources from the input items
listed in Table 6-5.
Identification, Quantity, and Needed Resources. Collect the information
from the resource management plan on how to identify and quantify the
resources needed to do the project work. This plan also reveals how to
aggregate this information into document(s). Get high-level information about
the team of physical resources needed for the project from the project scope.
Activity-Level Resource Information. Check out the activity list to
know what activities need resources. You can derive the human and
physical resource needs of each activity from its attributes, such as resource
requirements, required start and finish dates, activity location, and assumptions
and constraints. This information is found in activity attributes.
236   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Resource Information from Resource Calendars. Get the team and
      physical information from resource calendars. From there, you can possibly
      extract the information at both the activity and attribute levels, such as type of
      resources, quantity, skill level, experience, and geographical location. Typically,
      the resource calendar also contains the following useful information:
            *    Days and times of day when a resource is available
            *    The passive time for the resource--for example, holidays
                 for human resources
            *    The quantity of each type of available resource
            *    The capability of each resource
      Cost, Risk, and Information. Cost information about the resources may
      be extracted from the assumptions log and cost estimates, and risk information
      for each resource from the risk register. This cost and risk information would
      be useful when selecting the resources by some analysis technique such as
      alternative analysis.
      You should also consider EEFs and OPAs, such as the following, which can
      influence activity resource estimation.
      Enterprise Environmental Factors. Information about the infrastructure
      of the performing organization, such as existing facilities, will be used in
      identifying the resources and their availability. In addition to market conditions
      and published estimation data, organizational culture, resource location, and
      in-house skills would be important EEFs to consider.
      Organizational Process Assets. The organizational process assets relevant
      to activity resource estimating include organizational policies for staffing and
      purchase of supplies, and historical information on what types of resources
      were used for similar activities in a previous project.
      With this information, you can estimate activity requirements and aggregate
      then into a resource breakdown structure (RBS) with the help of tools.


      Tools and Techniques for Activity Resource
      Estimating
      Depending on which aspect of resource estimation you want to explore and
      in what detail, you can use one or more of the following tools and methods.
      Analogous Estimation. This method is used for quick estimation in various
      situations, such as enough detailed activity information is not available so you
      can figure out only a couple of top levels of WBS, or there is an immediate
      need for a rough estimate before you get into making the accurate detailed
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       237



estimate. This method estimates resource requirements based on information
from similar projects performed in past.
Bottom-up Estimating. You might discover that it is rather complex to
estimate resources at the work-package level or even at the activity level. In
that case, it might be helpful in certain cases to start at the activity level and
decompose activities into even smaller components if need be for the purpose
of resource estimating, then estimate the resources for each component, and
then aggregate the resources to get an estimate for the whole activity. You can
continue this aggregation to reach the package, control account, and summary
levels of WBS. In aggregation, you must consider the possible relationships
(overlaps and such) among different components of the activity so you don't
double-count the resources.
Parametric Estimating. This method makes resource estimates from given
data using parameters. For example, it's known it took 15 days to repair one
mile of road for 10 workers, so under the same conditions it would take
20 workers to repair 2 miles of road in 15 days. The implementation of the
technique generally includes statistical methods.
Alternative Analysis. Alternative analysis is all about exploring different
solutions to a problem. In the case of estimating resource requirements, you
will need to consider alternatives available for the resources needed for some
activities. For example, you might need to decide whether you want to buy
or develop a tool needed to perform an activity, what types of machines (for
example, Windows or Linux) to use, which computer technology to use to
do the development, or what level of skill is needed. Cost information and
experience can come in handy here.
Of course, make use of expert judgment for resource planning and estimating
and for team training.
Published Estimating Data. Information published by various vendors,
such as costs for resources, can be useful in estimating the resources.
Project Management Software. Depending upon the sophistication
of the resource requirements and the capabilities of the available features,
project management software might be useful in estimating and managing the
resources. It can also be used to create resource breakdown structures.
You can use a combination of these tools and techniques to generate the
output of the resource estimating process. You should also be holding
meetings with the team and other relevant stakeholders as the need arises.
238   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Output of Activity Resource Estimating
      The resource requirements are the major output of the resource estimating
      process. These and other output items are discussed in the following list.
      Activity Resource Requirements and Basis of Estimation. The main
      purpose of the Activity Resource Estimating process is to determine the
      resource requirements for each activity, and therefore this is the major output
      item from this process. In this document, you identify the types of resources
      required to perform each activity and also the estimated required quantity of
      each identified resource. If a work package in the WBS has multiple activities,
      the resource estimates for those activities can be aggregated to the resource
      requirements for the work package; then, continue this aggregation to reach
      the control accounts and project summary levels of WBS.
      The requirement documents may also include information such as the basis
      for each estimate, including methods, assumptions made, known risks and
      constraints, and resources used to make the estimates.
      Resource Breakdown Structure. The resource breakdown structure
      (RBS) is a hierarchical structure of resource categories and types required
      to complete the activities of the project. The RBS can be used to identify and
      analyze the project team resource assignments and usage of physical resources.
      Updates to Project Documents. The identified types of required resources
      for an activity and the estimated quantity of each identified resource become
      activity attributes and must be added to the activity attributes document.
      The activity resource estimating might generate modifications to the activity
      list--for example, to add or delete an activity. Moreover, new and changed
      assumptions and constraints will update the assumptions log, and you will
      update the lessons learned register with lessons; for example, which methods
      were more efficient and effective than others in resource estimation.
      After we figure out project requirements, it's time to acquire the resources,
      both physical and human.


      Acquiring Project Resources
      Project resources, both team and physical, are obtained and selected using
      the Acquire Resources process, shown in Table 6-6 in terms of input, tools
      and techniques, and output. The project work will be executed by the project
      team, and therefore the role of the team in the success of the project is
      crucial. It is critical to acquire the right project team for your project. Roles
      and responsibilities for the roles required to complete the project are defined
      during the resource planning process, discussed earlier in this chapter. Before
      the work can start, the roles need to be assigned to real individuals, who will
      become the members of the project team.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth      239



Table 6-6. The Acquire Resources Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                        Tools and Techniques          Output
1.Project Management Plan:   1.Decision making:            1.Physical resource
  *Resource management          *Multicriteria decision      assignments
   plan                          analysis                  2.Project team assignments
  *Procurement               2.Interpersonal and team      3.Resource calendars
   management plan             skills:                     4.Project Management Plan
  *Cost baseline                *Negotiations                updates:
2.Project documents:            *Pre-assignments              *Resource management
  *Project schedule             *Virtual teams                 plan
  *Resource requirements                                      *Cost baseline
  *Resource calendars                                      5.Updates to project
                                                             documents:
  *Stakeholder register
                                                              *Project schedule
3.Enterprise environmental
  factors                                                     *RBS
4.Organizational project                                      *Resource requirements
  assets                                                      *Stakeholder register
                                                              *Risk register
                                                              *Lessons learned register
                                                           6.Enterprise environmental
                                                             factors
                                                           7.Organizational project
                                                             assets



Selecting and Assigning Resources
The goal and output of the Acquire Resources process is resource
assignments. You just don't want to assign any resources to your project,
but only the best available. So, selecting the right resources is a crucial part
of this process. In the following, we explain in the form of steps how to
perform this process:
        1. How? Questions. Get general information about how
           to acquire resources from the resource management
           plan, and what resources will be procured and how to
           integrate them with the project and its stakeholders from
           the procure management plan.
240   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


           2. Resources Needs. Fetch information about the project
              resources that need to be obtained from the resources
              requirements document, and also from the stakeholder
              register, where you may find stakeholders' requirements
              or expectations about the use of specific resources; for
              example, they want to use Apple computers instead of
              Windows.
           3. Resources Use Time. Obtain information from the
              project schedule about when a given kind of resource is
              available; for example, ten software engineers are needed
              for the months of March and April.
           4. Resources Availability. In light of the information from
              steps 2 and 3, look into resource calendars to find out
              what resources are already available in what time slots.
           5. Select and Acquire Resources. Select and obtain
              the needed resources that are not currently available by
              using the techniques listed in Table 6-6. While selecting
              resources, cost information from the cost baseline will be
              useful.
           6. Resource Assignments. After having selected and
              obtained team and physical resources, assign them to
              the project and record these assignments into the team
              resource assignments and physical resource assignments
              documents, respectively. Of course, these assignment
              records will contain the appropriate details, such as name,
              time, and role and responsibilities that come with the
              roles. These two documents make up the output of this
              process.
           7. Create or Update Resource Calendars. Log the
              assignment information into the resource calendars,
              another output of this process. Create them if they do
              not already exist.
           8. Create Change Requests. During the performance of
              this process, the need for a corrective action or some
              other change might be felt. For example, you find out that
              a new assignment is needed and as a result changes to the
              project schedule and cost baseline will need to be made.
              In such cases, you will create change requests that would
              be processed through the pro forma Integrated Change
              Control process.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth           241



        9. Make updates to documents, such as those listed in the
           output column of Table 6-5, that may be needed as a
           result of performing this process.
In this section, we have discussed how to yield the output of this process,
starting from the input, by using certain tools and techniques, which will be
discussed next.


Caution! Resource calendars are created as an output item of the Acquire Resources process
and evolve in a progressive elaboration manner throughout the project as the process is iterated.
This output is also used as an input to this process.



Tools and Techniques for Acquiring and Selecting
Project Resources
In this section, we will discuss some techniques to select and acquire the
project resources, starting with pre-assignments.
Pre-assignments. At this stage of the project, there will likely be some team
and physical resources already assigned to the project. This can happen, for
example, in the following situations:
        *    A team member was promised an assignment as part
             of a specific proposal. Acceptance of this proposal
             automatically affirms that staff-member assignment.
        *    There is only one person in the organization who has the
             expertise to perform a specific activity.
        *    Team members were already involved in the project,
             taking part in developing the project charter and other
             processes, before the development of the resource
             management plan.
Decision-making Techniques. These techniques are used to select suitable
resources that can be efficiently and effectively used to perform the project
work. For example, in the multicriteria selection method, different resource
options are compared and scored based on several given criteria, and the
resource with the best score is selected. In a score scheme you can weight
different criteria depending upon their importance. The criteria and their
relative importance partially depend on the project. The general examples
include cost; timely availability; good fit with the team; right knowledge, skill,
experience, and attitude; and ability to efficiently and effectively perform the
assignment.
242   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Interpersonal and Team Skills: Negotiations. While not the only one, a
      very important interpersonal skill that you will be using to acquire resources
      is negotiations.The project manager and the project management team should
      effectively negotiate and exert influence in a positive way to obtain the best
      possible team to complete the project work.The failure to acquire an effective
      team can result in missed deadlines, cost overruns, poor quality, and eventually
      a failed project.You will most likely need to negotiate with functional managers
      for the staff assignments for your project. In these negotiations, you have a
      two-prong goal--to obtain the best available person for an activity and to
      obtain the person for the required timeframe.


      Tip While negotiating with a functional manager, sometimes it's important to understand
      the functional manager's perspective in light of the politics of the organization and to be able to
      influence the manager in that context. For example, a functional manager will weigh the benefits
      (for example, visibility of your project compared to that of competing projects) in determining
      where to assign the best performers. In this case, it is to your advantage to explain the importance
      of your project and the activity for which you are requesting the best performer.


      You may also be negotiating with project management teams of other projects
      who might be competing for or sharing resources, physical or human, from the
      same resource pool. Negotiation skills will also be used to communicate with
      external organizations to hire or contract team members.
      Virtual Teams. Welcome to the Information Age, triggered by the Internet.
      The process of working for an organization from outside its physical location
      was initially called telecommuting, and now also e-commuting. Today, we have
      the Internet, along with related and other technological advances, such as tele-,
      video-, and web conferencing, smartphones, websites, and web-supported
      e-mails and social media. This makes it possible to e-commute from virtually
      any place on the globe for any organization. Teams composed of e-commuters
      are called virtual teams because the team works together on the same project
      with little or no face-to-face interaction or meetings. It is not difficult to find
      people who have been or are working on virtual teams and have never seen
      the other team members face-to-face. I have and still am working with several
      such teams, and I'm sure you either have or you will in the near future. The
      virtual-team format expands the team definition to offer benefits such as the
      following:
              *    People working for the same organization but living in
                   different locations can join the same team.
              *    A needed expert can join a team even if the expert does
                   not live in the same location as the rest of the team.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   243



      *    The organization has the option to accommodate
           employees who can only work from their home offices
           for certain periods of time.
      *    Due to the availability of asynchronous communication
           means, such as e-mail, online bulletin boards, and social
           media, it is possible to form a team of members who have
           different work hours or shifts.
      *    Virtual teams eliminate or reduce the need to travel
           by using means of communication that are abundantly
           available, such as e-mail, video conferencing, and the
           Internet.
      *    This enables organizations to perform projects that
           were previously impossible due to the anticipated travel
           expenses.
Note that because virtual team members are not at the same location and
do not have regular face-to-face meetings, effective communication is that
much more important for the success of the project being performed by the
virtual team. Therefore, communication management is crucial to the success
of virtual teams.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.2

   Use your knowledge of the Acquire Resources process to answer the following
   questions:
   Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the process of acquiring resources.
   Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the process of acquiring resources.
   Q3. How are the documents listed for update in the output column of Table 6-6
   updated?


The team you are going to acquire could be a team at one location or a
virtual team, and a team member might be from your organization or from
outside your organization. In other words, you hire the individuals, but you
need a team to complete the project successfully. Virtual or non-virtual, once
initiated, a team needs to be continually developed.
244   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Developing the Project Team
      Your project team can consist of members from different departments and
      disciplines, regular employees and contractors, and experts from different
      disciplines. Some of these individuals might not have much appreciation for
      others' disciplines. You have the challenge to develop this diverse group
      into a cohesive and efficient team that will perform the project on time,
      within budget, and with quality. The single goal of team development is to
      maximize project performance. This is accomplished by introducing three
      elements:
              1. Improve the competencies of team members.
              2. Improve the interaction among team members.
              3. Improve the overall team environment.
      This will help you develop a cohesive and competent team to meet the project
      objectives effectively.


      Tip Each team member should be the owner of the piece of work assigned to them, and hence
      be fully responsible for it. That said, teamwork and team spirit is a critical factor for the project's
      success. It's the responsibility of the project manager to create an environment that supports
      teamwork and team spirit.


      Table 6-7 shows the Develop Team process, used to develop the project team,
      in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output. As usual, we start with
      the initial information provided by the input. The resource management plan
      guides how to develop the project team by providing useful information on
      team development-related matters such as the following:
              *     Feedback and training strategies
              *     Using results of performance assessments
              *     Disciplinary action
              *     Recognition and rewards systems
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth    245



Table 6-7. The Develop Team Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques         Output
1.Project Management Plan:    1.Co-location                1.Team performance
  *Resource management        2.Virtual teams                assessment
   plan                       3.Communication              2.Change requests
2.Project documents:            technology                 3.Project Management Plan
  *Project schedule           4.Meetings                     updates:
  *Project team               5.Interpersonal and team       *Resource management
   assignments                  skills:                       plan
  *Team charter                 *Influencing               4.Updates to project
                                                             documents:
  *Resource calendars           *Conflict management
                                                             *Project schedule
  *Lessons learned register     *Motivation
                                                             *Project team
3.Enterprise environmental      *Negotiations
                                                              assignments
  factors                       *Team building
                                                             *Resource calendars
4.Organizational project      6.Individual assessments
  assets                                                     *Team charter
                              7.Training
                                                             *Lessons learned
                              8.Recognition and               register
                                rewards
                                                           5.Enterprise environmental
                                                             factors
                                                           6.Organizational project
                                                             assets


Obviously, team development starts with team members and information
about them and the staff assignments made during the Acquire Resources
process. The project team assignments, project schedule, and resource calendars
documents will reveal their names, assignments, roles, responsibilities, time
they are available for trainings, and maybe much more. Team values, operating
guidelines, and rules are given in the team charter document developed during
the Plan Resource Management process. With this information on hand, you
can start team development, which is an iterative process repeated throughout
the project lifecycle. In the repetition of this process, you can make use of the
lessons learned in team development so far, which are recorded in the lessons
learned register.
You can use some standard tools and techniques, listed in Table 6-7, to develop
a winning team.
246   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Tools and Techniques for Project
      A very important management technique is to establish clear expectations
      at the very beginning of a project. The expectations can be established by
      implementing a set of ground rules. Early commitment to these guidelines
      will increase cooperation and productivity by decreasing misunderstandings.
      Once the rules are clearly established, all team members are responsible for
      enforcing them. These ground rules are part of the team charter document.
      Other techniques are discussed in the following sections.
      Co-location and Virtual Team. This technique keeps all (or most) of the
      project team members in the same physical location to improve communication
      and to create a sense of community among the team members. In this age of
      virtual teams, however, this is increasingly not a popular technique, but when
      most of the team members are in the same location, this technique is a default
      choice. It can include a war room, which is a meeting room used for regular
      face-to-face meetings. Also, even when the project is being executed by a
      virtual team, the co-location technique can be used to put together some
      team members at crucial times of the project. Some virtual teams co-locate
      for a specific period during the project.
      In the case of virtual team development, the role of communication
      technologies becomes that much more important.
      Communication Technologies. There are abundant synchronized and
      asynchronized communication methods--online or offline--available, which
      can be used for team development and other project tasks. The following are
      some examples of the kinds of methods available:
              *    Smartphone, e-mails, web chat, web podcast, and seminars
              *    Audio and video conferences
              *    Shared web portals, discussion groups, and bulletin boards
              *    Social media site to set up groups
      We will explore communication further in an upcoming chapter on
      communication management.


      Note Synchronized communication is when all the communicating parties are present at the
      same time--e.g.; phone calls, meetings, and conferences--while asynchronized communication is
      where all the communicating parties do not have to be present at the same time--e-mail, website,
      and online courses. The Internet, in general, is designed to support asynchronized communication.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth   247



Interpersonal and General Management Skills. General management
skills, especially interpersonal skills, are necessary to develop an effective
team. You and the project management team can minimize problems and
maximize cooperation by understanding the sentiments of each team member,
anticipating their actions, acknowledging their concerns, and following up on
their issues. To accomplish this, the following interpersonal management skills
are necessary:
      *   Effective Communication. This is needed to facilitate
          the smooth flow of necessary information among the
          team members.
      *   Ability to Influence. This is generally needed to get
          things done. In team development, it will be helpful
          throughout, from collecting information, to meetings, to
          getting consent, to resolving conflict.
      *   Leadership. This is needed for developing a vision and
          strategy and for motivating people to achieve that vision.
          During times of possible uncertainty, such as when there
          are changes in upper management, you should clarify the
          situation and help the team stay focused on the project.
      *   Motivation. This is needed for energizing team members
          to achieve high levels of performance and to overcome
          barriers to change. Motivation is invoked by a given reason
          to act. For example, you can motive team members by
          letting them own their assignments, letting then participate
          in decision making, giving credit and reward, and motivating
          the team by explaining how they are making a difference
          by performing this important project. Especially during
          times when the team is in a low-morale mode, you should
          be able to lift the team morale and thereby contribute to
          team development.
      *   Negotiation and Conflict Management. This is needed
          to work with the team members to resolve their conflicts
          and facilitate negotiations when necessary to resolve conflicts
          or make task assignments. Depending on the nature of the
          conflict, you can take it as a team development opportunity.
          An effective resolution to a conflict contributes to team
          building.
      *   Problem Solving. This ability is needed to define,
          analyze, and solve problems.
Most of these skills are discussed in more detail in Chapter 2. Team management
is further discussed later in this chapter.
248   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management



      Note Interpersonal skills are also called soft skills, as opposed to hard skills, which refer to
      technical skills and capabilities.


      Team-building Activities. In general, team building involves activities
      that encourage team members to get to know each other and create a
      collaborative, cooperative, and supportive team and work environment. Team-
      building activities can range from indirect team-building activities, such as
      participating in constructing the WBS, to direct team-building activities, such
      as social gatherings where the team members can get to know each other and
      start feeling comfortable with each other. While planning such activities, you
      should keep in mind that the team members might have different interests and
      different levels of tolerance for games and icebreakers. Although team building
      is an ongoing process, it's crucial in the beginning. It should start as soon as
      possible. For example, the project kickoff meeting is an indirect method to
      start team development. This can be used as a formal way to introduce team
      members and other stakeholders and spell out the project goals for everyone
      at the same time. An ideal kickoff meeting is a combination of serious business
      and fun. The goal is to align the team with the project goals and to help the
      team members feel comfortable with each other.
      In planning the kickoff meeting, you can assume that team members have the
      following questions in their heads that need to be answered before the end
      of the meeting:
             *     Why am I here?
             *     Who are you, and what are your expectations of me?
             *     What is this team going to do?
             *     How is the team going to do its work?
             *     How do I fit into all this?
      Consider the following steps to make your kickoff meeting successful:
             *     Agenda. Putting the meeting agenda in the hands of
                   the team members always helps the meeting run more
                   smoothly and effectively and keeps it on track.
             *     Welcome. Take immediate charge of the meeting by
                   introducing yourself and welcoming the participants.
                   Quickly walk through the agenda and set the stage for
                   the rest of the meeting.
             *     Project Overview. Define the project, its goals, and its
                   deliverables. Introduce the project team members and
                   briefly describe their roles. The goal is to provide a big
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth   249



            picture and to help individual team members figure out
            how they fit into it.
       *    Expectations. Many of the project team members
            might not already know you and your management style.
            You should take this opportunity to set expectations
            about how the team will function. For example, state that
            you expect all team members to attend the weekly status
            meetings. Remind the team to focus on the project goal,
            to do their part, and to look out for one another in a
            team spirit.
       *    Guest Speakers. Depending upon the size and visibility
            of the project, you might also invite relevant guest
            speakers, such as the project sponsor, the customer, or an
            executive stakeholder. Before the meeting, spend some
            time communicating with the guest speaker about the
            message to deliver.
       *    Closure. Ask for feedback and hold a question-and-
            answer session before closing the meeting.
Remember that the main purpose of the kickoff meeting is to bring every
team member onto the same page regarding the big picture of the project.
Don't get bogged down discussing every item in detail.
You should know that team development is not an instant process. Generally
speaking, when you form a team it goes through five stages of development
(according to the Tuckman model), as shown in Figure 6-3 and explained in
the following list.




Figure 6-3. The five progressive stages of team development in the Tuckman model
250   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


            *   Forming. This is the orientation stage, with high depen
                dence on the leader (the project manager, in this case) for
                guidance and direction. Individual roles and responsibilities
                are unclear, and there is little agreement on the team goals
                other than those received from the leader. Processes are
                often ignored, and the team members test the tolerance
                of the system and the leader. It's time to establish the
                ground rules and clarify expectations. The leader directs
                in this stage.
            *   Storming. This stage represents the struggle for
                control and power as team members work to establish
                themselves relative to other team members. The clarity
                of team goals increases, but some uncertainties persist.
                Compromises might be required to make progress.
                Coaching and training can play effective roles during this
                stage.
            *   Norming. This is the routine stage during which consensus
                and agreement about team goals generally prevails among
                the team members. Roles and responsibilities are clear
                and accepted by the team members. Major decisions are
                made by group agreements, and smaller decisions can be
                delegated to the appropriate team members. During this
                stage, the leader facilitates.
            *   Performing. This is the productivity stage in which the
                team knows what it's doing and why.The team is functioning
                in a cohesive mode and working toward the common
                goal in a more autonomous fashion. Disagreements
                might arise, but they are resolved within the team in a
                constructive way. During this stage, the leader delegates
                and oversees.
            *   Adjourning. This is the closure stage. When the
                mission for which the team was formed is accomplished
                (or cancelled), the team is adjourned to free the team
                members to move on to other things.
      Being aware of these stages of team development will help you better
      understand the behaviors of the team members and thereby develop your
      team more effectively.
      Training. The goal of training is to improve the competencies of the project
      team members, which in turn helps in meeting the project objectives. It might
      be aimed at individual members or at the team as a whole, depending upon
      the needs. The training might be scheduled, or it might be less formal--e.g.; it
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth        251



might result from on-the-job observations and conversations. The following
are examples of some other training methods:
      *    Coaching
      *    Mentoring
      *    On-the-job training of a team member by another team
           member
      *    Online training
      *    Instructor-led classroom training
Observation and conversation. Although not listed separately in the
PMBOK for this process, observations and conversations are both means to
stay in touch with the work and attitudes of the project team members. The
indicators to monitor these include the following:
      *    Progress toward completion of assigned activities and
           therefore project deliverables.
      *    Distinguished accomplishments contributing to the
           project performance.
      *    Interpersonal issues.
Individual and Team Assessments. In order to continually develop the
team, it's important to know and track the areas of strengths and weaknesses
of the team and its members. You want to assess the team members individually
and collectively; for example:
      1. What are their preferences, and what inspires them?
      2. How do they interact with other people?
      3. How do they process information?
Various tools are available to accomplish this, including focus groups, interviews,
ability tests, surveys, and online tests designed for this purpose.
Recognition and Rewards. Generally speaking, people feel motivated if they
feel that their contributions and efforts are recognized and valued. Offering
rewards is an effective method to express the recognition. The recognition
and rewards strategy set up during the resource planning process can be used
to develop the project team. Remember the following rules when setting up
a fair reward system:
      *    Only desirable behavior should be rewarded.
      *    Any member should be able to win the reward.
      *    Win-lose rewards, such as team member of the month,
           can hurt team cohesiveness.
252   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


             *   It's important to consider the value of the particular
                 award from the awardee's perspective.
             *   The cultural diversity of the team should be considered
                 and respected.

      Output of Team Development Process
      The major output of the Develop Project Team process is the team performance
      assessment document. This and other outputs are explained next.
      Team Performance Assessment. The effects of the team development
      efforts are measured by the individual and team performance assessments
      and recorded into the team performance assessment document. It contains
      information that includes the following:
             *   Improvement in individual skills that enables a team
                 member to perform project activities more efficiently
             *   Improvement in team skills that helps the team improve
                 overall performance and work more effectively as a group
             *   Increased team spirit or cohesiveness: team members
                 interact in constructive ways and help each other meet
                 the project objectives
             *   Reduced staff turnover rate
      Change Requests and Document Updates. As a result of the develop team
      process, changes may arise. So, change requests must be generated and processed
      through the Integrated Change Control process, as usual. Approved changes are
      implemented, and corresponding documents are updated. The obvious documents
      that might get updates are listed in the output column of Table 6-7. Knowing the
      process, the reasons for their updates should be trivial to figure out. For example,
      based on the team development experience of which methods work better than
      others, changes could be made to the relevant part of the resource management
      plan, and the lessons learned register should be updated accordingly. Similarly, team
      development could cause changes to assignments and the schedule, and so on.
      While you are developing the team, you also need to perform a related task,
      which is managing the project team.

      Managing the Project Team
      You manage the project team by using the Manage Team process, which is
      aimed at improving and optimizing the project performance by executing the
      following tasks:
             *   Resolving issues and conflicts
             *   Coordinating changes
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth           253



        *    Tracking the performance of each team member and of
             the team as whole
        *    Providing feedback to team members individually and to
             team as a whole


Tip Managing the project team involves activities ranging from hiring to firing and from
providing feedback to optimizing the project performance, and therefore requires a wide spectrum
of management skills, including communication, conflict management, negotiation, and leadership.
On one hand, you should provide challenging assignments, and on the other hand you should
recognize and reward high performance.


Table 6-8 presents the Manage Team process in terms of input, tools and
techniques, and output.

Table 6-8. The Manage Team Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                               Tools and Techniques         Output
1.Project Management Plan:          1.Interpersonal and team     1.Change requests
   *Resource management plan          skills:                    2.Plan updates:
2.Project documents:                   *Influencing                 *Resource
   *Project team assignments           *Leadership                   management Plan
   *Team charter                       *Conflict management         *Schedule baseline
   *Issues log                         *Emotional intelligence      *Cost baseline
   *Lessons learned register           *Decision making          3.Updates to project
                                    2.Project management           documents:
3.Team performance
  assessments                         information systems           *Project team
                                                                     assignments
4.Work performance reports
                                                                    *Issues log
5.Enterprise environmental
  factors                                                           *Lessons learned
                                                                     register
6.Organizational project assets
                                                                 4.Enterprise
                                                                 environmental factors


You perform this process by getting information about the team, some means
to manage it from the input items listed in Table 6-8, and then manage it using
the tools and techniques also listed in that table.
254   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Getting Information About the Team
      and Means for Managing It
      The main input items to managing the project team come from the output
      of the Plan Resource Management, Acquire Resources, and Develop Team
      processes. You extract the needed information from them as shown next.


      How to Manage the Team?
       You can get general guidance on how to manage the team, including releasing
      the team at the end of the project, from the resource management plan.


      Knowing the Team.
      To manage the team, you want to know who composes the team, what the
      team is doing, and how (well) it is doing. This information can be extracted
      from the following documents.
      Project Team Assignments. Obviously, you should know who your
      team members are and what they are supposed to be doing: their roles and
      responsibilities. Project team assignments, an output of the Acquire Resources
      process, contains this information.
      Assessment and Performance Information. The following items will
      yield this information:
            *   Team Performance Assessment. This is the output
                of the Develop Team process discussed earlier in this
                chapter. Performance assessment provides important
                information that can be used in managing a team member
                and in managing the team. This assessment helps you to
                understand a team member and identify and address issues.
                Some examples are the need to resolve conflicts, the
                need for training, and the need to modify communication.
            *   Performance Reports. Performance reports compare
                the progress of the project against the baseline data,
                such as the schedule baseline, the cost baseline, and the
                quality baseline. They basically reflect how the team is
                doing to achieve the project objectives. The information
                from the performance reports helps determine
                future team requirements, such as the need for more
                members, updates to the resource management plan, and
                recognitions and rewards. It may also reveal the need for
                training or a change of assignments.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      255



Means to Facilitate Team Management. The following input documents
or the information in them serve as a means to facilitate team management:
      *   Team Charter. An output of the Plan Resource Mana
          gement process, the team charter document contains
          information about team values, operating guidelines, and
          ground rules. These values and rules help and facilitate
          team management by guiding how to make decisions and
          resolve issues and conflicts. This further facilitates team
          management if the team took part in developing the team
          charter and agreed to it.
      *   Issues Log and Lessons Learned Register. The
          issues log can be used to facilitate a team-related issue
          resolution by logging in the issue information, including
          resolution target date. Issues generally involve obstacles
          that can stop the project team from achieving the
          project objectives. A written log should be maintained
          that contains the list of team members responsible for
          resolving the issues by target dates. The purpose of the
          issues log is to monitor issues until they are closed.
          The lessons learned register can facilitate team man-
          agement in the sense that you can use it to record the
          ongoing lessons learned in managing the team so as to
          subsequently use them to improve the efficiency and
          effectiveness of team management.
      *   Enterprise Environmental Factors and Organ
          izational Process Assets. The project management
          team can use the following EEFs and OPAs in managing
          the project team:
          *    Enterprise environmental factors that should be
               available to the project management team for
               use in managing the team include bulletin boards,
               newsletters, and internal websites for information
               sharing.
          *    The OPAs that can influence team management
               include the organization's policies, procedures, and
               system for rewarding team members. Certificates
               of appreciation, recognition dinners, and bonus
               structures are some examples.
To manage the team effectively, you should be aware of the tools and techniques
that can be used for that.
256   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Tools and Techniques for Managing the Project Team
      Interpersonal skills used to manage the team include leadership skills, one of
      three skill types in the project manager's talent triangle (covered in Chapter 2);
      influencing (also covered in Chapter 2 in much detail); decision making
      (covered a few times in different situations so far); conflict management; and
      emotional intelligence.
      Influencing. Influencing means getting individuals or groups to do what you
      want them to do without necessarily having formal authority to mandate an
      outcome from them. It is quite important, as under many formal and informal
      organizational structures, project managers have no or very little practical
      authority. So, in that case, to get work done, your only option is to use
      influencing skills, such as collecting all information about the given issue or
      situation; understanding all different perspectives on it; listening actively and
      effectively; clearly explaining your points and perspective while demonstrating
      consideration and understanding for the other perspective; having the ability
      to pursue resolution; and reaching an agreement without damaging the
      ongoing working relationship.
      Decision Making. In managing the team, you will be dealing with the team
      and the organization, making decisions based on the options or choices
      available. However, first you need to create the choices by using your skills
      of negotiation and influence on the organization and the team, as well as by
      stimulating a creative environment within your team. For that, you should
      always do your homework. Collect all relevant information, including the
      relevant environmental factors about the issue at hand, and analyze this
      information. In your analysis, don't forget to include the risk factors. After
      creating choices and analyzing, you can make decisions while following the
      rules in the team charter.
      Emotional Intelligence. Emotional Intelligence, in general, is the ability to
      sense and manage one's own and other people's emotions, where manage
      means understand the emotions, their impact, and controlling the impulse to
      adapt in order to change the situation. You and your team can use emotional
      intelligence to reduce the tension among team members so as to create an
      environment of collaboration by anticipating and understanding each others'
      reactions and emotions. You can also use relationship management, a part of
      emotional intelligence that guides how to influence, inspire, and develop the
      team while resolving conflict.
      Conflict Management. The purpose of conflict management is to nourish
      the positive working relationships among team members that result in
      increased productivity. The common sources for conflicts include the following:
            *    Scarce resources resulting in unsatisfied needs
            *    Scheduling priorities
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           257



        *    Personal work styles
        *    Perceptions, values, feelings, and emotions
        *    Power struggles
You can reduce the number of conflicts by setting ground rules, clearly defining
roles and goals, and implementing solid project management practices. In this,
the team charter is important.


Tip Differences of opinion should not be considered sources of conflict. If managed properly,
differences can be very healthy and can lead to better solutions, thereby increasing productivity if
managed appropriately.


Initially, the project team members who are parties to a conflict should be
given the opportunity to resolve it themselves. If the team members fail to
resolve the conflict and it becomes a negative factor for the project, you, the
project manager, should facilitate the conflict resolution, usually in private and
using a direct and collaborative approach. If the conflict continues, you might
have no option other than to use formal procedures, such as disciplinary
action.
Different project managers use different styles or methods in different
situations. The choice of the conflict-resolution style or technique may be
influenced by the following factors:
        *    Does the conflict need to be resolved for the long term,
             or is a short-term resolution fine?
        *    The intensity of the conflict and the relative importance
             of resolution in context of the project
        *    Urgency of resolving the conflict
        *    Positions taken by the parties involved in the conflict
The first step in conflict management is analyzing the nature and type of the
conflict, which might involve asking questions. You can meet with (interview)
the parties involved in the conflict. The next step is to determine the
management strategy. Different management strategies are summarized here:
        *    Avoidance. In this strategy, at least one party to the
             conflict ignores (or withdraws) from the conflict and
             decides not to deal with the problem. This strategy can
             be used by the project manager as a cooling-off period, to
             collect more information, or when the issue is not critical.
             However, if the issue is critical, this is the worst resolution
258   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


               strategy and can give rise to lose-lose situations if both
               parties withdraw or yield-lose situations if one party
               withdraws. This strategy is also called withdrawal strategy.
           *   Direct. In this approach, also called force, one party uses
               any available means to get its way, often at the expense
               of the other party. This is a win-lose situation. It can be
               justified in some situations, such as when the basic rights
               of a party in conflict are at stake or when you want to
               set a precedent. However, if used unfairly from a power
               position (such as if it is a management style), it can be
               destructive for team development. This strategy can
               cause the conflict to escalate, and the losing party might
               attempt to retaliate. When used by a party in power,
               competition is also called forcing.
           *   Compromising. In this strategy, also called reconcile,
               both parties gain something and give up something.
               This is a lose-win-lose-win strategy. You can use this
               strategy to achieve temporary solutions and to avoid a
               damaging power struggle when there is time pressure.
               The downside of this approach is that both parties can
               look at the solution as a lose-lose situation and can be
               distracted from the merits of the issues involved. In this
               way, this short-term solution can hurt the long-term
               objectives of the project.
           *   Accommodation. This strategy, also called smoothing,
               is the opposite of the competition strategy. One party
               attempts to meet the other party's needs at the expense
               of their own. This might be a justifiable strategy when the
               concerns of the accommodating party are less significant
               than the concerns of the other party in the context of
               the project. Sometimes it's used as a goodwill gesture.
               However, it is a lose-win approach (the accommodating
               party loses and the accommodated party wins), and the
               accommodating party runs the risk of losing credibility
               and influence in the future. However, this strategy,
               when applied carefully, and if both parties become
               accommodating, meeting in the areas of agreement, can
               turn into a win-win situation. This is why this technique
               is also called smoothing.
           *   Collaboration. This strategy, also called problem solving,
               is based on reaching consensus among the parties in the
               conflict. Both parties work together to explore several
               solutions and agree on the one that satisfies the needs and
               concerns of both parties. This is a win-win strategy and is
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth           259



             generally considered the best of all the strategies because it
             helps build commitment and promotes goodwill between the
             parties involved. A form of collaboration is called confronting.
             You confront the problem causing the conflict head-on and
             then solve that problem through an open dialogue and by
             examining several alternatives. This is problem solving.


Tip You should always look for how the different processes overlap and interact with each
other. For example, conflict management is a technique for managing the team. However, the
purpose of conflict management is to nourish the positive working relationships among the team
members that result in increased productivity, so resolving a conflict can also be looked upon as a
team development activity.


As mentioned earlier, leadership skills are covered in Chapter 2, and you
should already be familiar with project management information systems by
now and here you can use it for managing the team, as it contains the schedule,
calendar, and other management tools.

                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.3

    Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a conflict-resolution
    strategy. Match each comment with the corresponding strategy in the second column.

Comment                                          Conflict-Resolution Technique
A.Let's have a face-to-face meeting and hear 1.Avoidance/withdrawal
  out both parties.
B.Both of you have to meet halfway; you          2.Competition/forcing
  can't get everything all the time.
C.I'm the one who is running the show            3.Compromising/smoothing
  here, and I have made the decision.
D.OK, I see your point now. I was thinking       4.Accommodation
  more at personal level, but your view
  is more compatible with the project's
  objectives. I guess for that reason I can
  live with your approach.
E.You guys are not even listening to my          5.Collaboration
  argument. I feel I'm wasting my time. So,
  I'm not going to discuss it with you any
  longer.
F.Let's sit down, talk it out, and design the    6.Confronting/problem solving
  best solution that is good for all parties.
260   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management



      Caution! Not only can you earn quite a few points on the PMP exam, but you can also be a
      very effective project manager if you realize this: confront the problem or the issue head-on, but do
      your homework (investigate, research, or analyze) before taking action.


      While you are managing the team using these techniques, you might
      recommend some actions as an output of the Manage Team process.


      Output of Managing the Project Team
      The output from managing the project team includes change requests--e.g.;
      from recommended corrective and preventive actions--and updates to
      organizational process assets and the project management plan.
      Change Requests. You or the Manage Team process might generate
      recommendations for corrective and preventive actions, as well as other
      changes, as discussed here:
              *    Recommended Corrective Actions. A corrective
                   action is a direction for executing the project work to
                   bring the future performance in line with what is expected
                   in the project management plan. The corrective actions
                   recommended during project team management might
                   include the following:
                   *     Staffing changes, such as changing assignments
                         of team members, replacing team members (for
                         example, the ones who leave), and outsourcing some
                         work
                   *     Training for the team or for individual team
                         members
                   *     Recognition and rewards based on the reward
                         system
                   *     Disciplinary actions
              *    Recommended Preventive Actions. A preventive
                   action is a direction to perform an activity to stop or
                   reduce the probability of an anticipated event occurrence
                   generally associated with a project risk. Preventive action
                   can also be taken to reduce the anticipated impact of
                   an event in case it happens. The preventive actions
                   recommended during project team management might
                   include the following:
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth   261



          *   Cross-training so that in the absence of a team
              member another team member can take over the
              assignment
          *   Role clarifications to ensure that all the
              responsibilities associated with the role are
              performed
          *   Planning for overtime in anticipation of extra work
              that might be needed to meet project deadlines
Other Change Requests and Updates. The team management activities
can generate some change requests for the project management plan. For
example, staffing changes can generate requests for extending the schedule,
increasing the budget, or reducing the scope. The change requests should be
processed through the Integrated Change Control process. Approved and
implemented changes will trigger changes to the resource management plan,
schedule baseline, and cost baseline. Of course, due to arising issues, change
in assignments, and lessons learned in the course of team management, there
will be a need to update the issues log, project team assignments, and lessons
learned register.
Updates to Organizational Process Assets. Several kinds of organizational
process assets can be updated as a result of project team management. Here
are some examples:
      *   Input to Organizational Performance Appraisals.
          The project team member's project work performance
          and interaction with other project team member is
          a significant way to offer input to the organizational
          performance appraisal for that team member.
      *   Templates and organization's standard processes
      *   Lessons-learned Database. The lessons learned
          database should be updated with the lessons learned
          during team management, which can come from different
          areas that include the following:
          *   Issues and solutions in the issues log
          *   Special skills and competencies discovered during
              the project work for the team members
          *   Successful and unsuccessful ground rules, conflict
              management techniques, and recognition events
262   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management



      Tip Managing the project team is a complex task when the team members are accountable to
      both the project manager and the functional managers. Effectively managing this dual relationship
      is critical to the success of the project and is therefore generally the responsibility of the project
      manager.


      Interpersonal skills and an understanding of organizational theories is very
      important in managing human resources. Motivation is the key factor.


      Motivating Your Team
      Because you have come so far in studying this book, I must say you are
      motivated to take the CAPM exam, learn about project management, or
      both. So, what is motivation? Motivation is an internal drive to meet a set of
      objectives. Internal drive is a state of unrest inside of you. This is how it goes.
      A need is a deficiency, an absence of something, a hole. Out of need arises the
      desire to fulfill the need. This desire or want represents dissatisfaction, which
      creates a state of unrest. This unrest is the drive. When drive is directed
      at a call for action to meet those objectives that will satisfy the need, it
      becomes motivation. In a nutshell, the need acts as a catalyst, like an enzyme
      in a biochemical reaction, that sets you on a journey toward meeting a set of
      objectives that will satisfy the need.
      If you want to get optimal results from your computers, you network them
      appropriately and execute appropriate software programs on appropriate
      drives in the network. If you want to achieve optimal results from your team,
      you create the appropriate drives in the team members that will execute
      actions to meet project objectives; in other words, you motivate them.
      This is how important motivation is: motivation to do some task plus the
      ability to do that task is equal to performance. So, a lack of motivation means
      poor performance. In a project, motivation begins with you, the project
      manager. You must be motivated for the project and to motivate the project
      team members. It's always a good idea to have some formal knowledge of
      something that you are going to go through. So, here are some theories of
      motivation.
      Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Theory. According to this theory, people
      have layers of needs, as illustrated in Figure 6-4, and until the lower-layer needs
      are satisfied, they will not move to satisfy the upper-layer needs. For example,
      if you are unemployed and broke and as a result your very survival is in danger,
      you don't care about buying health insurance, life insurance, or dating.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth        263




Figure 6-4. Illustration of Maslow's theory of hierarchy of needs (Based on Motivation and
Personality, Abraham Maslow, 1970, Harper and Row)

Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory. This theory classifies the
factors needed to motivate people into two categories: hygiene factors and
motivating factors. Hygiene factors are necessary for motivation but not
sufficient; they do not bring satisfaction, but they prevent dissatisfaction.
Some examples are compensation; company policies; level of supervision or
ownership of the assigned work; relationship with superiors, subordinates, and
peers; and working conditions. Motivating factors are the factors that bring
(or increase) job satisfaction. Some examples are challenging work assignment,
opportunity for career advancement and accomplishments, opportunity for
growth, sense of responsibility, and recognition.


Caution! Hygiene factors are related to the work environment, whereas motivating factors
(also called motivators) are related to the work itself.
264   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory. According to this
      theory, the following three needs motivate people:
            *   Achievement. This is the need to perform well, achieve
                success, and get recognized for it. The key idea here is the
                drive to excel.
            *   Affiliation. This is the need or desire for good relation
                ships at work. You want to feel connected at work.
            *   Power. This is the desire to move things, to influence
                people or events. The key term here is world dominance
                or making a difference.
      McGregor's X-Y Theory. According to McGregor, there are the following
      two types of managers:
            *   Theory X Managers. These managers believe that
                most people (and hence workers) are self-centered and
                are only motivated by their physiological and safety needs,
                and are indifferent to the needs of the organization they
                work for. They (workers) lack ambition and have very
                little creativity and problem-solving capacity. As a result,
                they dislike their work and will try to avoid it. They will
                also avoid taking responsibility and initiative. There is
                one word to describe theory X managers: distrust. They
                distrust their employees. These managers, therefore, tend
                to be authoritarian.
            *   Theory Y Managers. As opposed to theory X managers,
                theory Y managers trust their employees. They believe
                that most of the people are high performers in a proper
                work environment. This is because most of the people
                are creative and committed to meeting the needs of the
                organization they work for. They also believe that most
                people like to take responsibility and initiative and are
                self-disciplined. Finally, they also believe that most people
                are motivated by all levels of needs in Maslow's hierarchy
                of needs. These managers tend to provide more freedom
                and opportunity for career growth.
      Expectancy Theory. According to this theory, people are motivated only
      if they expect a desired outcome or reward. The key idea here is: what is in
      it for me? The desired outcome here has two components: objectives will be
      met with this effort, and the performers will be rewarded.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth          265




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.4

   Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a management
   theory in the second column. Match each comment with the corresponding theory in
   the second column.

Scenario                                                     Motivation Theory
A.The management is real nice to the employees and           1.Maslow's Hierarchy of
  there are lots of perks. But I'm more concerned about        Needs Theory
  my career path once I join this company.
B.Engineering manager Bob has a habit that employees         2.Herzberg's Motivation-
  don't like. Every time he passes by a cubicle of an          Hygiene Theory
  employee, he peeps at the computer screen over the
  shoulders of the employee to see what the employee is
  really doing on the computer.
C.Rachel Janowicz quit her project management job with       3.McClelland's Achievement
  the Gugu Gaga company immediately after winning              Motivation Theory
  the California super lotto. She said, "Well, my money
  problem is solved. Now I will do what I always wanted
  to do. "
D.I'm not going to attend this seminar. Basically, I'll be   4.McGregor's X-Y Theory
  listening to their pitches all day long. What are the odds
  that I'll win the door prize?
E.Kushal did not really like the assignment. But he did      5.Expectancy Theory
  it anyway because he did not want to let his manager
  down.



Caution! The Expectancy Theory, applied carelessly, can backfire. For example, if the expected
reward is unachievable or not worth the effort, people will get de-motivated.


Controlling Project Resources
The project's physical resources are monitored and controlled using the
Control Resources process. By monitoring the planned versus actually
allocated resources, this process makes sure that the planned resources
are made available to the project at the planned time. It tracks not only the
shortage of resources, but also their surplus, and makes sure used resources
are released in a timely manner. Table 6-9 presents the control resources
process in terms of its input, tools and techniques, and output.
266   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      Table 6-9. The Control Resources Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                          Tools and Techniques        Output
      1.Project Management Plan:     1.Interpersonal and team    1.Work performance
        *Resource management           skills:                     information
         plan                           *Influencing             2.Change requests
      2.Project documents:              *Negotiation             3.Plan updates:
        *Project team assignments       *Problem solving            *Resource management
        *Project schedule            2.Data analysis:                plan
        *Physical resource              *Cost-benefit analysis      *Schedule baseline
         assignments                    *Performance reviews        *Cost baseline
        *Resource breakdown             *Trend analysis          4.Updates to project
         structure                                                 documents:
                                        *Alternative analysis
        *Resource requirements                                      *Physical resource
                                     3.Project management
        *Issues log                                                  assignments
                                       information systems
        *Risk register                                              *Resource breakdown
                                                                     structure
        *Lessons learned register
                                                                    *Assumptions log
      3.Agreements
                                                                    *Risk register
      4.Work performance data
                                                                    *Issues log
      5.Organizational project
        assets                                                      *Lessons learned register
                                                                 5.Enterprise environmental
                                                                   factors


      In short, the central task of controlling physical resources is to keep the
      triangle of planned, allocated, and used resources synchronized, as illustrated
      in Figure 6-5. It means that all resources as planned are allotted, and all allotted
      resources are being used. To make that happen, you will be monitoring the
      planned, allocated, and being used resources; analyzing this resourced data
      and creating change requests; and making sure that those change requests are
      processed. In the process of doing all this, you will obviously be communicating
      with relevant resource stakeholders.
      In the following, we discuss this process in the form of steps:
              1. Get How-to Information. First, find out from the
                 resource management plan the general information on
                 how to use, control, and release the physical resources.
              2. Get General Resource Information. From resource
                 requirements and RBS, find the reference for detailed
                 resource information. This information will be useful in
                 case a resource needs to be replaced or more of it needs
                 to be acquired.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth        267




                                        Alloed


                                          Physical
                                         Resources
                        Planned                           Used

Figure 6-5. Control Resources process: synchronize planned, allocated, and used resources


       3. Get Process Facilitators. While performing this
          process, be aware of the risks attached to the resources,
          as recorded in the risk register. Also, continually use the
          lessons learned register to record the lessons learned during
          this process for subsequent use. Moreover, agreements
          made are recorded into documents when issues arise
          with the resources in use, or when the new resources
          are acquired during the project execution. Here, we are
          talking about the resources external to the organization.
       4. Get Information About Scheduled and Assigned
          Physical Resources. The project schedule reveals
          information about needed resources: which resource and
          when and where it's needed. These are planned resources.
          Physical resource assignments contain information about the
          resources assigned to the project: resource type, quantity,
          assignment location, and whether the resource is internal or
          external to the organization. These are allocated resources.
       5. Get the Used Resource Information. Work performance
          data provide information about the actually used resources,
          such as the resource type and quantity used.
       6. Synchronize Planned, Allotted, and In-use Reso
          urces. In steps 4 and 5, you got information about
          planned--i.e., scheduled, allotted or assigned, and used
          resources. Having this information, you do the following:
            a. Conduct Performance Reviews. Compare and
               analyze the actual resource usage from work
               performance data with planned and assigned/allotted
               resources to prepare work performance information,
               an output of this process. This would expose any
               asynchronization or gaps between planned, allotted,
               and used resources. You then proceed to synchronize
               the planned, allotted, and used resources triangle, as
               shown in the next steps.
268   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


                 b. Predict the Resource Usage. Perform a trend
                    analysis on the work performance data collected over
                    time to predict the resource usage in the future.
                    Knowing the predicted resource usage, you want
                    to synchronize it with the planned and allotted
                    resources, as shown next.
                 c. Explore Different Solutions. You deal with the
                    problem of resource shortages and surpluses by
                    adjusting cost/budget, scope, schedule, or a mixture
                    of these three factors. You can perform a cost-benefit
                    analysis, covered in the chapter on cost management,
                    to explore the option of acquiring additional resources
                    in the case of a shortage. Also, you can consider the
                    other options to synchronize predicted resource
                    usage with the planned and allotted resources, such
                    as adjusting schedule or scope.
                 d. Pick the Best Solution. You the pick the best
                    options by performing alternative data analysis,
                    and then generate the change requests accordingly,
                    another output of the Control Resources process.
                 e. Use your negotiation and influencing skills to get the
                    best solution approved.
                 f.   Based on approved and implemented changes or for
                      other reasons in this process, update the documents
                      that need to be updated, listed in the output column
                      of Table 6-9.
      While controlling resources, you can also use the problem-solving technique,
      which is listed in PMBOK as a technique for this process, but it is a very general
      approach that can be used in all disciplines of knowledge. This approach is
      applied to solve a problem by taking the following steps:
            1. Identify and define the problem clearly.
            2. Break the problem into smaller, easily solvable pieces.
            3. Investigate the problem and collect data.
            4. Analyze the data to discover several possible solutions.
            5. Choose the best or most suitable solution.
            6. Test the chosen solution to make sure that it fixes the
               problem.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   269




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.5

   Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the Control Resources
   process, answer the following questions:
      Q1.    Make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.
      Q2.    How should the assumptions log and risk register be updated
             as a result of the Control Resources process?


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      *     To lay the foundations of your project's success, you must
            negotiate to acquire 1) the individuals with the right skills
            and capability of performing the project work effectively
            and efficiently; and 2) the best options of physical
            resources.
      *     It is critical for the project's success to develop and
            manage the group of individuals to be a high-performing
            team.
      *     To optimize results, keep planned, allotted, and used
            physical resources in sync with each other.

Summary
To execute the project, you need to put together a project team that will
perform the project work, and you and the team will need physical resources
do the project work. To accomplish these tasks, you use the processes of
project resource management. First, you develop the resource management
plan that contains the roles needed to perform the project, the responsibilities
assigned to the roles, and a guide on how to perform other processes in
resource management. To start with, you estimate the team and physical
resources for each project activity defined in the previous chapter by using
the Estimate Activity Resources process. With this resources information
in hand, perform the Acquire Resources process to obtain individuals and
physical resources. The goal is to negotiate to obtain the individuals with
the right skills and capability of performing the project work effectively and
efficiently and to obtain the best options for physical resources.
Having obtained the individuals, you use the Develop Team process and
Manage Team process to turn this group into a high-performance team by
1) identifying the areas of improvement and facilitating that improvement--
e.g.; competencies, interaction with other team members, and overall team
environment; and 2) tracking performance, providing feedback, resolving
270   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


      conflicts, and managing changes. Finally, use the Control Resources process
      to optimize the results by keeping the planned, allotted, and used physical
      resources in sync with each other.
      Road Ahead. In this part of the book, we explored how to develop the
      project scope baseline and project schedule baseline. There is another
      baseline closely related to scope and schedule baselines--the cost baseline,
      which we will visit in the first chapter of the next part of the book. In this
      chapter, besides realizing the close connection between resources and costs,
      we can also note the importance of communication in obtaining the best
      project resources and developing and managing the individuals to be a high-
      performance team. So, one chapter in the next part is devoted to project
      communication management. In the context of projects, we communicate
      with the project stakeholders. We explore project stakeholder management
      in one of the other chapters in the next part of the book.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend

      *The human or team resource planning is used to determine the roles that will perform
       the schedule activities and to develop the team resource management plan to fill the roles
       with team members.
      *The goal of the Acquire Project Team process is to fill the roles defined in the staffing
       management plan with real individuals who will perform those roles to execute the
       project.
      *Regardless of how much control you have over team assignments, always try to obtain
       the best person for the job by such means as negotiation, for which you must do your
       homework, which includes finding out the availability and competencies of the candidate
       team members.
      *The project team assignments made through the Acquire Project Resources process
       are the input to the Develop Team process, which uses techniques such as training,
       recognition and rewards, and other team-building activities to develop a high-performance
       team from team members, who were just a group of people to start with.
      *You must manage the team in order to optimize its performance.
      *The Control Resources process is all about keeping the planned, allotted, and used
       physical resources in sync with each other.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth        271




Look Out

*Planning resource management includes both human and physical resources.
*Information about responsibility for assignments among human resources will be
 scattered across different parts of the project management plan, including the quality, risk,
 and communication plans.
*Planning resource management does not assign the resources; assignments happen in the
 Acquire Resources process.
*Resource calendars are an output item as well as an input item for the Acquire Resources
 process.
*Project calendars are both an input and an output of the Acquire Resources process.
*The project manager should effectively negotiate and exert influence in a positive way to
 obtain the best possible team to complete the project work.
*The failure to acquire an effective team can result in missed deadlines, cost overruns, poor
 quality, and eventually a failed project.
*The Control Resources process is about physical resources only.

Memorize

*Responsibility assignment matrix, RAM, is a matrix used to specify the relationships
 between schedule activities, the roles to perform those activities, and the team members
 assigned to the roles.
*The project management plan is an input item to all the resource management processes
 except the one that generated it. This is because the project management plan contains
 the resource management plan.
*Resource breakdown structure is an output of the Estimate Activity Resources plan.
*Team development goes through five progressive stages: forming, storming, norming,
 performing, and adjourning.
*The strategies used to resolve conflicts include avoid/withdraw, force/direct, compromise/
 reconcile, accommodate/smooth, and collaborate/problem solve. Collaboration is the best
 strategy because it offers a win-win resolution.


Review Questions
        1. Management has asked you to produce a chart that
           depicts the resource needs for all the activities in the
           project. Which of the following charts is management
           referring to?
             A. The project organizational chart
             B. WBS
             C. The roles and responsibilities chart
             D. The responsibility assignment matrix
272   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


           2. Which of the following is not an output of the Plan
              Resource Management process?
               A. Project organizational chart
               B. Roles and responsibilities
               C. Resource requirement
               D. Team charter

           3. Which of the following is a true statement about the
              team charter?
               A. It is an output of the develop team process.
               B. It is an output of the team management process.
               C. It is an output of the resource planning process.
               D. It is an input of the resource planning process.

           4. Which of the following is generally the best conflict-
              resolution technique to resolve conflict in your team in
              most situations?
               A. Avoidance
               B. Compromise
               C. Accommodation
               D. Collaboration

           5. Karl, one of your team members, is arguing with you
              over how to perform a specific task. At the end of a long
              discussion, you say, "Karl, I know you feel different about
              it, but please do me a favor and do it this way for my
              peace of mind." Which conflict-resolution technique are
              you using?
               A. Avoidance
               B. Compromise
               C. Accommodation
               D. Forcing
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   273



6. Which of the following is not a situation well suited for
   team-development efforts?
    A. The kickoff meeting
    B. A conflict between two groups within the team
    C. Low team morale
    D. Changes in the budget

7. You are in the beginning of executing your project, and
   you need to make assignments to individuals who will do
   the project work. Which process should you perform?
    A. Develop Resource Management Plan
    B. Develop Project Team
    C. Acquire Project Team
    D. Make Staff Assignments

8. Virtual teams are a tool and technique used in which of
   the following processes?
    A. Develop Resource Management Plan
    B. Develop Project Team
    C. Acquire Project Team
    D. Manage Project Team

9. You heard in the hallway that the project manager of
   The Da Vinci Code project, named Pappu Gloria, has
   very poor soft skills. If this is true, Pappu Gloria needs to
   improve his:
    A. Software skills
    B. Interpersonal skills
    C. Ways of handling equipment
    D. Capability to use scheduling software
274   Chapter 6 | Project Resource Management


          10. Which of the following is not the standard tool or
              technique you need to acquire a project team?
               A. Survey technique
               B. Negotiations
               C. Virtual teams
               D. Pre-assignments

          11. Pam Cruise, the engineering manager, receives daily
              progress reports from all the engineers she manages.
              She also visits the cubicles of the engineers several
              times a day to ensure that they are working and not just
              browsing the Web. Most of the engineers agree that she
              is a micromanager. What kind of management theory is
              she applying?
               A. Theory alpha
               B. Theory X
               C. Theory Y
               D. McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory

          12. Gary Meltzer, the engineering manager, receives weekly
              progress reports from all the engineers he manages. He
              encourages them to take ownership of their assignments.
              Most of the engineers agree that he trusts his engineers.
              What kind of management theory is he applying?
               A. Theory alpha
               B. Theory X
               C. Theory Y
               D. McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   275



13. Susan Travis, the project manager, receives weekly
    progress reports from all the engineers she manages. She
    rewards the achievements of her employees and always
    gives credit to her employees for their accomplishments.
    She is always willing to mentor her team members and
    to put them on a career path. She also helps the good
    performers to get the assignments and projects of their
    choice. What kind of management theory is she applying?
     A. Theory alpha
     B. Theory X
     C. Theory Y
     D. McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory

14. Your project sponsor has asked you to ensure that allotted
    resources are used, unused resources are immediately
    released, and no unplanned resource is allotted. To ensure
    that, which process would you run?
     A. Plan resource management
     B. Control resources
     C. Manage resources
     D. Acquire resources
                                                                 PA R T


                                                                III

Cost,
Stakeholders, and
Communication
You can largely define your project in terms of baselines, as well as measure its
progress or performance by comparing the project result with the baselines.
The deviations from the baselines measure how much the project is off the
track. We have already covered the scope baseline and schedule baseline.
We start this part of the book by covering the cost baseline in a chapter on
project cost management.
Throughout this book, we have been referring to communication, a thread
that runs through every aspect of a project. Whom do you communicate
with? The answer is project stakeholders, without whom there would be no
project. So, following cost management, we will cover these two intrinsically
connected topics in two separate chapters on stakeholder management and
communication management.
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             7

Project Cost
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 8 percent of the CAPM exam,
equivalent to about 11 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques,
and outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given
process uses and how it helps in generating the output, and what a given tool
or technique does in a given process.
You should understand very well the concepts and methods of cost estimates,
earned value management (EVM), earned value analysis, variance analysis,
reserve analysis, to-complete performance index, and so on.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how
the tasks can be tailored to your needs, and recognize agile environment
in action; continual assessment generates change requests, which lead to
changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_7
280   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Cost Management:
         1.Understand the four project management processes in the project cost management
           knowledge area.
         2.dentify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the four processes in
           project cost management.
         3.Identify key concepts in project cost management, including tailoring and special
           considerations for agile/adaptive environments.
         4.Understand and apply basic forecasting and earned value methods for project cost
           management.


      You need resources to execute the project schedule. For example, you need
      the team members--the human resources--to perform the project activities,
      such as a computer programmer to design and develop the program, and
      physical resources, such as computers. These resources are going to cost, and
      costs need to be managed; i.e., planned, estimated, budgeted, and controlled.
      Once the budget for the project has been determined, the costs need to
      be controlled, which includes measuring the project cost performance. Cost
      is intimately connected to schedule and scope. The intrinsic relationship
      between scope, schedule, and cost is called triple constraint.
      So, the core question in this chapter is: how do you manage the project cost?
      This issue breaks down into three avenues that we will explore: estimating
      cost, determining budget, and controlling cost.


      Project Cost Management: Big Picture
      Project cost management consists of developing a cost management plan,
      estimating costs, determining a budget, and controlling costs. First of all, we
      need to distinguish between cost and budget. Cost is the value of the inputs
      that have been (or will be) used up to perform a task or to produce a project
      outcome: product, service, or result. This value is usually measured in units of
      money. For example, you paid two programmers $1,000 each for developing a
      software program, and you paid $100 to a tester to test the program. So, the
      cost for the task of developing and testing the software program is $2,100.
      You can add the costs of components of a system, and the sum will represent
      the cost of the system, but it's still a cost, and not a budget. Budget is an
      aggregated cost with a timeline. You aggregate the costs of all the resources
      needed to perform the project and put a timeline on it: the availability of funds
      over time. That is called a budget.
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth       281



As illustrated in Figure 7-1, cost management contains the Plan Cost
Management process to generate a cost management plan according to which
all the three other processes are performed. The Estimate Costs process
generates the output items cost estimate and basis of estimates, which are
used by the Determine Budget process to generate a cost baseline and project
funding requirements, which are used in the Control Costs process.

                                     Plan Project
                                     Management



                             Cost Management     Cost Management
                                   Plan                Plan
                       Cost                               Project funding
                       estimates      Determine           requirements
 Estimate Costs                                                                Control Costs
                       Estimate        Budget                  Cost baseline
                       baseline

Figure 7-1. Big picture of cost management


Table 7-1 lists the processes of time management along with their process
groups and major outputs.

Table 7-1. Processes of Cost Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Cost Management           Process Group        Major Output              Perform
Process
Plan Cost Management      Planning             Cost management           Once or at predefined
                                               plan                      points in the project
Estimate Costs            Planning             Activity cost             Periodically
                                               estimates                 throughout the
                                               Basis of estimates        project

Determine Budget          Planning             Cost baseline             Once or at predefined
                                               Project funding           points in the project
                                               requirement
Control Costs             Monitoring and       Work performance          Throughout the
                          Controlling          information               project
                                               Budget forecasts


Cost management starts with developing the cost management plan.
282   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Developing Cost Management Plan
      The cost management plan, developed by the Plan Cost Management process,
      is a guide on how to manage project costs, including estimating costs,
      determining budget, and monitoring and controlling costs. Table 7-2 presents
      the Plan Cost Management process in terms of input, tools and techniques,
      and output.


      Caution! Cost is planned very early in the project; that is when the probability of influencing
      the project cost is at a maximum.


      We extract raw data from input items, listed in Table 7-2, and convert it into a
      cost management plan by using techniques, also listed in the same table.

      Table 7-2. The Plan Cost Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                  Tools and Techniques Output
      1.Project charter                      1.Data analysis            1.Cost management plan
      2.Project Management Plan:             2.Expert judgment
         *Schedule management plan           3.Meetings
         *Risk management plan
      3.Enterprise environmental factors
      4.Organizational project assets



      Performing the Plan Cost Management Process
      Here, we describe in steps what to do to perform the process of developing
      the cost management plan:

              1. From the project charter, extract information about 1)
                 preapproved financial resources from which you can
                 develop the detailed cost; and 2) project requirements
                 that will influence the cost management.
              2. From the schedule management plan and risk plan, get
                 information about which processes and controls may
                 influence cost management, such as cost estimates.
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth   283



      3. From enterprise environmental factors, get information
         about the factors that can influence the development
         of the cost management plan, such as organizational
         structure and culture; market conditions in terms of
         product availability globally and in different regions;
         productivity differences of different regions, which will
         affect the cost of project work; any relevant cost-related
         published data; currency exchange rates; and the project
         management information system to get information
         about different ways of managing costs.
      4. From the organizational project assets, get information
         about the factors that can influence the development of
         the cost management plan, such as organizational policies
         and procedures regarding cost estimates and budgeting
         and financial control--e.g.; account code, time reporting,
         standard contract provisions, etc., and historical
         information from lessons learned from past projects.
      5. Use data analysis techniques such as alternative analysis to
         choose one option out of many available; e.g.; to choose
         which funding option would be better or best: loan, self-
         funding, or funding with equity; or whether to make, buy,
         or rent a project-related item.
      6. Use expert judgment where needed on cost management-
         related topics, such as cost estimate, cost control, and
         budgeting.
      7. Put all the information collected from steps 1 through
         6 together into the cost management plan document.
         To facilitate this, you can hold meetings with relevant
         stakeholders, such as the sponsor, needed team members,
         and anybody who has project cost-related responsibilities.
What are some specific items in the cost management plan?


Cost Management Plan
The cost management plan presents a guide to how to manage costs, including
estimating, budgeting, and controlling costs. The following are examples of
which items typically can be found in this plan.
Choice of Processes. Whether, for this project, cost estimation and
budgeting will be performed as one process or two separate processes.
284   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Cost Measurements: Units, Precision, Accuracy. The plan has answers
      for simple questions about measurements of cost and other relevant quantities;
      for example:

            1. What are unit systems of measurement? For example,
               U.S. dollar, pound, Euro, or Indian rupees for money; miles
               or kilometers for distance; and pounds or kilograms for
               mass, commonly called weight.
            2. What is the precision level? This refers to the rounding-
               off error; e.g.; rounding off to nearest whole number
               corresponds to an error of 0.5. For example, $19.40
               would round off to $19.00, and $19.60 to $20.00.
            3. What is the accuracy level? This refers to approximation
               errors; e.g.; if the cost is estimated to be $100 with an
               accuracy of 20%, it means that cost could be any amount
               from $80 to $120.

      WBS Usage. Recall Chapter 4 on scope management, where we covered
      the work breakdown structure (WBS), which contains the component for
      project cost accounting called control account. The cost management plan may
      suggest using that WBS account consistently for cost estimating, budgeting,
      and cost controlling. The control account points may be defined inside the
      WBS.
      How to Measure Performance. The cost management plan may define
      rules for cost performance measurement--for example, how to set up
      control account points within WBS--and include details of how to implement
      the earned value management (EVM) technique, how to employ estimate at
      completion (EAC), what cost-tracking methods to use, and so on.
      Other Items. The cost management plan may specify and describe 1)
      the format and frequency of different cost reports; 2) the maximum cost
      performance deviation from the baseline allowed before a red alarm goes
      off to trigger an action; 3) recommended funding options; 4) procedures for
      documenting cost and accounting for currency fluctuations; and more.
      With the project cost management plan in hand, you are ready to start
      working on estimating the project costs.


      Estimating Project Costs
      Estimating project costs means developing an estimate for the monetary
      resources needed to complete the project work--that is, activities. That
      includes both kinds of resources: team and physical. These estimates are
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth     285



based on the information available at a given time. The estimates in the
beginning are less accurate; for example, their accuracy may be only as good
as 50%. For example, if you say the cost will be $100,000, it could be
anywhere between $50,000 and $150,000. As the project moves along and
more information becomes available, the cost estimates can be improved to
get better estimates.
The standard process used to estimate costs is called the Estimate Costs
process and is presented in Table 7-3 in terms of input, tools and techniques,
and output. Performing the process is described next.

Table 7-3. The Estimate Costs Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                             Tools and Techniques             Output
1.Project Management Plan:        1.Analogous estimating           1.Cost estimates
   *Cost management plan          2.Bottom-up estimating           2.Estimate bases
   *Quality management plan       3.Parametric estimating          3.Updates to project
   *Scope baseline                4.Three-point estimates            documents:
2.Project documents               5.Data analysis:                    *Assumptions log
   *Project schedule                 *Alternative analysis            *Risk register
   *Resource requirements            *Reserve analysis                *Lessons learned
                                                                       register
   *Risk register                    *Cost of quality
   *Lessons learned register      6.Decision making:Vote, etc.
   *Enterprise environmental      7.Project management
    factors                         information system
   *Organizational project        8.Expert judgment
    assets



Estimating Project Costs
The project cost estimating process is described in high-level steps in the
following sections.

Collect Basic Work Information: Scope Baseline
Estimating project costs means estimating the costs required to complete the
project scope by executing activities. Therefore, you need the scope baseline
to ensure all the needed information is accounted for when estimating costs.
Recall that the scope baseline is constituted by the scope statement, WBS,
and WBS dictionary. All these components of the scope baseline are useful in
estimating the project costs. The scope statement will provide the cost-relevant
information, such as project- and product-acceptance criteria, assumptions
and constraints, product scope description, and project boundaries around
286   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      the scope. An example of a cost-related assumption is if we are only counting
      the direct costs of the project or if we are also counting the indirect costs.
      The indirect costs are those costs that cannot be directly traced to a specific
      project and therefore are usually shared by multiple projects and determined
      by some approved accounting procedure. An example would be the utility
      bill of the building or a computer network shared by many projects in the
      company.
      The WBS will be useful by providing the relationships of project deliverables
      to different WBS components; that cost is linked to the deliverable, doubling
      is avoided, and costs can be aggregated or integrated. The WBS dictionary will
      provide the identification and description of the work.
      Work is performed in terms of activities that need resources, and it is the
      resources that cost.

      Collect Resource Information
      Information about the project resources can be collected from several sources,
      such as the following:
            *   Project Schedule. The approved project schedule--
                i.e., schedule baseline--will give you the required
                information about the resources needed along the
                timeline to complete the project work. So, the schedule
                baseline is crucial to making the cost estimates, as it yields
                information about the type, amount, and time window of
                both team and physical resources.
            *   Resource Requirements. This document, generated
                by the Estimate Activity Resources process, provides
                detailed information about scheduled resources, such as
                identification, type, quantity, and so forth.
            *   Quality Management Plan. This document contains
                quality-related resource information, as it describes the
                activities and the resources needed to perform those
                activities in order to meet the planned project quality
                objectives.
            *   Risk Register. Both kinds of risks--threats and
                opportunities--have an impact on the cost in the form
                of risk-mitigation costs and revenues or savings from the
                opportunities. So, the detailed information about risks
                provided in the risk register can be used in cost estimates.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth          287




Caution! As you learned in the previous chapter, activity resources are estimated by
performing the Estimate Activity Resources process. Therefore, the Estimate Costs process should
be closely coordinated with the Estimate Activity Resources process.


We also need information on how to keep a process going once it has started.

Collect Information to Facilitate the Process
The information on how to get the process going once started can be
extracted from the following sources:
       *     Cost Management Plan. This document can be used
             as a guide on how to perform the Estimate Cost process;
             e.g.; methods, units, and precision level to use.
       *     Lessons Learned Register. Record your experience of
             estimating the cost; e.g.; which technique works the best
             and so on. The lessons learned register can facilitate team
             management in the sense that you can use it to record
             ongoing lessons learned for subsequent use to improve
             the efficiency and effectiveness of cost estimating.
The following are the information sources for the items that can facilitate or
influence the Estimate Costs process:
       *     Enterprise Environmental Factors. Enterprise
             environmental factors relevant to estimating costs include
             market conditions and published commercial information
             that will provide the cost of resources, including team and
             physical resources such as material and equipment. This
             will also provide information related to the availability of
             products and services and their cost and rates. Supply-
             and-demand conditions can also influence the project
             costs, as can currency exchange rates and inflation.
       *     Organizational Process Assets. This includes the
             organization's policies and procedures regarding cost
             estimates; cost estimating templates; and information
             from previous projects, including lessons learned.
All the cost-related information that you have collected from input items, as
just described, needs to be converted into cost estimates.
288   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Convert Cost-Related Information into Cost Estimates
      The cost-related information is converted into cost estimates by using one of
      the available methods listed in the tools and techniques column of Table 7-3. In
      general, you can use several methods to estimate the cost, such as analogous
      estimating, three-point estimates, bottom-up estimating, and so forth. Methods
      like alternative analysis and decision making are used to choose the methods
      or the results of cost estimating.
      All these techniques have been discussed in this book multiple times, such as
      in estimating activity durations and in estimating activity resources. Now, we
      discuss them in the context of estimating project costs and budgeting.
      Analogous Estimation. Analogous cost estimation is a technique that
      evaluates cost-related variables--such as rate, cost of a component, or cost
      of an activity--from similar components and activities in previous projects,
      or the cost of a similar project from the past, to estimate the same variable
      in the current project. This technique is useful when very limited component
      information is available, especially in the beginning of a project, and is usually
      used for estimating the gross values and not the detailed component-based
      values. It's generally less costly and less time consuming than other techniques,
      but also less accurate. Its accuracy and reliability improve if the person making
      the estimate is an expert and the components or activities being compared
      are actually similar.
      Parametric Estimation. This is a technique that uses some parameters and
      the statistical relationships among them to make the estimate. For example, if
      the unit cost is known, say, from historical data, the cost of the whole package
      containing a number of units can be calculated. For example, if there are ten
      identical or similar activities in a work package and it is known that one activity
      costs $100, then we can say that the whole work package will cost $1,000.
      This technique can generate quite accurate results depending on the accuracy
      of the quantity of resources and other data that goes into the estimation.
      Bottom-up Estimation. This technique involves estimating the cost of
      the parts of a component and then aggregating the costs of those parts to
      calculate the cost of the whole component. By continuing the process, we can
      aggregate the costs of multiple components and eventually get the cost of the
      whole project. This technique can generate accurate results when you can
      generally make a better estimate of a part than the whole, which is usually the
      case when enough information is available. Of course, statistical uncertainty
      or accuracy improves as the number of activities, packages, and components
      increases.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth       289




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.1

   Problem:
   An activity cost estimate goes like this:
   It will take 20 hours of a programmer to write this program. The average rate to hire
   a programmer is $50 per hour. Therefore, the cost of writing this program, assuming
   that everything else needed to write the program, such as a computer, is in place, is
   20 x $50 = $1,000.
   What kind of estimation technique is at work here?


Contingency Reserve Analysis. There are the following two problems
associated with estimates:
       *    Estimates are approximations, and approximations imply
            uncertainty, which means risk.
       *    There may be risks not yet identified at the time of making
            estimates; i.e., cost amount is unknown.
You will need some funds to deal with this situation. What comes to your
rescue here is called a contingency reserve. The contingency reserve, in general,
is an amount of a resource, such as funds, time, and so forth, allocated in
addition to the calculated estimates so as to reduce the risk arising from
various sources. For example, risk arising from overruns of project objectives
to a level acceptable to the performing organization because there was known
uncertainty in estimating the cost of a few components. In other words, the
contingency reserves are the funds reserved to deal with the events that are
anticipated but not certain: known risk with unknown cost.
Depending upon the project, the contingency reserve amount may be
determined as a certain percentage of the total project cost estimate, or you
can use analytical methods.


Caution! Contingency reserves, also called contingency allowances, usually become part of
the project budget, project funding requirements, and cost baseline.
290   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Alternative Analysis, Decision Making, and Project Management
      Information System (PMIS). All these techniques have been discussed
      in this book multiple times, such as in Chapter 5. In similar ways, you use
      alternative analysis to choose one or a few out of many available options
      of alternative cost estimate methods; you use decision making to take one
      path when many are available; and you use PMIS to facilitate multiple and
      alternative methods to estimate cost; e.g.; spreadsheet, simulations, statistical
      cost analysis, and graphics.
      Cost of Quality. This is the cost of implementing the conformance to the
      planned quality objective and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 10.
      Three-point Estimates. Three-point estimates, discussed in Chapter 5
      for duration estimates, can also be applied to cost estimates; replace time
      duration with cost.


      Tip Because cost depends on other estimates, the accuracy of cost estimates depends on
      many other estimates, such as the activity duration estimates and resource requirement estimates,
      that go into developing the schedule baseline used for making cost estimates. It is important to
      keep this dependency in mind just in case you need to change any of these other estimates.



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.2

          The pessimistic cost estimate for an activity is $5,000, the optimistic estimate is
          $3,000, and the most-likely estimate is $4,000. Calculate the expected estimate by
          using the PERT technique, where the most-likely scenario is given a weight of 4 as
          compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios.


      By using some of these tools suitable to our project, we get cost estimates.

      Output of the Estimate Costs Process
      The output of the Estimate Costs process consists of the items discussed in
      the following sections.
      Activity Cost Estimates. These are the quantitative estimates of various
      costs required to complete the project work. Depending on the project and
      the stage of the project, the cost estimates may be documented in summary
      form or in detail. These estimates include costs for all resources needed
      to complete the project work, including team members, equipment, facilities,
      information technology, labor directly applied to the project work, material,
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth        291



services, and so on. Indirect costs and special categories, such as allowances
and contingency reserves, must also be included.
Estimate Bases. It's important to document what the bases were of the cost
estimates. These may highly depend on the application area of the project. At
a higher level, the following elements must be included in the documentation:
      *    Assumptions made in making the estimates; for example,
           the labor rate and where this data came from
      *    Constraints that affected the estimates; for example, a
           milestone must be met by a certain date
      *    The methods used to develop the estimate; for example,
           three-point estimate
      *    The uncertainty, such as 10%, and the confidence level
           must be assigned to an estimate
      *    What the risks are and how they were included in the
           cost estimates
Updates. During this process, some existing assumptions and constraints
may no longer be true, and some new assumptions and constraints may appear,
leading to the need to update the assumptions log. This will also affect the risks,
thus leading to a risk register update. Of course, we should always update the
lessons learned register with important lessons learned in performing the
process; e.g.; in this case, the cost-estimating techniques that worked the best.
In a nutshell, the outcome of estimating costs will include cost estimates for
each project activity and the basis for that estimate, which can be used to
determine the project budget.


Determining Project Budget
Determining the project budget is the process of aggregating the cost
estimates for all project activities and assigning a timeline to it. Table 7-4
presents the Determine Budget process in terms of its input, tools and
techniques, and output. Most of the items in the input to this process have
already been described in this chapter. Organizational process assets may
include organizational policies and tools for determining the budget. From
the business document business case, collect information about financial
factors that are critical for the project success. Information about target
benefits--e.g.; timeframe for materializing the benefits, benefit matrix, values
calculations, etc.--can be extracted from the benefit management plan. Both
of these business documents were covered in Chapter 2.
292   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Table 7-4. The Determine Budget Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                             Tools and Techniques              Output
      1.Project Management Plan:        1.Cost aggregation                1.Cost baseline
         *Cost management plan          2.Reserve analysis                2.Project funding
         *Resource management plan      3.Historical information review     requirements
      2.Scope baseline                  4.Reconciliation of funding limits 3.Updates to project
                                                                             documents
      3.Project documents:              5.Financing
                                                                             *Cost estimates
         *Cost estimates                6.Expert judgment
                                                                             *Project schedule
         *Basis of estimates
                                                                             *Risk register
         *Project schedule
         *Risk register
      4.Business documents:
         *Business case
         *Benefit management plan
      5.Agreements
      6.Enterprise environmental
        factors
      7.Organizational project assets



      Cost aggregation is the technique used to calculate the cost of a whole by
      summing up the costs of the parts of which the whole--i.e., the project
      work--is made. You can use the bottom-up estimation technique in WBS
      to aggregate the costs of the all the components and activities to calculate
      the total cost of the project, as already explained in the previous section.
      The timeline assigned to this cost will be important in order to reconcile
      the expenditure with the funding limits along the timeline. The reconciliation
      may require rescheduling some activities, hence updating the project schedule
      documents.
      In the previous section, we discussed using analogous estimates and parametric
      estimates to estimate the cost of project activities by using the parameters
      from historic information. Models can be built based on these methods to
      estimate the total cost of the project. The accuracy and reliability of these
      models depend on the accuracy of the historic parameter information,
      whether the parameters can be quantified, and whether the models built on
      these parameters are scalable; i.e., they work for projects of all sizes.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth          293



The reserve analysis at the budget level includes a management reserve in
addition to the contingency reserve, and you must understand the difference
between the two. Contingency reserves are funds that can be used to deal
with the unplanned events that can potentially transpire--e.g.; in case one or
more identified risks occur--whereas management reserves are funds that
can be used in the case of unplanned changes that are within the project
scope but were missed during planning.
Both contingency reserves and management reserves are part of the
project budget and budgeting requirements. The approved budget minus the
management reserve is equal to what is called the cost baseline. You can
add the amount of the management reserve to the cost baseline after it has
been used. The cost performance of the project is monitored, measured, and
controlled against this baseline.
Financing as a tool in budgeting refers to situations where funding is acquired
in stages along the timeline and you have to meet certain conditions--e.g.;
show certain project progress--to secure funds at every stage. Funding may
not be uniformly distributed over time.
In order to avoid confusion, remember that in every stage or funding period

        1. cost baseline = anticipated expenditure + anticipated
           liabilities; and
        2. funding requirements = cost baseline + management
           reserves
In the process of determining the budget, you may need to update the project
schedule, as already mentioned, as well as the cost estimates and risk register,
to respond to changes, which may have been applied to related areas.


Caution! Both contingency reserves and management reserves are part of the project
budget and budgeting requirements; cost baseline is the approved budget minus the management
reserve. That means the management reserves will not be used in the calculations of earned value
measurements discussed further on in this chapter.


Once the project cost is determined and the budget is approved, you need to
control costs as the project progresses.
294   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Controlling Costs
      Controlling costs means monitoring and controlling the cost performance and
      the resulting updates and changes to the costs, budget, and cost baseline of the
      project. Monitoring and controlling costs has two dimensions to it: expenditure
      of project funds and the work performed as a result of those expenditures.
      One major aspect of cost monitoring and controlling is to determine the
      relationship between the expenditures and the accomplishments. The cost
      performance is found in this relationship. The other main aspect is to control
      the changes to the approved cost performance baseline.


      Caution! Like any other change, a change in cost and budget must also be processed through
      the Integrated Change Control process and should only be implemented after its approval.


      To be more specific, monitoring and controlling the project costs includes the
      following:
             *    Influence the factors that can create changes to the
                  approved cost baseline.
             *    Monitor the following:
                  *    Work performed against the funds expended
                  *    Variance of cost performance from the approved
                       baseline

             *    Prevent unapproved changes from creeping into
                  implementation, expenditures, and cost reports.
             *    Act to keep cost overruns within the planned acceptable
                  limits.
             *    Ensure the following:
                  *    Change requests are dealt with in a timely fashion
                       and managed as they occur.
                  *    Expenditures do not exceed the approved budget;
                       that is, by period and by total amount. Any change to
                       it must be approved before implementation.

             *    Communicate with the appropriate stakeholders about
                  the cost associated with the approved changes.
      Cost is monitored and controlled by using the Control Costs process,
      presented in Table 7-5 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth     295



Table 7-5. The Control Costs Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques      Output
1.Project Management Plan:     1.Earned value analysis   1.Work performance information
   *Cost management plan       2.Variance analysis       2.Cost forecasts
   *Cost baseline              3.Trend analysis          3.Change requests
   *Performance                4.Reserve analysis        4.Plan updates
    measurement baseline       5.To-complete                *Cost management plan
2.Project funding                performance index          *Cost baseline
  requirement                  6.Project management         *Performance measurement
3.Work performance data          information system         baseline
4.Project documents                                      5.Updates to project documents
   *Lessons learned register                                *Cost estimates
5.Organizational project                                    *Basis of estimate
  assets
                                                            *Assumptions log
                                                            *Risk register
                                                            *Lessons learned register


The following are at the core of the controlling costs process:

        1. From the cost management plan, get information on how
           to control costs. Apply this information to the following
           steps.
        2. Compare the cost results from project execution in the
           work performance data with the cost baseline by using
           variance analysis. If deviations pass the threshold, create
           needed change requests.
        3. Perform an earned value analysis by comparing the project
           execution results in the work performance data against the
           performance measurement baseline. This comparison may
           generate change requests.
        4. Based on these comparisons, perform a trend analysis.
           This will generate the cost forecast.
        5. The results from the preceding steps will create work
           performance information.
        6. Like in many other processes, use the lessons learned
           register to record and subsequently use the lessons
           learned to improve the process.
296   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Organizational process assets that can influence cost controlling include cost-
      control related policies, procedures, and guidelines; monitoring and reporting
      methods; tools used in controlling costs; and the lessons learned database
      from past projects.


      Caution! In general, project progress or performance is measured by comparing the
      project execution results, in work performance data, against the performance measurement
      baseline, which is an approved integrated plan for scope, schedule, and cost for the project.
      Important relevant components of this integrated plan are the scope baseline, schedule
      baseline, and cost baseline.


      Two common input items to controlling scope, schedule, and cost are work
      performance data and the performance measurement baseline. In all three
      processes, we perform performance measurement analysis, using some tools
      and techniques to generate work performance information, a common output
      item of these three processes.
      The elaborate nature of the performance measurement analysis can be seen
      in the cost-control process. This performance measurement analysis for cost
      control, using the tools and techniques listed in Table 7-5, is presented in the
      next section.


      Performance Measurement Analysis for Cost Control
      As mentioned earlier, cost control includes influencing the factors that can
      create changes to the cost baseline. But to detect these changes, you need
      to detect and understand variances or deviations from the cost baseline by
      monitoring cost performance.
      In general, variance is a measurable deviation in the value of a project variable
      or parameter such as cost or schedule from a known baseline or expected
      value. Variance analysis is a technique used to assess the magnitude of the
      variation in the value of a variable, such as cost, from the baseline or expected
      value, determine the cause of the variance, and decide whether a corrective
      action is required. A common technique to assess the cost variance is called
      the earned value technique (EVT), also called earned value management (EVM). It
      is a commonly used method of performance measurement that has various
      forms. Most commonly, it integrates the scope, schedule, and cost performance
      by comparing the baselines with the actual progress made. For example, you
      calculate the cumulative value of the budgeted cost of work performed in
      terms of the originally allocated budgeted amount and compare it to the
      following:
                                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth            297



        1. Budgeted cost of work scheduled--that is, planned
        2. Actual cost of work performed
Don't worry if these terms sound confusing right now; I will go through an
example soon. However, as you will see, the greatest difficulty in understanding
EVT (or EVM) stems from the coupling of cost and schedule. You must realize
by now that the project cost and the project schedule are inherently related
to each other. Schedule refers to performing certain work over a certain time
period, whereas cost refers to the money spent to perform the work on a
project (or a project activity) over a certain period of time. The relationship
between cost and schedule can be realized by understanding that it costs
money to perform a schedule activity. Also, the "time is money" principle is
at work here. For example, a project activity can be looked upon in terms
of an amount of work that will be needed to complete it or in terms of its
monetary value, which will include the cost of the work that needs to be
performed to complete the activity.


Caution! As you delve into EVM, remember there are only three variables or parameters that need
to be monitored and developed closely: planned value (PV), earned value (EV), and actual cost (AC). The
rest of the parameters and the earned value analysis are largely based on these three fundamental
parameters.


The EVM involves calculating some variables where you will see the interplay
of schedule (work) and cost. I will work through a running example to help
you understand the terminology used here.
Example: Assume you are a project manager for the construction of a
16-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12
weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of
the first four weeks of work, $125,000 has been spent, and four miles of road
has been completed.
I will use this example to perform the cost performance analysis and the
schedule performance analysis in terms of cost.


Cost Performance
Cost performance refers to how efficiently you are spending money on the
project work, measured against the expectations set in the project management
plan--that is, the cost baseline. The total cost approved in the baseline is
called the budget at completion (BAC).
298   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management



      Note The variables discussed here, such as BAC, EV, and AC, can be calculated either for the
      whole project or for a part of the project, such as a project activity.


      Budget at Completion (BAC). This is the total budget authorized for
      performing the project work (or a project activity), also called the planned
      budget. In other words, it is the cost originally estimated in the project
      management plan. You use this variable in defining almost all the following
      variables. In our example, the value of BAC is $600,000.
      Earned Value (EV) or Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP).
      This is the value of the actually performed work expressed in terms of the
      approved budget for a project or a project activity for a given time period. In
      this variable, you see the relationship of schedule (work) and cost in action.
      BAC represents the total value of the project. But when you perform only
      some work on the project, you have earned only some of that total value, and
      the earned value is proportional to the fraction of the total work performed,
      as shown by the formula here:

                  EV = BAC x (work completed / total work required)
      So, in our example, EV can be calculated as:

                  EV = $600,000 (4 miles/16 miles) = $150,000
      This is the earned value of the work performed so far, which may or may not
      be equal to the actual money that you spent to perform this work.
      Actual Cost (AC) or Actual Cost of Work Performed (ACWP). This
      is the total cost actually incurred performing the work for a project until a
      specific point on the timeline. In our running example, $125,000 has already
      been used up to this point. So, the actual cost at this point in time is $125,000.
      This cost is to be compared with the earned value to calculate the cost variance
      and cost performance.
      Cost Variance (CV). This is a measure of cost performance in terms of the
      deviation of reality from the plan, and it is obtained by subtracting the actual
      cost (AC) from the earned value (EV), as shown in the formula here:

                                         CV = EV - AC
      So, in our example, CV can be calculated as shown here:

                           CV = $150,000 - $125,000 = $25,000
      The expected value of CV is zero because we expect the earned value to be
      equal to the actual cost. A positive result indicates better cost performance
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       299



than expected, whereas a negative result indicates worse cost performance
than expected. Deviation is one way of comparison, and ratio is another.
Cost Performance Index (CPI). Earned value represents the portion of
the work completed, and the actual cost represents the money spent. So, the
CPI indicates whether you are getting a fair value for your money. This is a
measure of the cost efficiency of a project calculated by dividing earned value
(EV) by actual cost (AC), as shown in the formula here:
                                           EV
                                   CPI =
                                           AC

So, the CPI for our example can be calculated as:
                     CPI = $150,000 / $125,000 = 1.2
This means you are getting $1.20 worth of performance for every dollar
spent. A value of CPI greater than one indicates good performance, whereas
a value less than one indicates bad performance. The expected value of CPI
is one.
Back in our example, both the CV and the CPI indicate that you are getting
more value for each dollar spent. Hold back a little before opening the
champagne, though. If you read the text of our example again, note that 4 out
of 12 weeks have already passed, and only 4 out of 16 miles of road have been
built. That means that only one-fourth of the work has been accomplished in
one-third of the total scheduled time. This means we are lagging behind in our
schedule. Although cost performance is good, schedule performance needs to
be investigated, too; remember, time is money!

Schedule Performance in Terms of Cost
Schedule performance refers to how efficiently you are executing your project
schedule as measured against the expectations set in the project management
plan. It can be measured by comparing the earned value to the planned value,
just like cost performance is measured by comparing the earned value to the
actual cost. Planned value refers to the value that we planned to create in the
time spent so far.
Planned Value (PV) or Budgeted Cost for the Work Scheduled
(BCWS). This is the authorized cost for the scheduled work on a project
or a project activity up to a given point on the timeline. The planned value is
also called the budgeted cost for the work scheduled (BCWS). PV is basically how
much you were authorized to spend in the fraction of schedule time spent so
far, as shown in the formula here:

          PV = BAC x (time passed / total schedule time)
300   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Therefore, the planned value for the project in our example at the end of the
      first four weeks is calculated as shown here:

                  PV = $600,000 x (4 weeks / 12 weeks) = $200,000
      So, PV represents the planned schedule in terms of cost. You can calculate the
      schedule performance by comparing the planned schedule to the performed
      schedule in terms of cost.


      Caution! Note that the total planned value (PV) of the project is the same as the budget at
      completion (BAC).


      Schedule Variance (SV). This is the deviation of the performed schedule
      from the planned schedule in terms of cost. No confusion is allowed here
      because you already know that the schedule can be translated to cost. SV is
      calculated as the difference between EV and PV, as shown in the formula here:

                                          SV = EV - PV
      So, the SV in our example can be calculated as:

                          SV = $150,000 - $200,000 = - $50,000
      The negative value means we are behind schedule. Deviation represented
      by schedule variance is one way of comparison, and ratio represented by
      schedule performance index is another.
      Schedule Performance Index (SPI). Earned value represents the portion
      of work completed in terms of cost, and planned value represents how much
      work was planned by this point in time in terms of cost. So, the SPI indicates
      how the performed work compared to the planned work. This is a measure
      of the schedule efficiency of a project calculated by dividing earned value (EV)
      by planned value (PV), as shown in the formula here:
                                                      EV
                                              SPI =
                                                      PV

      So, the SPI for our example can be calculated as shown here:

                              SPI = $150,000 /$200, 000 = 0.75
      This indicates that the project is progressing at 75 percent of the planned
      pace--not good.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth       301



You should note that all these performance variables except the BAC are
calculated at a given point in time. As shown in Figure 7-2, you can maintain
a graphic that presents the values of these variables against points in time
as the project progresses. Note that the value of the BAC does not change
with time because it is the cost at completion time. Further note that
given the BAC, the PV can be calculated at any point in time, even before
the project execution starts. EV and EC are accumulated as the project
execution progresses.




Figure 7-2. The behavior of some performance variables as the project progresses in time.
The variable BAC is independent of time.


By using the variables discussed so far, you can monitor the project performance
as the time progresses. Not only that, you can also make predictions about
future performance based on past performance.
302   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Forecasting Techniques
      Forecasting refers to predicting some information about the project in the
      future based on its performance in the past. The forecasting is regularly
      updated as the project progresses and more data of the past performance
      becomes available.
      Estimate to Complete (ETC) at Budgeted Rate. This is the prediction
      about the expected cost to complete the remaining work for the project or
      for a project activity. The future work is assumed to be completed at the
      budgeted rate. Therefore, the value of the ETC is obtained by subtracting
      the earned value (EV) from the budget at completion (BAC), as shown in the
      formula here:

                                       ETC = BAC - EV
      So, in our example, the value of ETC can be calculated as:

                         ETC = $600,000 - $150,000 = $450,000
      This is true if the current variances are seen as atypical and the future
      performance is expected to be as planned. If the current trend, however,
      continues, then we need to take CPI into account, as shown next.
      Estimate to Complete (ETC) at the Present CPI. This is the prediction
      about the expected cost to complete the remaining work at the present CPI.
      Therefore, in that case, the ETC is given by:

                                                  BAC - EV
                                          ETC =
                                                    CPI
      The next question that can be asked about the future is how much it will cost
      to complete the whole project.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.3

         In our running example, calculate the ETC at the present CPI.


      Estimate at Completion (EAC) at the Budgeted Rate. This is the
      estimate made at the current point in time for how much it will cost to
      complete the whole project or a project activity from beginning to end. It
      is assumed that the future work will be performed at the budgeted rate.
      Therefore, the value of the EAC is obtained by adding the value of ETC at
      budgeted rate to AC, as shown in the formula here:

                             EAC = AC+ ETC (budgeted rate)
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth   303



Accordingly, the value of EAC for our example can be calculated as:

                    EAC = $125,000 + $450,000 = $575,000
Another useful prediction to be made is how much performance you need in
the future to complete the remaining work within budget.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.4

   Prove the validity of the following equation:
                                    EAC = AC + BAC - EV


EACs calculated thus far are correct under the assumption that in the future
the cost will be incurred as it was budgeted or performance will be made as
planned. If, however, the current variance trend is assumed to continue, then
EAC is calculated as discussed next.
Estimate at Completion (EAC) at the Present CPI. This is the estimate
made at the current point in time for how much it will cost to complete the
whole project or a project activity from beginning to end. It is assumed that
the future work will be performed at the current CPI. Therefore, EAC is
calculated as follows:
                            EAC = AC + ETC ( at current CPI)


                                                   BAC - EV
                                   EAC = AC +
                                                     CPI


                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.5

   In our running example, caluclate EAC at the present CPI.


As was said earlier, performance is an integrated measure of progress in the
areas of scope, schedule, and cost. Just measuring one of these parameters
may be misleading. For example, in our running example, we are performing
better in cost but poorly in schedule. This is why sometimes EAC is measured
by taking into account both CPI and SPI, as shown here:

                                                   BAC - EV
                                   EAC = AC +
                                                   CPI  SPI
304   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.6

         In our running example, calculate EAC at the present CPI and SPI.


      To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI). This is the variable used to
      predict the future performance needed to finish the work according to a
      specified goal; for example, either within the planned budget (BAC) or at the
      completion cost currently predicted (EAC). If the goal is to complete it within
      BAC, it is calculated as the ratio of the remaining work to the remaining
      budget, as shown in the formula here:

                                Remaining work BAC - BCWP BAC - EV
                       TCPI =                  =          =
                                Remaining funds BAC - ACWP BAC - AC

      Therefore, the value of TCPI in our example can be calculated as:

                 TCPI = ($600,000 - $150,000) / ($600,000 - $125,000)
                 = 450,000 / 475,000 = 0.95 = 95%
      If it is realized that BAC is not attainable, then it is replaced with EAC.
      Accordingly, TCPI will be given by the following:

                                         Remainingwork BAC - EV
                                TCPI =                =
                                         Requiredfunds EAC - AC

      Table 7-6 summarizes most of these performance variables.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth       305



Table 7-6. Performance Variables Used in the Earned Value Technique Analysis

Variable           Abbreviation     Description                       Formula
Budget at          BAC              Total planned cost                None
completion
Earned value or    EV or BCWP       Fraction of the completed work EV = BAC x (Work
budgeted cost of                    in terms of the planned budget completed / Total
work performed                      at a given point in time       work required)
Actual cost        AC or ACWP       The money spent on the work       The sum of all the
                                    until a given point in time       costs until a given
                                                                      point in time
Cost variance      CV               The difference between what       CV = EV - AC
                                    you planned to spend and what
                                    is actually spent until a given
                                    point in time
Cost               CPI              The work performed per            CPI = EV / AC
performance                         actual cost
index
Planned value or   PV or BCWS       The fraction of work planned      PV = BAC x
budgeted cost of                    to be completed at a given        (Time passed / Total
work scheduled                      point in time                     schedule time)
Schedule variance SV                The difference between the      SV = EV - PV
                                    work actually completed and the
                                    work planned to be completed
                                    at a given point in time
Schedule           SPI              The actual work performed         SPI = EV / PV
performance                         per planned work performed in
index                               terms of cost
Estimate to        ETC              Estimate of what will be spent    ETC = BAC - EV
complete                            on the remaining project (or a
                                    project activity) based on the
                                    performance so far and the
                                    planned cost
Estimate at        EAC              Estimate of what will be spent    EAC = ETC + AC
completion                          on the whole project (or a
                                    project activity) based on the
                                    performance so far and the
                                    planned cost
To-complete       TCPI              Calculates the efficiency:        (BAC - EV) /
performance index                   remaining work per remaining      (BAC - AC)
                                    funds
306   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management



      Caution! Depending on what information in known, the variables just discussed can
      be expressed in different equations, as shown by Study Checkpoint 7.4. But sticking the
      definition-side variable, it can be realized that all these different forms of equations for a variable
      are all equivalent.


      The analysis presented here is a good demonstration of how schedule and
      cost are coupled together, and both obviously depend upon scope. The
      success of a project depends on completing the project according to the
      schedule--with full planned scope and within the planned cost. These three
      parameters, scope, schedule, and cost, are intrinsically related to one another.


      Scope, Schedule, and Cost: The Triple
      Constraint
      The nutshell of running a project is delivering the scope according to some
      schedule, and it's going to cost someone. Completing a project successfully
      includes delivering the planned scope according to the planned schedule
      and within the planned budget. The fundamental parameters for budget and
      schedule are cost and time, respectively: budget is the cost with a timeline, and
      schedule is determined from the time estimates for completing the schedule
      activities defining the scope. So scope, schedule, and cost are the heart of any
      project. These three project parameters also comprise a triple constraint
      that is a framework for evaluating competing demands. A triple constraint
      can be depicted as a triangle, with each side representing one of these three
      parameters. Figure 7-3 shows the triple constraint for the scope, schedule, and
      cost. This means if one of these parameters changes, at least one of the other
      two must change as well.




      Figure 7-3. Triple constraint: scope, schedule, and cost. You cannot change the length one
      side of the triangle without changing the length at least one of the other two sides.
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth           307




Caution! The present version of PMBOK does not formally discuss the triple constraint of
scope, cost, and schedule. However, the formal name aside, it remains a fact that scope, schedule,
and cost are tightly coupled, as reflected by the integrated performance measurement baseline
and the earned value analysis. Therefore, the discussion in this section is still valuable.


In Figure 7-3, you cannot change the length of one side of the triangle with-
out changing the length of at least one of the other two sides. For example,
assume you are being interviewed by a functional manager for a project man-
ager position. Don't be surprised if you are asked a question based on the
following situation:

        1. The project is way behind the schedule.
        2. No extra resources, such as money or project team
           members to perform activities, are available.
        3. You have to implement all the planned features.
The question is, what will you do to meet the deadline that is approaching
within a week? From a project management viewpoint, this situation is a
good example of the triple constraint. The project is behind schedule, which
means there is a schedule change (or a change in time available to finish the
remaining project). Recall project scheduling from Chapter 5--your options
in this situation are pretty limited, such as applying lead and lags, float, and
smoothing techniques. In most of these situations, at least one of the other
two parameters must change. If you want to meet the deadline, either you
should be allotted more funds to hire more resources or the scope of the
project should be changed, which means some of the features would be left
out. Depending upon the knowledge level of the functional manager about
project management, this answer might not get you the job, but as a project
manager, you must stand your ground. Project management is not magic; it
involves dealing with cold, hard reality in a realistic way, thereby establishing
clear and achievable objectives.


Note While considering the cost-schedule-scope constraint, you should also remember
techniques like resource leveling and smoothing, applying leads and lags, and schedule compression
techniques, such as crashing and fast tracking, discussed in Chapter 5. Also remember that those
techniques do not guarantee that no additional cost (or resources) will be required.
308   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      You can see the relationship of the triple constraint with quality by recalling
      that a high-quality project delivers the required product on time and within
      the planned scope and budget. Therefore, while balancing between these
      three constraints, the quality (and, as a result, customer satisfaction) might be
      affected. The triple constraint is also a good example of how one change can
      give rise to other changes across the project. This highlights the importance
      of managing and controlling changes.
      Changes to scope, schedule, and cost are controlled using the Control Scope,
      Control Schedule, and Control Cost processes, respectively. These three
      processes are at the center of the project action. As Figure 7-4 illustrates, they
      take work performance data from the project execution process, the Direct
      and Manage Project Work process, and the generate work performance
      information process, which are used by the Monitor and Control Project
      Work process to generate the work performance reports.

                                              Direct and
                                               Manage
                                             Project Work

                       Work performance                         Work performance
                             data                     Work            data
                                                      performance
                                                      data
                         Control
                                             Control Scope           Control Cost
                        Schedule


                                                 Work
                                             performance
                                             informaon



                                              Monitor and
                                                Control
                                              Project work


                                                 Work
                                             performance
                                               reports

      Figure 7-4. The processes to control scope, schedule, and cost in a big picture
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       309




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.7

   Q. Name three processes that convert the work performance data into work
   performance information.


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:

      1. Project cost is estimated from project scope, project
         schedule, and project resource requirements, and project
         budget is project cost along the timeline.
      2. Cost control involves converting the cost-related work
         performance data into work performance information by
         comparing the data with the integrated baseline: scope
         baseline, schedule baseline, and cost baseline.
      3. This comparison is made by using earned value
         management (EVM), in which there are several variables
         based on three fundamental parameters, namely actual
         cost (AC), earned value (EV), and planned value (PV).

Summary
Cost management consists of developing a cost management plan, estimating
costs, determining budget, and controlling costs. You use the scope baseline to
estimate the monetary resources needed to complete the project activities.
The activity cost estimates and project schedule are used to determine the
project budget, which is the cost with a timeline attached to it. The budget
includes the aggregated cost, contingency reserve, and management reserve
with a timeline. These elements are also included in the project funding
requirements. The approved budget minus the management reserve is called
cost baseline. The cost performance of the project is monitored, measured,
and controlled against the integrated baseline that includes this cost baseline.
The three fundamental parameters--scope, schedule, and cost--are
intrinsically related to each other. For example, if you change one of them,
one or both other parameters will change as well. This constraint is known
as a triple constraint. Therefore, the project cost performance is measured by
comparing the project execution results against the performance measurement
baseline, which is an approved integrated plan for scope, schedule, and cost for
the project. In other words, the performance baseline includes scope baseline,
cost baseline, and schedule baseline.
310   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Road Ahead. In Chapter 2, we talked about project stakeholders in some
      detail, and all through the book we have been making references to them.
      As you know, everyone from the project sponsor to you, your team, and the
      customer is a stakeholder. Without stakeholders, there would be no project.
      This underlines the importance of stakeholder management. So, in the next
      chapter, we will explore project stakeholder management.

      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *The project charter, project schedule management plan, and project risk management plan
       are used to develop the project cost management plan.
      *The scope baseline, schedule baseline, and resource requirements are the main inputs to
       make cost estimates for activities, which are aggregated to determine the project budget.
      *The accuracy of cost estimates depends on the accuracy of other estimates, such as
       activity duration estimates and the activity resource requirements estimates.
      *The project budget includes the aggregated cost with timeline, contingency reserves, and
       management reserves; this composition also makes budgeting requirements.
      *Monitoring and controlling includes monitoring and controlling project performance and
       managing the resulting changes.
      *The three project parameters--cost, schedule, and scope--form a triple constraint, which
       means if one of these three parameters changes, at least one of the other two must change.
      *Performance measurement baselines and work performance data are the common input
       to controlling the scope, schedule, and cost, and work performance information and
       change requests are the common output.
      *Project cost performance is measured by comparing the project results from work
       performance data against the performance measurement baseline: scope baseline,
       schedule baseline, and cost baseline.

      Look Out

      *The probability of influencing the project cost is maximum early in the project.
      *The approved budget minus the management reserve is equal to what is called the cost
       baseline. You can add the amount of management reserves to the cost baseline after it has
       been used.
      *Planned value (PV), earned value (EV), and actual cost (AC) are the three key parameters
       that need to be monitored closely. The rest of the earned value analysis is based on these
       three fundamental parameters.
      *Cost variance (CV) is calculated by subtracting the actual cost (AC) from the earned
       value (EV), and not from the planned value (PV).
      *Schedule variance (SV) and schedule performance index (SPI) are calculated in terms of
       cost: EV and PV.
      *It is possible for CV and SV to run in opposite directions--for example, CV has a positive
       value when SV has a negative value.
      *Total planned value (PV) of the project is the same as the budget at completion (BAC)
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   311




Memorize

*Project budget is the time-phased project cost obtained by aggregating the individual
 activity costs.
*Contingency reserves are the funds that can be used to deal with the unplanned events
 that can potentially transpire--e.g.; in case of one or more identified risks occur--
 whereas management reserves are the funds that can be used in case of unplanned
 changes that are within the project scope but were missed during planning.
*Three-point estimations and analogous estimation usually are less time consuming but
 also less accurate than parametric estimation and bottom-up estimation.
*In every stage or funding period:
  Cost baseline = anticipated expenditure + anticipated liabilities
  Funding requirements = cost baseline + management reserves
*For cost performance analysis:
  EV = BAC x (Work completed / Total work required)
  CV = EV - AC
  CPI = EV / AC
*For schedule performance analysis:
  PV = BAC x (Time passed / Total schedule time)
  SV = EV - PV
  SPI = EV / PV
  EAC at the budgeted rate = AC + BAC - EV
                                 BAC - EV
  EAC at current CPI = AC +
                                   CPI
                                                   BAC - EV
  EAC at current CPI and current SPI = AC +
                                                   CPI xSPI
            BAC - EV
   TCPI =
            BAC - AC
312   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


      Review Questions
           1. Your project is in the planning stage. You first want to
              make the cost estimates for the planned project activities,
              and then you want to aggregate those costs. Which
              process will you perform first?
               a. Determine Budget
               b. Plan Resource Management
               c. Estimate Costs
               d. Plan Cost Management
           2. Which of the following processes will you perform first?
               A. Estimate Activity Resources
               B. Determine Budget
               C. Estimate Costs
               D. Develop Schedule
           3. Your supervisor has asked you to put some contingency
              reserves into your project plans. Which of the following
              is not true about contingency reserves?
               A. These are the funds and not the time.
               B. These are included in the cost baseline.
               C. These are included in the budget.
               D. These are included in the project funding requirement.
           4. You are in the process of developing the cost baseline for
              your project. What is the name of this process?
               A. Determine Budget
               B. Develop Cost Baseline
               C. Estimate Costs
               D. Control Costs
                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth   313



5. Assume that you are the project manager for the
   construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
   work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
   approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
   of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
   and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
   earned value of the project at the end of the first three
   weeks?
   A. $160,000
   B. $200,000
   C. $150,000
   D. $600,000
6. Assume that you are the project manager for the
   construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
   work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
   approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
   of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
   and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
   planned value of the project at this point in time?
   A. $160,000
   B. $200,000
   C. $150,000
   D. $600,000
7. Assume that you are the project manager for the
   construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
   work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
   approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
   of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
   and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
   cost variance?
   A. $40,000
   B. $50,000
    C. -$40,000
    D. $120,000
314   Chapter 7 | Project Cost Management


           8. Assume that you are the project manager for the
              construction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
              work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
              approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
              of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
              and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
              schedule variance?
               A. $40,000
               B. $50,000
               C. Three weeks
               D. Twelve weeks
           9. A project has a CPI value of 1.25 and an SPI value of 1.33.
              It means which of the following?
               A. The project is making slower progress and costing
                  more than planned.
               B. The project is making faster progress and costing less
                  than planned.
               C. The project is making slower progress and costing
                  less than planned.
               D. The project is making faster progress and costing
                  more than planned.
          10. Project cost performance is measured by comparing the
              project results from work performance data against the
              integrated performance measurement baseline. Which of
              the following are the three elements of this integrated
              performance measurement baseline?
               A. Scope baseline, time baseline, and cost baseline
               B. Scope baseline, schedule baseline, and quality baseline
               C. Scope baseline, time baseline, and quality baseline
               D. Schedule baseline, scope baseline, and cost baseline
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   315



11. An influential stakeholder has submitted a request for
    completing the project earlier than planned in less time.
    What are the two parameters that are most likely to be
    affected by this time change?
     A. Schedule and deliverables
     B. Quality and risk
     C. Cost and scope
     D. Cost and budget
12. You are managing a project in biotechnology code
    named Mitochondria Eve. You need work performance
    measurements or information to write the performance
    reports. Which process(es) will you run?
     A. Monitor and Control Project Work
     B. Control Scope, Control Schedule, and Control Costs
     C. Develop Project Work Performance Report
     D. Direct and Manage Project Work
13. The cost of a project activity is estimated to be $500 with
    10% accuracy. What is the estimated range of cost?
     A. $450-$550
     B. $490-$510
     C. $475-$525
     D. $500-$550

14. Which of the following is not listed as an input item in
    PMBOK to develop the cost management plan?
     A. Project charter
     B. Schedule management plan
     C. Risk management plan
     D. Quality management plan
                                                                      CHAPTER


                                                                              8

Managing the
Stakeholders
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 9 percent of the exam,
equivalent to about 12 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how it helps in generating the output, and what a given tool or
technique does in a given process.
You should understand very well the concepts and methods of stakeholder
mapping and representation, classification models, and stakeholder engagement.

CAPM Exam Objectives
Project Stakeholder Management:
   1.Understand the four project management processes in the project stakeholder
     management knowledge area.
   2.Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the four project
     stakeholder management processes.
   3.Recognize key stakeholders roles and needs.
   4.Identify the key concepts and benefits of stakeholder management.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_8
318   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      Without project stakeholders, there is literally no project. Your project is
      doomed to fail without successful project stakeholder management. Before
      asking "What is stakeholder management?" let's recall who the project
      stakeholders are. As discussed in Chapter 2, the enthusiasm, anxieties, fears
      etc. about the project varies with different stakeholders. Accordingly, they will
      have differing needs and expectations. One of the key project management
      focuses on which project success depends is achieving stakeholder satisfaction
      by meeting their needs and expectations while remaining aligned with project
      objectives. A key to keeping stakeholder expectations aligned with project
      objectives and meeting those expectations is to keep stakeholders engaged in
      the project. Project managers have little, if any, control over the stakeholders.
      So, stakeholder management is all about stakeholder engagement.
      To learn about project stakeholder management, we will explore three
      avenues: identify stakeholders, plan stakeholder engagement, and manage and
      monitor stakeholder engagement.


      Project Stakeholder Management: Big Picture
      Project stakeholder management is all about getting stakeholders engaged in
      the project in order to get their support.This knowledge area is comprised of
      the four processes summarized in Table 8-1. A high-level and simple view of
      the interaction between these processes is shown in Figure 8-1.

      Table 8-1. Processes of Project Stakeholder Management Mapped to the Process Groups of
      Major Outputs.

      Resource Management        Process Group       Major Output       Performed
      Process
      Identify Stakeholders      Initiating          Stakeholder        Throughout the
                                                     register           project as needed
      Plan Stakeholder           Planning            Stakeholder        Throughout the
      Engagement                                     engagement plan    project periodically
      Manage Stakeholder         Executing           Issues, change     Throughout the
      Engagement                                     requests           project
      Monitor Stakeholder        Monitor and         Work performance Throughout the
      Engagement                 Control             information      project
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth       319




            Project Management Plan
                                           Stakeholder
                                         engagement plan
                    Identify                                    Plan Stakeholder
                 Stakeholders                                     Engagement
                                       Stakeholder register


                         Stakeholder                       Stakeholder
                         register                        engagement plan


                   Monitor
                                                                Plan Stakeholder
                 Stakeholder
                                             Issue log            Management
                 Engagement


Figure 8-1. Big picture of managing stakeholders


Note With the exception of integration management, there is no knowledge area other than
stakeholder management that has processes in all the project stages before closing the project.
This reflects the significance of stakeholder management.


Before we can get stakeholders engaged in the project, we need to identify
them.


Identifying the Project Stakeholders
As mentioned in Chapter 1 and explained in Chapter 2, project stakeholders
are individuals and organizations whose interests are affected (positively or
negatively) by the project's execution and completion and/or who can influence
or impact the project. In other words, a project stakeholder has something
to gain from the project or something to lose to the project. Accordingly,
stakeholders fall into two broad categories: positive stakeholders, who will
normally benefit from the success of the project, and negative stakeholders,
who see some kind of disadvantage coming from the project.The implications
obviously are that the positive stakeholders would like to see the project
succeed, and the negative stakeholders' interests would be better served
if the project were delayed or cancelled altogether. For example, your city
mayor might be a positive stakeholder in a project to open a Walmart store in
your neighborhood because it brings business to the city, whereas some local
business leaders might look at it as a threat to their businesses and thereby
may act as negative stakeholders.
320   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      Negative stakeholders are often overlooked by the project manager and the
      project team, which increases the project risk. Ignoring positive or negative
      project stakeholders will have a damaging impact on the project. Therefore,
      it's important that you, as a project manager, start identifying the project
      stakeholders early on in the project. The different project stakeholders might
      have different and conflicting expectations that you need to analyze and
      manage.
      Identifying all the project stakeholders might be a difficult task, but the obvious
      ones include the project manager, program manager, portfolio manager,
      customers and users, project sponsor, project management office, project
      team, operations management, sellers and business partners, and functional
      managers related to the project. In addition to these key stakeholders, discussed
      in Chapter 2, there can be a number of other less obvious stakeholders
      inside and outside of your organization. Depending upon the project, these
      might include investors, sellers, contractors, family members of the project
      team members, government agencies, media outlets, lobbying organizations,
      individual citizens, and society at large.
      It is critical for the success of the project that you identify both positive
      and negative stakeholders early on in the project, understand and analyze
      their varying and conflicting expectations, and manage those expectations
      throughout the project.
      Table 8-2 presents the Identify Stakeholders process in terms of its input, tools
      and techniques, and output. Identifying stakeholders includes the following:
            *    Identify individuals and organizations that can influence
                 the project and/or be impacted by the project.
            *    Document relevant information about the individuals and
                 organizations and about their interests and involvement
                 in the project and so forth.
            *    Document how these individuals and organizations can
                 influence the project and how they can be impacted by
                 the project.
            *    Determine the level of importance of these stakeholders.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth     321




Table 8-2. The Identify Stakeholders Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques           Output
1.Project charter             1.Data gathering:              1.Stakeholder register
2.Project Management Plan:       *Questionnaires and         2.Change requests
  *Communications                 surveys                    3.Project management
   management plan               *Brainstorming                updates:
  *Stakeholder engagement     2.Data analysis:                  *Communications
   plan                          *Stakeholder analysis           management plan
3.Business documents:            *Document analysis             *Stakeholders
  *Business case                                                 engagement plan
                              3.Data representation:
  *Benefit management                                           *Requirement
                                 *Stakeholder mapping
   plan                                                          management plan
                                  and representation
4.Project documents:                                            *Risk management plan
                              4.Expert judgment
  *Requirement                                               4.Project document updates:
                              5.Meetings
   documentation                                                *Issues log
  *Change log                                                   *Assumptions log
  *Issues log                                                   *Risk register
  *Agreements
5.Enterprise environmental
  factors
6.Organizational project
  assets


As mentioned earlier, stakeholder identification is necessary in order to
manage stakeholder expectations and to manage their influence on the
project. They can influence various aspects of the project, such as definition,
changes, execution, deliverables, and ultimately its success. They may come
from inside the organization with different levels of authority or from outside
the organization.
Identifying stakeholders is an iterative process--that is, you might have to
perform the identification over and over again because some old stakeholders
may become irrelevant and some new stakeholders may appear during the
life of the project. Because identifying and analyzing the stakeholders and
managing their expectations and influence is so critical to the success of the
project, you should start this task early on in the project.
In order to identify the stakeholders, we gather, analyze, and present the data
or information about the stakeholders.
322   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      Gathering Data
      You can start by collecting information about stakeholders from the input
      items listed in Table 8-2.
      The Project Charter. The project charter helps to identify key stakeholders
      with responsibilities by revealing the internal and external individuals and
      groups who are either directly involved in the project or potentially will
      be impacted by it. The project sponsor, customers, and departments of the
      performing organization participating in the project are some examples of
      stakeholders identified by the project charter.
      Business Documents. The business case document reveals the project
      objectives and the initial list of related stakeholders. From the benefit
      management plan you can extract information about the stakeholders who
      would benefit from the project outcome.
      Project Management Plan. As stakeholder management is closely coupled
      with communication management, you can extract considerable information
      about project stakeholders from the communication management plan. Also, if
      the stakeholder engagement plan is already developed, it will contain information
      about stakeholders.
      Project Documents. The change log and issues log may reveal new
      stakeholders or changed project relations with an existing stakeholder. Also,
      from the requirement documentation you can extract or derive the stakeholder
      information.
      Procurement Documents. If the project originated from procurement
      activity, then the procurement documents, such as the contract, will be useful
      to identify the stakeholders. If this project is going to use procurement in
      order to produce part of its product, even then the procurement documents
      will help to identify some stakeholders, such as sellers and suppliers.
      Advanced Data Gathering. In conjunction with and in addition to simple
      information and data collection from input items, we can use some data-
      gathering techniques to identify new stakeholders and also get more information
      about already identified stakeholders.These techniques include questionnaires,
      surveys, and brainstorming.You can also use document-analysis techniques for
      this purpose. These techniques are described in Chapter 10.
      Once the data about stakeholders is collected, it needs to be analyzed to
      extract the useful information from it, which will then need to be appropriately
      presented.
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth     323




Stakeholder Data Analysis
Stakeholder analysis is an activity to analyze data about the stakeholders to
extract useful and relevant information. The following are three major steps:
      1. Identify. Identify all potential stakeholders and the
         important characteristics of each identified stakeholder,
         such as the following:
             a. Name, Department, and Role. For example,
                Dr. John Serri, Vice President, Research and
                Development
             b. Interest in the Project. Why should the
                stakeholder be interested in the project? Is the
                stakeholder seeking to benefit or is the stakeholder
                threatened?
             c. Right, Ownership, Contribution. What are
                the legal and moral rights of the stakeholder,
                ownership of assets, and so forth, and how and
                how much can the stakeholder contribute to the
                project?
             d. Knowledge Level. What is the knowledge level
                of the stakeholder, especially about the project
                and in the application area of the project? In other
                words, how and how much can the stakeholder's
                knowledge help or hurt the project?
             e. Expectations. What are the stakeholder's needs
                and expectations of the project?
             f.   Kind and Level of Influence. In which way
                  and how much can the stakeholder influence the
                  project to impact its outcome?
      2. Assess. Make an assessment of how a stakeholder is
         going to react to various situations in the project. This
         will help in your preparation to influence them to get
         their support to enhance the chances of project success.

      3. Classify. With this information at hand, we can classify--
         i.e., categorize--the stakeholders using data-presentation
         techniques that will help you build an appropriate
         relationship with the stakeholders.
324   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      Data Presentation
      An example of a data-presentation technique is mapping stakeholders using
      various criterion. When there are so many stakeholders, it's important for
      effective stakeholder management to classify and prioritize the stakeholders.
      This will help with efficient use of management efforts, including communication
      and expectations management, and also building appropriate relationships with
      stakeholders. For example, an obvious classification is positive and negative
      stakeholders. For more sophisticated classifications, there are several criteria
      and models, including the following:
      Direction of Influence. This model classifies stakeholders according to the
      magnitude and direction of their influence, as follows:
            *    Upward. For whom the project is being performed--
                 e.g.; project sponsor, customer organization, and senior
                 management or performing organization
            *    Downward. Project team or other people working for
                 the project on a temporary basis, such as knowledge or
                 skill specialists
            *    Outward. Stakeholders outside the project team; e.g.;
                 end users, suppliers, and regulators
            *    Sideward. Other project managers or middle managers
                 in competition with this project; e.g.; for resources
      Power/Interest Grid. In this model you place the stakeholders on a two-
      dimensional plot: power/authority level versus interest level. For example, if
      a powerful stakeholder has a lot of interest in the project, he is of great
      priority. If, on the other hand, a stakeholder lacks interest in the project, then
      he potentially is not going to influence the project that much, even if he has a
      lot of authority.
      Power/Influence Grid. This model plots the stakeholders in a two-
      dimensional space: authority level versus ability to influence the project.
      Influence/Impact. This model plots the stakeholders in a two-dimensional
      space: ability to influence the project versus ability to cause changes in the
      project planning and execution, and hence in the final outcome. For example,
      a project stakeholder may be highly involved (high influence) in the project but
      have no ability to impact the project, such as influencing the changes in the
      project. In that case, this stakeholder is of lower priority than the stakeholder
      who has high involvement and high impact.
      Stakeholder Cube.This model plots the stakeholders in a three-dimensional
      space: influence, impact, and power.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth      325



Salience Model. This model classifies stakeholders based on their multiple
characteristics, such as the ability to impose their will (power); the urgency
of their needs, expectations, or requirements; and the legitimacy of their
involvement.
One main purpose of stakeholder analysis and presentation models is to
prioritize stakeholders. For example, you can draw a variable against another
variable and see where the stakeholders fit in that plot. If the variables are
chosen carefully, the plot will suggest how much attention should be given
to various stakeholders in the plot. As an example, Figure 8-2 presents such
a plot in which the x-axis represents the level of interest from very low to
very high and the y-axis represents the power/authority level from very low
to very high. Stakeholders 1, 2, and 3 have a low interest in the project and
low power, and therefore they do not deserve much of your time and effort.
However, they must be monitored because their interest and power may
change over time. At the other extreme, Stakeholders 8, 9, and 10 have a high
interest in the project and have a very high capability to influence the project
due to high power. These stakeholders should obviously be managed with
maximum effort. Also, the high-authority/low-interest stakeholders should get
due attention because they have the power to drive a change in the project.




Figure 8-2. An example of determining strategy by plotting stakeholders against different
variables
326   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders



      Caution! Communication of information about the stakeholders is an important part of
      the stakeholder management strategy. For example, some of the information about certain
      stakeholders may be too sensitive to be included in a publicly shared document. As a project
      manager, you must exercise your discreet judgment on which information about which stakeholder
      to share with whom and to what detail.


      The results of the information from stakeholder analysis and data presentation
      go into the stakeholder register, the main output of this process.


      Output of Identifying Stakeholders
      You store information about the stakeholders that you identified in a document
      called the stakeholder register. This information includes the following items:
             *    Identification. For example, name, location,
                  organizational position, project role (if any), and contact
                  information
             *    Assessment. Requirements and expectations coming
                  from this stakeholder, the part or phase of the project that
                  is of most interest to this stakeholder, and assessment of
                  potential influence and impact on the project
             *    Classification. There will be a whole array of different
                  kinds of project stakeholders with varied levels of
                  influence. So, it's helpful to classify them in the register by
                  using suitable criteria, such as whether they are internal
                  or external to the performing organization; whether they
                  are proponents or opponents of the project; their power,
                  influence, impact, and interest levels; the direction of their
                  influence; and so on.
      In addition to this output, the Identify Stakeholders process may also generate
      change requests, and as a result some documents may need to be updated,
      such as those listed in the output column of Table 8-2.

                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.1

         Knowing the Identify Stakeholders process, answer the following:
             Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the Identify Stakeholders
                 process.
             Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the Identify Stakeholders process.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth         327



Congratulations, now you know the project stakeholders. But, before you can
manage them, you need to plan. As pointed out earlier, managing stakeholders
is all about stakeholders' engagement in the project. So, we want to plan
stakeholder engagement.


Planning Stakeholder Engagement
Managing stakeholders is equivalent to managing their engagement in the
project. So, the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process is all about developing
a management strategy to keep stakeholders engaged in an effective way
throughout the project. We have all the required information about the
stakeholders, such as their needs, expectations, level of influence, and impact
level, in the stakeholder register. Based on this, you develop approaches to
interact with stakeholders effectively.
You use some tools and techniques with this information, along with the
project management plan, to crank out the stakeholder management plan.
The inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are shown in
Table 8-3.

Table 8-3. The Plan Stakeholder Engagement Process: Inputs,Tools and Techniques, and Outputs

Input                             Tools and Techniques            Output
1.Project charter                 1.Data gathering:               1.Stakeholder
2.Project Management Plan:           *Benchmarking                  engagement plan
   *Communications                2.Data analysis:
    management plan                  *Assumption and
   *Resource management plan          constraint analysis
   *Risk management plan.            *Root-cause analysis
3.Project documents:              3.Data representation:
   *Project schedule                 *Mind mapping
   *Stakeholder register             *Stakeholder engagement
   *Change log                        assignment matrix
   *Issues log                    4.Decision making:
   *Assumptions log                  *Prioritizing/ranking
   *Risk register                 5.Expert judgment
4.Agreements                      6.Meetings
5.Enterprise environmental
  factors
6.Organizational project assets
328   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      As the project proceeds, the memberships and needs and expectations may
      keep changing, and hence this plan may need to be changed accordingly several
      times by repeating the Plan Stakeholder Management process.
      The first step to developing a stakeholder engagement plan is to get the raw
      data from the input items listed in Table 8-3.


      Raw Data for Stakeholder Engagement Plan
      From the input items for this project, you extract the information about the
      project and its stakeholders that would act as raw data.This data will help you
      develop approaches to involving stakeholders in the project, as shown in the
      following sections.
      Information Project Level. From the project charter, fetch information
      about purpose, objectives, and success criteria of the project. Also, from
      the project agreements extract information on how to properly manage a
      stakeholder, including contractors, suppliers, and procurement groups.
      Main Sources of Information About Stakeholders. The stakeholder
      register is the main source of information about stakeholders, such as their
      identity, needs, expectations, and so forth. Also, from the project schedule,
      extract information about the owner and executor of the project, and
      from the resource management plan get the information about the roles and
      responsibilities of stakeholders.
      Secondary Sources of Information About Stakeholders. Assumptions
      about certain stakeholders can be found in the assumptions log, and risk owners
      and impactors can be found in the risk register. Information about stakeholders
      with issues and who may help to resolve them can be found in the issues
      log. As an example, one need of stakeholders with issues will be that you
      communicate with them. You can learn about stakeholders' attitudes toward
      and tolerance to risk from the risk management plan. From the change log,
      extract information about stakeholders who are sources of change requests
      and about those who will decide to accept, reject, or postpone a given request.
      General Support Information for Stakeholder Management. As
      mentioned earlier, stakeholder management and communication management
      are tightly coupled. Communication strategies and their implementation from
      communication management would provide useful information for stakeholder
      management processes.
      It's critical that you adapt stakeholder management to the project environment.
      That's where enterprise environmental factors play a role as input to this process.
      The organizational structure and culture in conjunction with political climate
      and stakeholders' risk tolerance can be used to select better options to
      effectively adapt stakeholder management to the project environment. Factors
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       329



like geographical distribution of facilities and resources and local and global
culture and trends may also influence the development of an engagement plan.
The important organizational process assets in this process include the
organizational policies and procedures about media, ethics, security, risk,
communications, and so on.
For effective and efficient stakeholder management, it's important to learn
from experience. Therefore, the lessons learned database and historical
information are especially useful organizational process assets used as input
for the Plan Stakeholder Management process.
You use the information discussed in this section as raw data for certain
methods to develop the stakeholder engagement plan, as discussed in the
next section.


Tools and Techniques to Develop Stakeholder
Engagement Plan
To develop the stakeholder engagement plan, you do the following:
      1. Analyze the raw data discussed in the previous section.
      2. Compare the analysis results with benchmark.
      3. Prioritize stakeholders and their needs.
      4. Present the information in an easily useable form.
These steps are elaborated in the following.
Data Analysis. There are usually multiple possible strategies to apply to
stakeholder engagement. These are tailored using analysis of assumptions
and constraints, such as those about the stakeholders and their needs and
expectations. Furthermore, you need to find the fundamental reason for the
current level of support for or opposition to the project by a stakeholder so
that you can chose appropriate strategies to bring the support or opposition
to a desirable level. This fundamental reason is found by conducting a root-
cause analysis.
Comparing Results. You can compare the results from data analysis with a
suitable benchmark, such as results from a world-class project in the application
area of your project.
Decision Making. You can prioritize stakeholders and their needs and
requirements by using decision-making techniques such as prioritizing or
ranking. Decision making has been explained and used in several chapters,
such as Chapter 3.
330   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      Data Presentation. The data presentation involves presenting the
      information in an easily useable form. For example, mind mapping can be used
      to visually display information about stakeholders and how they are related to
      each other and to the organization. An important piece of information about
      stakeholders is stakeholder engagement, which is the heart of stakeholder
      management as it's critical to project success.You can define different levels of
      engagement for your project, such as those shown in Table 8-4.

      Table 8-4. Levels of Stakeholder Engagement

      Stakeholder Level of   Aware of Project and     Action or Reaction
      Engagement             Potential Impacts
      Leading                Yes                      Actively working for project success
      Supportive             Yes                      Supporting the change to be caused by
                                                      the impact
      Resistant              Yes                      Resisting the change to be caused by
                                                      the impact
      Neutral                Yes                      Neither supportive nor resistant
      Unaware                No                       No intentional reaction to project



      You should also always know what the current engagement level of a given
      stakeholder is and what level of engagement is required for that stakeholder
      should the project succeed.This information can be complied in the stakeholders'
      engagement assessment matrix, as shown in a simple example in Table 8-5, which
      compares each stakeholder's current engagement level with the desired one;
      Current indicates the current engagement and Desired indicates the desired
      engagement. The project team needs to identify the desired engagement level
      for the current phase of the project based on available information.
      The example in Table 8-5 shows that stakeholder Janet is at the desired
      engagement level, while stakeholders Shanti, John, and City Mayor require
      further communications and additional actions to move them to the desired
      level of engagement.

      Table 8-5. Stakeholders' Engagement Assessment Matrix

      Stakeholder     Leading            Supportive     Resistant     Neutral     Unaware
      Janet           Current, Desired
      Shanti                             Desired                      Current
      John                               Desired                                  Current
      City Mayor                         Desired        Current
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      331



The stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix exposes the gaps between
the current and desired engagement levels. Accordingly, you can take action
through the stakeholder management processes to fill these gaps.
In the process of doing analysis for engagement planning you will be holding
meetings with the relevant stakeholders and seeking their expert judgment as
needed on relevant topics, such as understanding and dealing with internal and
external politics, culture, and power structures; appropriate communication
means and strategies in different situations; and strategies for stakeholders'
project engagement.
The output of this process is the stakeholder management plan, which
contains strategies to implement and actions to perform to facilitate creative
stakeholders' involvement in the project, such as making project decisions and
executing the project.
The stakeholder management plan is implemented in the process of managing
stakeholder engagement.


Managing Stakeholder Engagement
Managing stakeholder engagement means communicating and working
with stakeholders to stay on the same page as them regarding the project
requirements by addressing their needs, expectations, and issues as they arise.
It is best done by getting them involved in project decision making and project
execution at the appropriate level at the appropriate time.What do you really
do when you manage stakeholder expectations? This is a three-pronged task:
Involvement for Confirmation. Involve the stakeholders in project decision
making and project execution at the appropriate level at the appropriate time
to ensure or confirm their continued project support.
Expectations Containment. Monitor and keep the expectations of the
stakeholders within the project scope and project management plan through
active communication, including negotiation.
Risk, Concerns, and Issues. Address stakeholder concerns, including those
that may but have not yet become issues--for example, anticipate problems
in the near future. Addressing such concerns may uncover some potential
risks that will need to be addressed. An issue is an item or a matter that is
under discussion or dispute, and there are most likely opposing views and
disagreements about it among the stakeholders.
Understand, clarify, and resolve issues raised by the stakeholders. Some of the
resolutions can give rise to change requests; other issues may be postponed
to the next project or the next phase.
332   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders



      Caution! The importance of resolving issues in a timely fashion cannot be overstated. An
      unresolved issue can grow into a major source of conflict and a delay in the completion of project
      activities.


      You can keep stakeholders on the same page as you by ensuring that they
      understand the internal dynamics and realities of the project, such as risks
      and interdependencies. Keeping them in touch with the project reality will
      increase the probability of project success. It's the responsibility of the project
      manager to manage stakeholder engagement by using the process presented
      in Table 8-6 in terms of input, tools and technique, and output.


      Table 8-6. The Manage Stakeholder Engagement Process: Input,Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                             Tools and Techniques           Output
      1.Project Management Plan:        1.Feedback                     1.Change requests
         *Communications                2.Interpersonal and team skills: 2.Project management
          management plan                  *Conflict management            updates:
         *Stakeholder                      *Negotiations                  *Communications
          engagement plan                                                  management plan
                                           *Observation/
         *Risk management plan              conversation                  *Stakeholders'
         *Change management plan                                           engagement plan
                                           *Cultural and political
      2.Project documents:                  awareness                  3.Project document updates:
         *Stakeholder register          3.Ground rules                    *Stakeholder register
         *Change log                    4.Expert judgment                 *Change log
         *Issues log                    5.Meetings                        *Issues log
         *Lessons learned                                                 *Lessons learned register
          register
      3.Enterprise environmental
        factors
      4.Organizational project assets



      Most of the items in the input and tools and techniques columns in Table 8-6
      have already been discussed in this book. Some information regarding these
      items and relevant to this process will be discussed in this section.
                                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth             333




Tip Managing stakeholders' expectations by engaging them is crucial for project success
because it keeps their expectations in line with the project goals, objectives, and requirements
as laid out in the project management plan. Otherwise, their definition of success will be different
from your definition of success, and the project will fail in their eyes even if it succeeded according
to the project management plan.


Earlier, I discussed how managing stakeholder engagement is a three-pronged
task.That was the what of this process. But how do you perform this task? The
how of the task also has three dimensions to it.
Manage Stakeholder Engagement According to a Strategy. This
strategy and information on how to manage stakeholders' expectations by
engaging them is found in the stakeholder engagement plan.
Identify the Right Stakeholders to Communicate With. A list of
stakeholders and information about them is in the stakeholder register. Also,
you can use the risk management plan to find out about risk categories,
risk tolerance, and reporting format in the context of stakeholders. This is
information that you will use to manage stakeholder engagement.
Communicate with the Stakeholders to Manage Their Project
Engagement. Use the communication management plan as a guide for
stakeholder communication regarding methods, technology, and format to use.
While communicating to manage their expectations, you will be addressing
their concerns and issues, for which you will need the issues log to document
and track the status of those issues. Because it's a continuous process
throughout the project, you will be regularly recording the lessons learned in
the lessons learned register to subsequently use them to improve the process.
While addressing stakeholders' concerns and issues, you or they will be
generating change requests, for which you will need a change management
plan that describes the process for submitting, evaluating, and implementing
the changes, and of course the change log to document and manage the change
requests. The plans and other documents listed in the output columns of
Table 8-6 are updated to reflect these changes.
As Table 8-6 shows, the change requests item is the main output of the Manage
Stakeholder Engagement process.


Note Rarely does an issue grow to become a project or a project activity. It is your responsibility
to resolve issues in a timely fashion in order to maintain a constructive relationship with stakeholders.
However, the resolution may cause change requests for the small project, which should go through
the proper evaluation and approval process before they are implemented, obviously.
334   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      Communication is the key to this process, and all the tools and techniques,
      listed is Table 8-6, used in managing stakeholder engagement are directly
      related to it. The feedback, negotiations, conflict management, observation
      and conversation, and ground rules (which are part of the team charter) were
      discussed in Chapter 6 in the context of obtaining resources and developing
      a project team, and observation and conversations were also discussed in
      Chapter 4. Cultural and political awareness is covered in the next chapter, on
      communication management.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.2

         Knowing the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
            Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the Manage Stakeholder
                Engagement process.
            Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
                process.




                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.3

         True or False: A stakeholder is proposing something that is not within the planned
         scope of the project. The appropriate response to this proposal is to oppose it.


      It is important to document your experience of managing stakeholder
      expectations, which includes causes of issues, how the issues were resolved,
      lessons learned, and so on. This will add to the organizational process assets
      and will be useful for upcoming projects and as a record through the lifecycle
      of the current project. As stakeholder engagement in the project needs to
      continue throughout the project lifetime, it needs to be monitored.


      Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement
      The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process "supervises" stakeholder
      engagement to see how it's going. To keep it on track, information is
      distributed among the stakeholders and the engagement strategies and plans
      are modified. Like a typical monitoring and controlling process, its main input is
      work performance data and main output the work performance information.
      Table 8-7 presents the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process in terms of
      the input, tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth     335




Table 8-7. The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques          Output
1.Project Management Plan:    1.Data analysis:              1.Work performance
   *Communications               *Stakeholder analysis        information
    management plan              *Root-cause analysis       2.Change requests
   *Stakeholder                  *Alternatives analysis     3.Project management
    engagement plan                                           updates:
                              2.Decision making:
   *Resource management                                        *Communications
                                 *Multicriteria decision
    plan                                                        management plan
                                  analysis
2.Project documents:                                           *Resource management
                                 *Voting
   *Stakeholder register                                        plan
                              3.Data reorientation:
   *Project communications                                 *Stakeholder
                                 *Stakeholders'              engagement plan
   *Issues log                     engagement assessment
                                                         4.Project document updates:
   *Risk register                  matrix
                                                           *Stakeholder register
   *Lessons learned           4.Communication skills:
    register                                               *Risk register
                                 *Feedback
3.Work performance data                                    *Issues log
                                 *Presentation
4.Enterprise environmental                                 *Lessons learned
                              5.Interpersonal and team
  factors                                                    register
                                skills:
5.Organizational project         *Leadership
  assets
                                 *Networking
                                 *Active listening
                                 *Cultural and political
                                  awareness
                              6.Meetings


The core of performing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process is
described in the following section.


Performing the Monitor Stakeholder Management
Process
Monitoring stakeholder engagement using items from the input and tools and
techniques columns of Table 8-7 is described in the following steps.
Get the Project Execution Data and Results. The input item work
performance data from project execution includes the status of stakeholder
engagement in the project, such as who is supporting or opposing the project
and at what level. The other input item project communication contains the
336   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      project works performance report and any information that will be or has
      been distributed to stakeholders.
      Communicate. Distribute the information in project communications that
      needs to be distributed according to the communication management plan
      using communication methods like presentation. Make sure the information has
      been received and understood using communication methods like feedback.
      Analyze Work Performance Data. Analyze the stakeholder engagement
      data in the work performance data document using data-analysis techniques
      such as stakeholder analysis, root-cause analysis, and alternatives analysis. The
      stakeholder analysis, already described in this chapter, is performed to determine
      the support or opposition of stakeholders regarding the project. The root-
      cause analysis, discussed in an upcoming chapter on quality management,
      is performed to determine the fundamental reason for not achieving the
      engagement as planned. Once the root causes are discovered, the alternatives
      analysis, discussed already in multiple chapters, is performed to explore and
      evaluate the various options for responding to the failure to engage as planned.
      Make Decision. After conducting the alternatives analysis, evaluate the
      various options; make a decision as to which option to choose by using
      multicriteria decision analysis or by voting, both discussed in Chapter 3.
      Generating the Output. The data analysis generates the output item work
      performance information, which contains the current stakeholder engagement
      status, such as project support level compared to desired level as defined
      in the stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix. The decision on which
      response option to choose generates change requests, whose implementation
      causes plan and project document updates, as listed in the output columns of
      Table 8-7.
      You will also make use of interpersonal and team skills in monitoring stakeholder
      engagement. For example, you will use leadership skills, covered in Chapter
      2, to share your project vision with the stakeholders and motivate them
      to support the project objectives and outcome; networking to find out
      the project support level among stakeholders; active listening, covered in
      Chapters 2 and 9, to minimize misunderstandings and to build consensus;
      cultural awareness, covered in Chapter 9, to consider cultural sensitivity and
      differences in communication and engagement requirements; and political
      awareness, covered in Chapter 9, to better understand organizational
      strategies and power structures and to communicate accordingly in order to
      maximize project support.
      The enterprise environmental factors and organizational project assets that
      influence are pretty much the same as in the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
      process. Other items from the input column not mentioned here have their
      usual roles to play and were already discussed in this chapter.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   337




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.4

   Knowing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
      Q1. How will the stakeholder register and risk register be updated as
          a result of this process?
      Q2. How will the stakeholder engagement plan, communications management
          plan, and resource management plan be updated as a result of this process?


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
      *    Stakeholder management is about managing the engag
           ement of stakeholders in the project and monitoring that
           engagement.
      *    The engagement is done by getting stakeholders involved
           in project decision making and project execution at the
           appropriate level at the appropriate time.
      *    The ultimate purpose of engagement is to maximize
           support for the project, and it's achieved by managing
           stakeholders' needs and expectations and addressing
           their concerns.

Summary
It is crucial for the success of the project to get the support of stakeholders,
which is best done by getting them engaged in the project at the appropriate
level at the appropriate time. Project stakeholder management is all about
stakeholder engagement, of which the big part is managing stakeholder needs,
expectations, and concerns.
In stakeholder management, you first identify stakeholders using project
business documents and other items as input to produce the stakeholder
register; you generate a stakeholder engagement plan by using the project
charter and other items as input. Because the processes of generating the
stakeholder register and stakeholder engagement plan are performed
throughout the project, the stakeholder register can be and is used as an
input to the process of creating the stakeholder engagement plan, and the
stakeholder engagement plan can be and is used as an input to the process of
generating the stakeholder register, as shown in Figure 8-1.
You manage and monitor stakeholder engagement according to the
stakeholder engagement plan. The monitor engagement process takes the
338   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


      engagement-related data from the project's execution and converts it into
      work performance information, then generates necessary change requests.
      Road Ahead. The communication management plan is an input to all the
      stakeholder management processes, underlining the close connection
      between stakeholder management and communication management, which
      will be discussed in the next chapter.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *Managing stakeholders includes identifying stakeholders, planning stakeholder engagement,
       and managing and controlling stakeholder engagement.
      *The stakeholder management plan contains strategies to implement and actions to
       perform to facilitate creative stakeholders' involvement in the project, such as making
       project decisions and project execution.
      *The main purpose of managing stakeholder engagement is to get continued project
       support from stakeholders. It done by managing their needs and expectations through
       their involvement in the project.
      *The Monitor Engagement process oversees stakeholder engagement and converts the
       engagement-related data from the project's execution into work performance information,
       then generates necessary change requests.

      Look Out
      *Managing stakeholder expectations is crucial to the success of the project by keeping
       these expectations in line with the project management plan.
      *After the stakeholders have been identified, stakeholder management is all about managing
       and controlling stakeholder engagement.
      *A key purpose of the stakeholder engagement plan is to support interactions with project
       stakeholders to serve the project's interest.
      *The communication management plan is an input to all the stakeholder management
       processes.
      *Unresolved issues can grow to become a source of conflict.

      Memorize
      *The stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix is a table that compares individual
       stakeholders' current engagement level with the desired one.
      *Stakeholder management is not about managing or controlling the stakeholders; it is
       about managing or controlling their engagement with the project.
      *Mind mapping is a technique used to visually display information about stakeholders and
       how they are related to each other and to the organization.
                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth   339




Review Questions
   1. The data presentation model that presents a stakeholder's
      influence, impact, and interest in one plot is called a:
      A. Salience model
      B. Stakeholder cube
       C. Influence/impact/interest grid
       D. Three-dimensional model
   2. You are project manager of project named "Teach the
      Congress." Your friend Cosmo is a project manager of
      a project that shares some resources with your project.
      What kind of influence does Cosmo have on your project?
       A. Upward
       B. Outward
       C. Sideward
       D. Downward
   3. You have just joined a project that has already been
      planned. You want to take a look at strategies to
      implement and actions to perform to facilitate creative
      stakeholders' involvement in the project, such as making
      project decisions and doing project execution. Where
      you will look?
       A. Stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix
       B. Mind mapping
       C. The stakeholder engagement plan
       D. Project stakeholder register
   4. Which of the following is not generated during the Plan
      Stakeholder Engagement process?
       A. Stakeholder register
       B. Stakeholder engagement plan
       C. Stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix
       D. Strategies about stakeholders' involvement
340   Chapter 8 | Managing the Stakeholders


           5. The focus of the stakeholder management knowledge
              area is:
               A. Stakeholder management
               B. Managing stakeholder expectations
               C. Controlling stakeholders
               D. Stakeholder engagement
           6. Project business documents are input to which
              stakeholder process?
               A. Identify Stakeholders
               B. Manage Stakeholder Expectations
               C. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
               D. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
           7. Which of the following is an input to all the processes of
              stakeholder management?
               A. Project charter
               B. Communications management plan
               C. Resource management plan
               D. Stakeholder engagement plan
           8. Which of the following is not an output of monitoring
              stakeholder engagement?
               A. Performance reports
               B. Change requests
               C. Issues resolved
               D. Stakeholder engagement plan changed
           9. You have generated a project document named project
              communications that can be used in which of the following
              processes?
               A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
               B. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
               C. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
               D. Distribute Information
                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth   341



10. The salience model can be used in which of the following
    processes?
     A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
     B. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
     C. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
     D. Identify Stakeholders
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                             9

Project
Communication
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 10 percent of the exam,
equivalent to about 11 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how it helps generate the output, as well as what a given tool or
technique does in a given process.
You should understand very well the concepts and methods of the
stakeholders' engagement assignment matrix, interpersonal and team skills,
and communication methods and models.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how
the tasks can be adapted to various needs, and recognize an agile environment
in action; e.g.; continual assessment generates change requests, which lead to
changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_9
344   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Communication Management:
         1. Understand the three project management processes in the project communication
            management knowledge area.
         2. Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the three project
            communication management processes.
         3. Identify key concepts and approaches in project communication management,
            including tailoring and special considerations for agile/adaptive environments.
         4. Recognize the dimensions of communication and components of a communications
            management plan.
         5. Identify communications skills and methods for project communication management.


      Communication skills are critical for success not only in management, including
      project management, but also in a multitude of short-term and long-term
      tasks we perform each day. These skills can be applied to all communication
      techniques, such as verbal, written, video, and body language, as well as to
      listening. They are also an important component of other skills required for
      effective project management, such as negotiating, influencing, and leadership,
      and are one of the three skills that constitute the PMI's talent triangle for
      project management. Other common usages for communication skills are
      performing tasks such as fact finding to develop or verify information; probing
      or analyzing an idea or situation; holding meetings and conducting discussions;
      setting and managing expectations; resolving conflicts; and educating, coaching,
      motivating, pursuing, or reassuring a person or a group. You manage project
      communication using processes in the knowledge area called project
      communication management.
      In project management, with whom do you largely communicate using your
      communication skills? The answer is project stakeholders. This shows how
      intimately connected the communication management and stakeholder
      management project management knowledge areas are.The central question in
      this chapter is: how do you use communication for the success of the project?
      In search of an answer, we will explore three avenues: plan communication,
      manage communication, and monitor communication.


      Managing Project Communication: Big Picture
      There is a common thread that runs through almost all activities and processes
      in project management, and that is communication.The project and its activities
      would fail without effective communication. Communication is an exchange
      of information among persons and groups by using an effectively common
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth         345



system of signs, symbols, and behavior. I use the term effectively common to
take into account the fact that even if two communicating entities are using
two different systems, the "translators" between the communicating entities
produce the results as if the two entities were using a common system. For
example, I might be using a Windows computer, and you might be using a
Macintosh, but we can exchange e-mails without having to deal with the
differences between the two machines.


Tip Communication is a common thread that runs through almost all activities and processes
in project management. You manage communication using processes in the communication
management knowledge area, but communication itself permeates through almost each project
activity.


The importance of communication in project management cannot be
overemphasized. Even a well-scheduled and well-funded project can fail in
the hands of a hardworking team of experts because of the lack of proper
and timely communication. As a project manager, you may be dealing with a
wide functional variety of individuals, ranging from executives to marketing
personnel, sales folks, and technologists. You should be able to wear different
communication hats depending upon with whom you are communicating. For
example, you will not be talking in terms of technical jargon with executives or
marketing folks, and you will not speak marketing lingo to software developers.
You will be speaking to different stakeholders in their "language" while filling
the "language gap" between different functional groups and eliminating
misunderstandings resulting from miscommunication. The key point is that
you put on the appropriate communication hat depending on which individual
or group you are communicating with. Be able to switch communication hats
quickly and avoid technical jargon and acronyms that are not understood by
the person or the group you are communicating with. The goal is clarity of
language to convey the message accurately.
In a project, you will be communicating with project stakeholders. The
intrinsic connection between communication management and stakeholder
management is illustrated in Figure 9-1, with communication management
processes in gray and stakeholder management in white.
346   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management



                                                 Identify
                    Stakeholder               Stakeholders
                                                                            Stakeholder
                    register                                                register
                                Communication        Stakeholder
                                management plan      register
                           Stakeholder                         Updated project
                           engagement plan      Manage         management
            Plan                                               plan                 Monitor
                                              Stakeholder
        Communication                         Engagement                         Communication
                           Communication
                           management plan

                                                     Project
                                                     communications          Project
                  Communication                                              communications
                  management plan
                                                Manage
                                             Communication


      Figure 9-1. Big picture of project communication management

      As shown in Table 9-1, project communication management is constituted by
      the following three processes:
             *    Plan Communication. This is the process of determ
                  ining the information needs and accordingly developing
                  the project communication plan to meet those needs.
             *    Manage Communication. This is the process of
                  managing the distribution of relevant information to
                  the right stakeholders at the right time using the right
                  methods. This managing of information covers the
                  creating, collecting, storing, retrieving, and distributing of
                  needed project information.
             *    Monitor Communication. This is the process that
                  oversees communication to make sure that the inform
                  ation needs of stakeholders are being adequately met
                  throughout the project as planned, and that this commu
                  nication is producing the desired impact.


      Tip The major goal of communication management is to deliver the right information to the
      right stakeholders at the right time using the right methods to produce the desired impact.


      These processes are mapped to their process groups in Table 9-1.
                                                                CAPM(R) in Depth     347



Table 9-1. Processes of Project Communication Management Mapped to the Process
Groups of Major Outputs

Resource Management       Process Group      Major Output        Performed
Process
Plan Communication        Planning           Communication       Throughout the
                                             management plan     project
Manage Communication      Executing          Project             Throughout the
                                             communications      project
Monitor Communication     Monitoring and     Work performance    Throughout the
                          Controlling        information         project
                                             Change requests



In a nutshell, communication in project management has much to do with
managing the information and delivering it to project stakeholders at the right
time by using the appropriate methods. The project stakeholders were already
identified in the initiation stage, so we can plan project communication for them.

Planning Project Communication
First, you should realize that the communication activities may be performed in
many possible forms, such as from body language to word of mouth or a written
formal document; from with your peers to up and down the organizational
hierarchy, to the media; and from unofficial to official.You should be conscious
about using an appropriate form of communication depending on the nature
of the communication task at hand and who you are communicating with.
In a project environment, communication means communicating with the
project stakeholders. Plan Communication is the process of determining the
information needs of the project stakeholders, which in general will be different
for different stakeholders, and accordingly designing the communication
approach within the constraints of the available organizational assets at your
disposal to meet those needs.
To be specific, communication planning determines the following:
       *   The communication and information needs of each
           project stakeholder--individual or group
       *   The few Ws: what information is needed and where it will
           be stored, when it is needed, who needs it, and who will
           deliver it, who can access it, and so on
       *   How the information will be delivered--for example, by
           e-mail, phone call, or presentation
       *   Gap factors: time zone differences, language barriers, and
           cross-cultural barriers
348   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management



      Caution! Planning communication is the process of determining the information needs
      of each project stakeholder and accordingly the communication approach. Poor planning will
      produce undesired results, such as the wrong individuals getting sensitive information, necessary
      information not getting to the right stakeholders in time, wrong communication methods being
      used, and so on.


      As mentioned in the last chapter, the stakeholder register is developed during
      the Identify Stakeholders process, which, along with the project plan, is the
      major input into the Plan Communication process presented in Table 9-2
      in terms of its inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. Also, because
      communication is the common thread running through the whole project,
      and because it must be adapted to the whole project environment, all the
      enterprise environmental factors and all the organizational process assets
      should be considered as input. Historical information and lessons learned
      are particularly important because they can be used for wisely planning the
      communication based on experience.

      Table 9-2. The Plan Communications Management Process: Inputs, Tools and Techniques,
      and Outputs

      Input                            Tools & Techniques                Output
      1.Project charter                1.Communication                   1.Communications
      2.Project Management Plan:         requirement analysis              management plan
         *Resource management          2. Communication                  2.Project management
          plan                            technology determination         updates:
        *Stakeholder engagement 3.Communication methods         *Stakeholder
           plan                    and   models determination      engagement plan
      3.Project documents:       4.I nterpersonal and team    3.P roject document
                                   skills:                      updates:
        *Requirement
           documentation           *Communication style         *Project schedule
                                       assessment               *Stakeholder register
        *Stakeholder register
                                   *Cultural and political
      4.Enterprise environmental
                                       awareness
        factors
                                 5.Data representation:
      5.Organizational project
        assets                     *Stakeholders' engagement
                                       assignment matrix
                                       6.Expert judgment
                                       7.Meetings
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       349




Performing the Plan Communication Management
Process
The core of planning communication management can be expressed in the
following steps in terms of the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs listed
in Table 9-1:
      1. From the resource management plan, get relevant "how-
         to" information about resources, such as team mem-
         bers, other stakeholders, and communication resources,
         and how they are categorized, allocated, managed, and
         released. This info may help in determining stakeholder
         communication needs and how to fulfill them.
      2. From the stakeholder engagement plan, learn about the
         stakeholder engagement strategies, which would need
         communication to be implemented.
      3. Find out about stakeholders from the stakeholder register
         and project charter, which identify the key stakeholders
         and possibly their responsibilities.
      4. Fetch stakeholders' communication requirements from
         requirement documentation, if any.
      5. Determine the stakeholders' communication needs by
         performing the communication requirement analysis on the
         information or on raw data collected in the preceding
         steps.
      6. Determine the communication technology to use to store
         and deliver the information.
      7. Determine the communication methods and models to
         communicate with.
      8. Determine the interpersonal and team skills data-presen-
         tation techniques to be used in communication.
      9. Document all these determinations and "how-to's" in the
         communications management plan.
     10. Update the documents that need to be updated as a
         result of this process, such as those listed in the output
         column of Table 9-2.
The tools and methods just mentioned are explained in the following section.
350   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      Tools and Techniques for Communication Planning
      Recall that communication is the transferral of information from one point to
      another. It expends resources.To optimize the use of resources and the benefits
      of communication, you need to analyze the communication requirements
      and determine the best communication technology to be used to facilitate
      information transfer. These and other relevant tools and techniques are
      discussed in the following sections.


      Communication Requirements Analysis
      Communication requirements needed for the communication planning process
      must be analyzed. This analysis will generate the communication needs of the
      project stakeholders. For example, a communication requirement may specify
      the type of information needed and the format in which this information
      should be delivered. The analysis of this requirement will estimate its value--
      for example, fulfilment of this requirement will significantly contribute to
      the success of the project, or the lack of it will result in the failure of the
      project or one of its components. So, one of the purposes of communication
      requirements analysis is to optimize the use of resources in communication
      by prioritizing requirements.


      Tip Communication requirements need to be analyzed to determine the communication needs
      of the project stakeholders. This is important for optimal use of the communication resources and
      for project success.


      The following are some examples of what types of information and sources of
      communication requirements you will need to analyze for your project:
              *    Input Documents. Type of information and sources of
                   communication requirements mentioned in the previous
                   section.
              *    Relationships. Organizational and stakeholder respon
                   sibility relationships. Organizational charts can be helpful
                   to figure out some of this information.
              *    Groups. Different groups, disciplines, departments,
                   and specialties involved in this project--for example,
                   marketing, sales, and engineering as departments and
                   software engineering and testing as groups in the
                   engineering department-- and their interdependencies.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth           351



        *    Logistics. How many individuals and groups will be
             involved in the project and where they are located.
             Obviously, this information is necessary to plan
             communication.
        *    Information Needs. Communication is performed to
             deliver or exchange some kind of information. So, to plan
             communication effectively, it's important to know the
             following information needs:
             *    Information needs of the stakeholders
             *    Internal information needs--for example,
                  communication across the performing organization
                  and communication within the project team
             *    External information needs--for example,
                  communicating with contractors, media, and the
                  public
             *    Legal requirements, such as privacy of certain types
                  of information
             *    Number of communication channels or paths in
                  different modes, such as one-to-one, one-to-many,
                  and many-to-many.
You can appreciate the complexity of communication by realizing that there
are n(n-1)/2 possible communication channels among n stakeholders in many-
to-many mode.You can derive this formula by noting that each of n individuals
can communicate with n-1 other individuals. If we multiply n by n-1, we are
double counting each channel, and hence we divide by 2. For example, if there
are 20 stakeholders, the possible number of communication channels is 20
(20-1)/2=190.


Caution! Note that PMI lists communication technology, communication models, and
communication methods as tools and techniques in the Plan Communication Management
process. Generally, we use the tools and techniques listed in a process to run the process. But, in
this case, we are determining, not necessarily using, the communication technology, models, and
methods that will be needed to facilitate communication among stakeholders.


Based on the communication needs, you can determine which communication
technology, communication models, and communication methods will be
appropriate to meet these needs.
352   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      Communication Technology Determination
      Depending on communication needs and the nature of the information, the
      communication technology used may vary from a conversation in a hallway,
      to meetings, to a sophisticated information system. The following factors can
      contribute to determining the communication technology to be used for your
      project:
            *   Availability. If you are considering a number of options,
                obviously the technology that's already in place is more
                likely to be chosen.
            *   Project Environment. The project environment can
                also affect the choice of communication technology. For
                example, the communication technology requirements
                for a project team that meets face-to-face will be different
                than those for a virtual team.
            *   Project Length. The length of the project affects
                communication technology requirements in the following
                ways:
                *   Is it worth it to spend on a technology for the given
                    length of the project?
                *   Will the technology under consideration change
                    during the course of the project?

                *   If yes, that will mean extra costs for the new
                    technology and for training team members to use it.
            *   Urgency of the Information Need. How frequently
                the information needs to be updated will also play a role in
                determining the communication technology. For example,
                information that does not need to change frequently can
                be delivered in written reports, whereas information that
                can change very frequently can be delivered through web
                pages.
            *   Staffing Preparation Level. Another factor that can
                be considered in making the communication technology
                decision is the users' (project team and other stakeholders)
                level of preparation for using a given technology. Are the
                users already fluent in this technology, or will they need
                to be trained? Training and learning for the project staff
                could be valid issues on the table.
            *   Confidentiality of Information.This will also influence
                what technology you can use.
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth      353



      *   Organizational Policy on the Use of Social Media.
          This will affect what information you can put on social
          media.

Communication Models and Methods Determination
If you have some experience in IT or in the field of communication, be aware
that when PMI refers to communication models and methods, it has very
specific things in mind. Although it's a very broad topic, we will confine our
discussion to what PMI means by communication models and methods for the
purpose of the exam.
Communication Models. A general illustration of PMI's communication
model is seen in Figure 9-2, and the different components in the communica
tion path are explained in the following list:
      *   Sender. The individual that initiates the communication
          by sending the original message.
      *   Message. An encoded piece of information that travels
          from one individual to another.
      *   Encode. To convert thoughts into a format that can be
          sent as a message to the receiver.
      *   Decode. To convert the encoded message back into
          thoughts and ideas upon which one could act.
      *   Medium. The means of communication used to send
          and receive the message. E-mail, telephone, and face-to-
          face conversation are some examples of media.
      *   Feedback Message. The response sent by the receiver
          to the sender. It may be a simple acknowledgment, or it
          may be a full message that may require a response.
      *   Receiver. The individual that receives the original message
          sent by the sender
      *   Noise. While the message travels through the medium,
          it can be interrupted and modified by some interfering
          entity called noise. Anything that interferes with the
          transmission and understanding of the message is called
          noise. Some examples are distance, lack of background
          information or context in which the message is composed,
          and unfamiliar technology being used. For example,
          e-mailing and texting have their own lingo, acronyms, and
          symbols that can become noise for people who are new
          to these technologies.
354   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management




      Figure 9-2. A general illustration of a communication model as viewed by PMI

      The communication model presented in Figure 9-2 is very general, out of
      which we can slice out PMI's modes, as shown here:
             1. Eliminate the feedback message and any consideration of
                noise from Figure 9-2 and you have got PMI's basic sender/
                receiver model of communication. In this model, message
                can be sent, but it does not ensure that the message was
                understood by the receiver because there is no feedback.
             2. To the basic sender/receiver model, add the feedback
                message and noise consideration due to physical sources,
                such as technology or infrastructure, and you have got the
                basic interactive model. It can be used to send a message
                with some assurance that the message is understood.
             3. To the basic interactive model, add human factors such
                as culture differences to the sources of noise, and you
                have got more complex interactive model, as presented
                in Figure 9-2. It can be used to send a message with
                assurance that the message is understood.
      For the communication to work, both the senders and the receivers have
      some responsibilities. The responsibilities of the sender include ensuring
      that the message being sent conveys the complete information clearly and
      ensuring that the information is received correctly and understood properly
      by the receiver. The responsibilities of the receiver include ensuring that the
      information is received correctly and understood properly in its entirety and
      that it is acknowledged.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth    355




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.1

   Saira Bano is the project manager for the Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project.
   Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item in the
   second column.

   Term             Action
   A. Message       1.While developing the schedule, Saira realized that there was a
                      risk involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts into a note
                      that she wrote on her computer.
   B. Medium        2.She sent the note to the project sponsor.
   C. Encode        3.She used e-mail to send the message.
   D. Noise         4.The sponsor received the message.
   E. Receiver      5.The sponsor could not understand some of the acronyms and
                      terms in the e-mail message, such as variable number of tandem
                      repeats (VNTR, central dogma of molecular biology).
   F. Feedback      6.The sponsor responded to Saira, expressing his concern that he
                      could not exactly understand her concerns.



Communication Methods. In its most basic form, communication is an
exchange of information between two entities. Even communication among
several entities is better handled by looking at it as a set of exchanges
between two entities. For example, A communicating with B, C, and D is a
set of exchanges between A and B, A and C, and A and D. In other words,
exchange between two entities is the basic building block of communication.
So, we can always break down a communication as an exchange between a
sender and a receiver.
From the perspective of how the sender and the receiver are involved with
each other through the communication system, communication can be
classified into the following two main categories:
      1. Interactive Communication. In this type of communi
         cation, the receiver receives the message and sends a
         response to it. This way, the communicating entities keep
         switching the roles of sender and receiver. There are two
         kinds of interactive communication:
              *   Asynchronous Communication. A communi
                  cation in which the two communicating entities
                  do not have to be present at each end of the
                  communication line at the same time. E-mail is an
356   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


                    example of asynchronous communication because
                    when the sender of the e-mail pushes the Send
                    button, the intended recipient of the e-mail message
                    does not have to be logged on to the e-mail server.
                    The recipient can log on later, retrieve the message,
                    and read it.
                *   Synchronous Communication. A communication
                    in which the two communicating entities have to be
                    present at each end of the communication line at
                    the same time. It's a live, real-time communication--
                    if you are not present when the sender is sending
                    the message, you miss the message. Speaking with
                    someone face-to-face and conversing with someone
                    on the phone are two examples of synchronous
                    communication.
            2. One-way Communication. There are two kinds of
               one-way communication:
                *   Pull Communication. Pull communication is
                    used when it's up to the receivers to determine if
                    and when they need the information. In this kind of
                    communication, the receiver pulls the information
                    from a pool of information. Downloading from
                    websites is an example of this type of communication.
                *   Push Communication. In this kind of communi
                    cation, the sender broadcasts the information to
                    a set of entities without waiting for the request
                    of information and without the need to confirm
                    that the information reached its destination.
                    Marketing e-mails and letters are examples of push
                    communication. Status reports are another example
                    of push communication.
      The pull and push methods can also be used in conjunction with each other.
      For example, the sender can also push the information to a pool, and the
      receivers can pull it from there at their own convenience.
      The communication types discussed here are called communication methods in
      the PMI Standard. Depending on the purpose, the project manager can decide
      which of these communication methods to use. Quite often a hybrid approach
      is used in the real world--that is, a mix of more than one method.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth           357




Note Communication approaches, to be determined for the communication plan, refers to the
setting or environment in which the information flows, such as interpersonal communication (e.g.;
face-to-face conversation); small group communication (many-to-many; e.g.; a meeting); public
communication (one-to-many; e.g.; one speaker addressing a gathering); mass communication
(one-to-many; e.g.; broadcast or as press release); and network computing technology (e.g.;
online social networking sites).


Interpersonal and Team Skills. Interpersonal and team skills, including the
following, can be used when dealing with different aspects of communication.
Political awareness. Political awareness refers to recognizing and understanding
the power structure of the organization and the influence of this structure
on the relationships such as inner-management and team manager to team
member relationships. This technique determines the proper communication
approaches and strategies to operate within this power structure by integrating
political awareness into the project environment.
Cultural awareness. Culture awareness refers to recognizing and understanding
the cultural differences among stakeholders. This technique determines the
proper communication approaches and strategies to operate within the
framework of cultural differences and sensitivity. This will help you avoid
misunderstandings and resulting conflicts caused by poor training regarding
cultural differences and cultural insensibilities.
Communication-style assessment. This technique refers to identifying proper
content presentation and format and preferred delivery method for a planned
communication activity. This is often used for unsupportive stakeholders to
fill the gap between their current support position and the desired one, as
recorded in the stakeholders' engagement assignment matrix.
To close this gap between current project support position and the desired
one, the engagement assignment matrix can be re-analyzed to modify or identify
new communication requirements.
Of course, in the process of making these determinations, you will need to hold
meetings with the project team and other stakeholders about communicating
and other matters. You can also seek an expert on communication-related
topics.
The result of the activities described in this and the previous section is the
generation of the project communication plan.
358   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      Project Communication Plan
      The major output of communication planning is the communication
      management plan. This is the document that describes the communication
      expectations and needs, as well as the plans for how these needs will be met.
      It includes the following:
            *   Communication requirements of the project stakeholders
            *   Information to be communicated: content, format, and
                level of detail
            *   Who will communicate the information, who will receive
                it, and why
            *   The person responsible for authorizing the release of
                confidential information
            *   Methods of communication that will be used, such as
                e-mail, presentation, and press release
            *   The frequency of communication, such as daily or weekly
            *   The method and procedure for escalating those issues
                that cannot be resolved at a lower staff level, such as
                project level
            *   A glossary of common communication terminology
            *   Methods and procedures for updating and refining
                the communication management plan if needed as the
                program progresses
            *   Communication constraints
      When executing a project in this Information Age, more likely than not you will
      need multiple technologies for communication, such as e-mail, web calendars,
      and video conferencing. Therefore, it is important that you plan for the
      communication technology requirements. This planning has two components:
      the tools that are needed and the usage of those tools. To determine which
      tools are needed, ask questions such as the following:
            *   How frequently do you need to update the information?
            *   Will the team hold face-to-face or virtual meetings?
      For information that does not change often, written reports will be sufficient,
      whereas information that needs to be updated frequently and on a moment's
      notice needs web communication tools. To plan effective usage of the tools,
      ask the following questions:
            *   Are the tools (communication systems) already in place
                and ready to be used?
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           359



        *    Will the available communication tools change before the
             program ends?
        *    Are the team members familiar with the tools or do they
             need training to use them?
Also, there will be a method and procedure of how to modify the plan, if
need be.


Updates to Project Documents
During communication planning, you might realize that you need to make
some changes in the project schedule and stakeholder register. Accordingly,
you will need to change these documents.


Tip While planning for communication (or doing anything, for that matter), pay attention to
details, ask questions, and probe the situation to come to a better understanding. A well-understood
problem is already half-solved. Be an active and effective listener.


Part of managing stakeholders' expectations is to keep them on the same
page as you. To stay on the same page with the stakeholders, it's important to
distribute the relevant information at the right time.

                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.2

    Knowing the Plan Communication Management process, answer the following:
        Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
        Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
        Q3.Describe how the documents listed in the output column of
           Figure 9-2 will be updated.


With the communication plan in our hands, we are ready to make
communication happen--e.g.; implement the plan by managing and monitoring
communications.
360   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      Manage Communication
      Throughout the project lifecycle, you need to continually distribute the relevant
      information to the right stakeholders at the right time by using appropriate
      methods. A more complete statement would be that you need to make
      communications happen, where the happening of communications includes
      creating, collecting, storing, retrieving, and, at the end, disposing of project
      information. The process to make it happen is called Manage Communication,
      and it is run in accordance with the communication management plan. This
      process is presented in Table 9-3 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and
      output.

      Table 9-3. The Manage Communication Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                        Tools and Techniques         Output
      1.Project Management         1.Communication              1.Project communications
        Plan:                        technology                 2.Project management
        *Communication             2.Communication methods        updates:
         management plan           3.Communication skills:         *Communication
        *Stakeholder               *Feedback                        management plan
         engagement plan                                           *Stakeholder engagement
                                   *Presentation
        *Resource                                                   plan
                                   *Nonverbal
         management plan                                        3.Project document updates:
                                   *Communication
      2.Project documents:                                         *Stakeholder register
                                    competence
        *Stakeholder register                                      *Project schedule
                                   4.Project reporting
        *Quality report                                            *Risk register
                                   5.Interpersonal and
        *Risk report                 team skills:                  *Issues log
        *Issues log                   *Conflict management         *Lessons learned register
        *Change log                   *Meeting management       4.Organizational project
        *Lessons learned              *Networking                 assets update
         register
                                      *Active listening
      3.Work performance
                                      *Cultural and political
        reports
                                       awareness
      4.Enterprise
                                   6.Information management
        environmental factors
                                     systems
      5.Organizational project
                                   7.Meetings
        assets


      Overall, the Manage Communication process is run according to the
      communication management plan. The core task of this process is to distribute
      the right information to the right stakeholder at the right time. All other
      activities in this process are dedicated to this core task. You get information
      about stakeholders, such as their identity and communication needs, from
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       361



the stakeholder register; find out from the resource management plan what
communication is needed for the management of team and physical resources;
and also learn communication strategies from the stakeholder engagement plan
to keep stakeholders engaged in the project.
With this knowledge at hand, distribute the information using communication
technology, methods, and skills.


What Information to Distribute and in What Form?
Not all the stakeholders need the name kind of information. That said, in this
section we discuss, in general, what kinds of information is distributed, where
it is obtained from, and in what form it is distributed.
Information sources are the input documents discussed next.
Quality and Risk Reports. Quality-related information, such as quality issues
and improvements made in project processes, is collected from the quality
report, an output of the Manage Quality process. Risk-related information,
such as project-level and individual risks and their summaries, can be fetched
from the risk report, an output of the Identify Risks process.
Work Performance Reports. These reports are an output of the Monitor
and Control Project Work process and are discussed in Chapter 3. Status
reports and progress reports are two common examples of work performance
reports.
You take needed information and distribute it among the relevant stakeholders,
an act that is called in PMBOK by the name project reporting.
Performance Reporting. Performance reporting refers to collecting and
distributing work performance information, which includes standard reports
generated by various processes as just discussed, such as work performance
reports and ad hoc reports and presentations prepared during this process.
The information could be in various formats, from an informal chat to a formal
report, have various levels of detail, be at different project levels, and come
with different frequencies, from periodically to "on an exceptional basis." These
variations arise from the different information needs of different stakeholders.
For example, on a periodic basis, an analysis of the baseline compared with
actual work data yields performance and forecasts the project results, which
can then be communicated in appropriate detail to meet the need of a group
of stakeholders.
As mentioned earlier, presentation is one form of performance reporting.
Presentation. Listed in Table 9-3, presentation is, according to PMBOK, a
communication skill. Certainly, you need good communication skills to prepare
and deliver a presentation. Based on stakeholders needs, it could be on a wide
362   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      variety of topics, such as progress reports, information updates, and any project
      documents. To make an effective presentation, you should always consider the
      audience and their needs, and use audio/visual and other appropriate tools,
      such as tables, graphs, and histograms. Essential elements such as background
      information and conclusions should be included. It's important watch your
      nonverbal communication, such as body language, during your presentation.


      Note The EEFs and OPAs that influence this process are the same as those in planning
      communication; see Study Checkpoint 9.1.


      In addition to the two tools--performance reporting and presentation--
      just discussed, you will need other tools to manage communication, such as
      communication technology and methods and communication skills.


      Tools and Techniques for Managing Communication
      To manage communication, you will also use the two tools discussed in the
      following sections.


      Communication Technology and Project Management
      Information Systems (PMIS)
      Communication technology is discussed in the planning communication section
      in this chapter, and PMIS is covered in multiple chapters, such as 3 and 5. Recall
      that an information management system refers to a set of standard tools
      that a project manager can use to capture, store, and distribute information
      to stakeholders about various aspects of the project, such as project costs,
      project schedule, schedule progress, and performance. Depending upon the
      stakeholders and the kind of project information to be distributed, a variety
      of information management tools can be used.
      Hard-copy document management: reports, letters, and memos
      Electronic and Web communications management: press releases,
      e-mail, fax, voice mail, telephone, video and web conferencing, websites, and
      web publishing
      Web project management tools, including social media: web interfa
      ces to scheduling and project management software, meeting and virtual
      office support software, portals, blogs, and collaborative work management
      tools
                                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth   363



Examples of distribution formats supported by information management
systems may include tables, spreadsheet analysis, and presentations. You can
use the capabilities and features of the applications, such as graphics, to make
the information easy to understand and hence enhance its impact.


Communication Skills
You will need a wide variety of communication skills to manage communication.
Out of those listed in Table 9-3, we have already discussed presentations,
and feedback was discussed in Chapter 6, which occurs in response to
any communication, deliverable, or situation in the context of project
communication. Feedback is happening in any two-way communication. The
nonverbal technique refers to communicating through nonverbal means, such
as body language, eye contact, facial expression, and tone of voice. While
communicating, you should always be mindful about the nonverbal component
of communication. Communication competence refers to an overall ability
to communicate, including components such as the clear delivery of the key
message, awareness of purpose, creating relationship with receivers, and
exhibiting leadership.


Note Communication skills, an essential part of general management skills, are used to
ensure the following:

   *    The right stakeholders get the right information at the right time.

   *    The communication requirements and expectations of stakeholders are
        properly managed.



Interpersonal and Team Skills
Out of the interpersonal and team skills listed in Table 9-3, cultural and political
awareness were already discussed in the planning communication section in
this chapter, and conflict management was covered in Chapter 6.
Active Listening. This refers to paying attention to the speaker, acknowle
dging, asking for clarification in order in understand, and removing any
hindrance in understanding communications.
Networking. According to the dictionary definition, networking is an
interaction with other people to exchange information and develop contacts.
You can network with stakeholders in project and departmental parties and
at other social gatherings and settings. In this Information Age, you network
using online tools and appropriate websites. Overall, this will help improving
project communication and gaining more project support.
364   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      Meeting Management Techniques. Meeting management refers to organ
      izing and conducting meetings. For effective and efficient meeting management,
      you can take the following steps:
            *   Send a timely invitation to all relevant--and only
                relevant--stakeholders and encourage them to attend.
            *   Prepare meeting agenda and make it available in advance;
                if possible, send it with the invitation and also distribute it
                at the beginning of the meeting.
            *   Use your communication skills, including conflict
                resolution, to conduct meeting.
            *   Start meeting on time, stay on agenda topics, and end it
                on time.
            *   During the meeting, invite appropriate participation.
            *   Manage expectations during the meeting.
            *   Take minutes, including action items and who attended.
            *   Follow up on action items after the meeting.
      Given the same situation and communication technology and methods, one
      project manager may fail while the other may succeed. Why? The answer lies
      in the concept of effective communication.


      Tools for Effective Communication Management
      Managing communication effectively is more than choosing the right format,
      technology, and method. In short, it takes integrating many factors together;
      for example, using your communication skills to integrate appropriate
      technology, method, form, and content together to create a creative
      communication environment. This way, project communication goes beyond
      just the distribution of relevant information. For example, you must ensure
      that the right information is appropriately generated in the right form at the
      right time, is received by the right stakeholders, and is understood. Moreover,
      you also need to provide opportunities for stakeholders to make requests for
      further information, clarification, and discussion.
      In the following, we discuss some techniques and overall basic communication
      concepts that, if applied properly, can help facilitate communication
      management.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      365




Techniques for Effective Communication
Most of these techniques have already been discussed in detail in this chapter.
Here, they are presented briefly in light of effective communication.
Sender-Receiver Models. To facilitate multichannel communication,
feedback loops should be incorporated to provide interaction, encourage
participation, and remove barriers to communication.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the communication line has two ends.
Both the sender and the receiver need to have communication skills in this
environment. The sender has the following responsibilities:
      *   Ensure that the information is clear and complete.
      *   Confirm that the information is received and properly
          understood.
The receiver has the following responsibilities:
      *   Ensure that the information is received in its entirety.
      *   Ensure that the information is correctly understood.
So, the success of information distribution depends on both the sender
and the receiver. That said, at the end of the day, it's the project manager's
responsibility to make sure information is communicated successfully. The
communication has two flavors in each of the following dimensions:
      *   Making Media Choice. Depending on the situation,
          you decide whether to communicate in writing or orally,
          write an informal memo or a formal report, and face-to-
          face conversation or e-mail. Whatever media you use, you
          will use communication skills to deliver the information.
      *   Writing Style. Appropriate writing is an essential part
          of good communication skills. It is important to know
          how to use active or passive voice, and how to use
          appropriate sentence structure and word choice in a
          given situation.
      *   Meeting Management Techniques. You prepare a
          meeting agenda and make it available in advance, and use
          your communication skills, including conflict resolution,
          to conduct meetings that stay on agenda and end on time.
      *   Presentation Techniques. Prepare and deliver a
          presentation centered around the main message using
          visual aids for greater impact while being aware of the
          impact of body language as well.
366   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


            *   Facilitation Techniques. Use your communication skills
                to actively clarify, acknowledge, confirm understanding,
                remove barriers by overcoming obstacles, resolve conflict,
                and build consensus on the common goal of process success.
            *   Listening Techniques. Listen actively to comprehend
                adequately and to respond effectively.
      Also, awareness of basic communication concepts will help with effective
      communication.


      Mechanism of Communication and Dimension of
      Communication Activities
      Awareness of the mechanism of communication and the dimension of
      communication activities will help with effective communication because
      awareness leads to making the right choices.The basic issue here is to exchange
      information, which can be done in many forms, such as expressing emotions,
      sharing ideas, and giving instructions. However, you will need a mechanism for
      this exchange, such as the following:
            *   Nonverbal or Through Gestures. For example, body
                language, facial expressions, and tone of voice
            *   Spoken Word. For example, face-to-face, on phone, and
                through audio recordings
            *   Written Word. For example, on paper and on electronic
                media as on a website
            *   Through Media. For example, still and moving pictures,
                actions, choices of spoken words and then they are
                spoken--think of communication happening in a movie
            *   Choice of Words. For example, choosing words and
                phrases carefully to fine-tune the message; blunt or
                between the lines
      Also, you should be aware and make appropriate use of the two-dimensional
      nature of some communication methods, features, or categories such as the
      following:
            *   Place: External or Internal. Internal to the project--
                that is, within the project--or external--that is,
                communicating to entities external to the project, such
                as customers, media, and the public
            *   Format: Formal or Informal. Formal, such as reports
                and briefings, or informal, such as e-mails, memos, and ad
                hoc conversation
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth        367



       *   Hierarchy: Vertical or Horizontal. Horizontal means
           communication among peers--e.g.; other project
           managers; vertical means communication between
           different levels of the organizational hierarchy--for
           example upward (senior managers) and downward (team
           members and other stakeholders working for the project).
       *   Official or Unofficial. Examples: official newsletters
           and annual report; unofficial off-the-record conversation
       *   Written or Unwritten. Examples: written e-mail,
           unwritten oral and verbal talk and nonverbal body
           language
You use these tools and techniques to generate the output of the Manage
Communication process.


Tip Effective communication management builds bridges between diverse stakeholders with
different cultures, backgrounds, discipline of knowledge, interests, and opinions.



Output of Manage Communication Process
The output of the Manage Communication process is as follows.


Project Communications
The main output of the Manage Commination process is project
communications, which are artefacts of project communication, such as
performance reports, presentations, e-mails, memos, deliverables' status,
incurred costs and earned value graphs, and schedule progress.


Organizational Process Assets Update
The Manage Communication process will create some items that can be added
as a record to the organizational process assets. Here are some examples:
       *   Project reports, including status reports
       *   Stakeholder notifications about resolved issues and
           approved changes
       *   Project presentations
       *   Project records, such as memos and meeting minutes, and
           project files, such as plans and schedules
368   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


              *    Feedback from stakeholders
              *    Lessons learned

      Project Document Update
      As a result of this process, some project documents may be updated; see
      Study Checkpoint 9.3.

                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.3
              Q1. Knowing the Manage Communication process, how do you think
                  documents listed for update in Table 9-3 would be updated?
              Q2. Why do you need the project stakeholder engagement plan for
                  performing the manage communication process?



      Caution! Distinguish between communicating, the singular, and communications, the plural.
      Communication refers to the act of communicating, such as conducting a meeting or sending an
      e-mail, while communications refers to the artifacts of communication, such as meeting minutes,
      memos, e-mails, and progress reports.


      How will we know how we are doing in the communication aspect of the
      project? Well, we need to monitor the communication.


      Monitor Communication
      The Monitor Communication process makes sure that the information needs
      of the project stakeholders are met throughout the entire project lifecycle as
      planned in the communications management plan and stakeholder engagement
      plan. It can trigger reruns of the Plan Communication Management and Manage
      Communication processes to improve the results of communication.


      Tip Monitor Communication is a high-level process in the sense that it oversees the Plan
      Communication Management and Manage Communication processes to fine-tune them in order
      to optimize the effective information flow among all participants in project communication, at any
      and all times.
                                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth            369



While you are directing and managing the project work, the work results
and the progress toward creating the project results are produced. Just
producing the results is no guarantee of success. Success is determined by
the performance with which the results are being produced. You need to
know the performance to keep the project on the right track. Furthermore,
the stakeholders need to know with what rate, efficiency, and work quality
the resources are being used to deliver the project output. For this, you
need to collect the project performance data and evaluate different aspects
of the project and whether they are meeting expectations. In this process,
we are interested in the communication aspect of the project--whether
communication is gaining the targeted stakeholder support for the project.


Caution! All performance indicators are not equal. You must evaluate the impact and
implications of each deviation. For example, a performance deviation or other issues with key
performance indicators, such as actual versus planned schedule, cost, and quality, may trigger an
immediate alarm, while others may not. In case of an alarm, the right message must be delivered
to the right stakeholders at the right time, which can lead to a revision by rerunning the appropriate
process or processes.


The Monitor Communication process is presented in Table 9-4 in terms of its
inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs.

Table 9-4. The Monitor Communication Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                Tools and Techniques              Output
1.Project Management Plan:           1.Data reorientation:             1.Work performance
   *Communication                       *Stakeholders'                   information
    management plan                      engagement assessment         2.Change requests
   *Stakeholder engagement               matrix                        3.Project management
    plan                             2.Interpersonal and team            updates:
   *Resource management                skills:                             *Communication
    plan                                *Observation/                       management plan
2.Project documents:                     conversation                      *Stakeholder
   *Project communications           3.Information management               engagement plan
                                       systems                         4.Project document
   *Issues log
                                     4.Expert judgment                   updates:
   *Lessons learned register
                                     5.Meetings                            *Stakeholder register
3.Work performance data
                                                                           *Lessons learned
4.Enterprise environmental
                                                                            register
  factors
                                                                           *Issues log
5.Organizational project assets
370   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      Performing the Monitor Communication Process
      The purpose of monitoring communication is two-fold: 1) ensure that the right
      information is being distributed to the right stakeholders at the right time by
      using the right methods; and 2) check this by evaluating the project--e.g.;
      gaining the expected project support from stakeholders, and if not, generating
      change requests in the communication plan and management.
      With this in mind, the core of performing the Monitor Communication process
      is explained in the following steps using the input and tools and techniques
      from Table 9-4.
      Get Communication-related General and "How-to" Information.
      From the resource management plan, fetch current information about project
      organization in terms of roles and responsibilities; project organization charts
      will be useful. From the communication management plan, learn about current
      plan for generating/collecting, storing, and distributing information.You can find
      out the communication strategies from the stakeholder engagement plan. Also,
      the communication management plan would provide guidance on running the
      Monitor Communication process.
      Get the Project Execution Data and Results on Communication. The
      input item work performance data from project execution includes information
      about the type and quantity of information that was distributed. Also, you
      can find out which communication items or artefacts were distributed from
      project communications.
      This data provide a good picture of what were distributed, to whom, and using
      which technology and methods. The next step is to analyze and evaluate the
      impact of this communication on both the stakeholders and the project.
      Analyze Communication and Its Impact. To monitor and analyze
      communication and its impact, do the following:
            1. Review record of stakeholder's engagement issues from
               issues log including open and resolved issues.
            2. Review the lessons learned data from lessons learned
               register. It may suggest communication-related changes.
            3. Evaluate the stakeholder, e.g.; customer, satisfaction
               surveys.
            4. Review the stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix
               and compare the current engagements of stakeholders
               with the desired ones. This would indicate how effective
               the current communication is.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth         371



       5. Use tools provided by PMIS on communication data,
          including stakeholder surveys, stakeholders' engagement
          assessment matrix, issues log, etc. to assess the
          effectiveness and impact of communication.
       6. You can use your interpersonal and team skills such
          as observation and conversation to work with team to
          accomplish tasks like the following:
            *    Determine more efficient and effective way to update
                 project performance information and distribute it.
            *    Determine how to better respond to stakeholder's
                 requests.
            *    Based on preceding reviews and evaluations,determine
                 what changes should be made to communication
                 management plan and stakeholder engagement plan to
                 make communication more effective.
            *    Of course, you will also be using meetings for these
                 and other controlling communication tasks.
       7. All these reviews, from steps 1 to 6, can contribute to
          generating work performance information and change
          requests, the main outputs of this process.
Work Performance Information. This document contains information
about how project communication is performing and about communication
impact on the stakeholders.This is obtained by comparing communication as it
actually happened with as it was planned.This is done by actions performed in
steps 1 through 4--evaluating customer satisfaction surveys and stakeholder
feedback and comparing the current engagement levels of stakeholders with
the desired levels in the stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix.


Work performance information would be put into the Monitor and Control Project Work process
to create a work performance report, which in turn would be communicated using the Manage
Communication process.


Change Requests. The monitoring of communication, such as by steps 1
through 5, may reveal the need to make communication changes to obtain
the planned or expected results. The changes could be in any aspect of
communication, such as format, content, or the way it's distributed. Changes
could also include new methods and procedures, such as to improve efficiency.
372   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management



      The change requests generated by the Monitor Communication process, or by any other process,
      must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.


      Update Documents. Because project communication is performed
      according to the communications management plan and the communication
      strategies found in the stakeholder engagement plan, these documents may be
      modified as a result of the acceptance or implementation of communication
      changes.
      Some new issues may arise and some existing issues may get resolved,
      stakeholder communication may change, and some lessons may be learned,
      such as which communication method worked better for a particular group
      of stakeholders, so, accordingly, the issues log, stakeholder register, and lessons
      learned register may need to be updated.


      Caution! Do not confuse the Monitor Communication process with the Manage Communication
      process, even though you must recognize they are closely related and may seem to overlap.
      Remember the link between them: work performance information, a main output of the Monitor
      Communication process, is put into the Monitor and Control Project Work process to create a work
      performance report, which in turn would be communicated using the Manage Communication
      process.




                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.4

          In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
          second column in the context of its role in communication management.

          Item                              Role
          A.Work performance data           1.Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
          B.Work performance                2.Output of Monitor Communication
            information
          C.Work performance reports        3.Output of Monitor and Control Project Work
          D.Project communications          4.Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
                                            5.Input to Monitor Communication
                                            6.Input to Manage Communication
                                            7. Output of Manage Communication
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       373



The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
      1. Communication is a common thread that runs through
         the project lifecycle. So, it's important to develop a
         communication plan early in the project.
      2. As in managing stakeholder engagement, one main purpose
         of managing communication is keeping and gaining the
         stakeholders' support. With this in mind, communication
         is managed according to the communication management
         plan and stakeholder engagement plan to implement the
         mantra: deliver the right information to the right people at
         the right time by using the right communication methods
         to produce the desired impact.
      3. The Monitor Communication process is used to ensure
         that communication is happening as planned in the
         communication management plan and stakeholder
         engagement plan, and as a result the targeted stakeholder
         support for the project is being obtained.

Summary
Communication is the common thread that runs through almost all activities and
processes in project management. There are three communication processes:
plan communication to determine communication; manage communication to
make it happen; and monitor communication to ensure it happened. The key
to the project and the mantra of effective communication is the distribution
of the right information to the right stakeholders at the right time by using the
right communication methods to create the desired impact.
To determine how to do this, you need to plan communication, for which
you need to identify stakeholders and develop a stakeholder management
strategy. The communication is managed and controlled according to the
communication management plan, and also according to the stakeholder
engagement plan, which contains the stakeholder communication strategies.
In the Manage Communication process, reports--such as work performance
reports, quality report, and risk report--and information is distributed to the
stakeholders at the right time using the right communication methods.
The Monitor Communication process oversees that communication is actually
happening as planned and having the desired impact. If it's not, change requests
are generated to correct the situation.
Road Ahead. Recall from this chapter that the quality report and risk report
are input into the Manage Communication process. These reports come from
quality management and risk management. We will cover quality management
374   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


      in the next chapter, followed by a chapter on risk management; both are in
      the last part of this book. This last part will also include a chapter on project
      procurements management that contains processes for acquiring products,
      services, or results for the project from outside the project.

      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *Plan Communication is the process of determining the information needs of the project
       stakeholders and accordingly determining which tools and methods to use to meet those
       needs by producing, storing, and delivering the information.
      *Effective communication management builds bridges between diverse stakeholders with
       different cultures, backgrounds, disciplines of knowledge, interests, and opinions.
      *Work performance data, generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process, is
       used as an input to the Monitor Communication process to generate work performance
       information.
      *Work performance information would be put into the Monitor and Control Project Work
       process to create a work performance report, which in turn would be communicated,
       along with other reports, using the Manage Communication process.

      Look Out
      *Communication requirement analysis is performed to determine the communication
       needs of the project stakeholders and to optimize the use of the communication
       resources for project success.
      *Communication plays a critical role in keeping the stakeholders engaged in the project.
      *Distinguish between communicating, the singular, and communications, the plural.
       Communication refers to the act of communicating, such as conducting a meeting, while
       communications refers to the artifacts of communication, such as meeting minutes.
      *Distributing information means distributing all the relevant information, whereas
       performance reporting focuses on the performance part of the information.
      *To manage and monitor communication, the stakeholder engagement plan is also
       used, along with the communication management plan, because it explains how to use
       appropriate stakeholder communication strategies to engage the stakeholders.
      Memorize
      *The factors that can contribute to determining the communication technology to be used
       include availability, project environment, project length, urgency of the information need,
       ease of use, and confidentiality of information.
      *Distributing the right information to the right stakeholders at the right time by using the
       right communication method is the mantra in communication management.
      *Performance reports are important, but along with them, other reports and information
       are also distributed to stakeholders.
      *The process of manage communication significantly adds to the organizational process
       assets in the form of project reports, status reports, project presentations, stakeholder
       notifications, and other project communication artifacts and records.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth   375




Review Questions
   1. Which of the following communication skills are
      necessary for a project manager?
      a)Listening, b) negotiating, c) resolving conflict,
        d) pursuing a team, e) setting expectations
      Select the most correct answer:
      A. All except a
      B.   All except a and e
      C. All except d
      D. All
   2. You want to ensure that messages are delivered and
      understood. Which communication model would you
      implement for that to happen?
      A. Basic sender-receiver communication model
      B.   Basic interactive communication model
      C. More complex interactive model
      D. B or C
   3. You are trying to understand the message sent to you
      by one of your team members, who lives on the other
      side of the globe.The team member has used lots of local
      phrases and acronyms that you are trying to understand.
      According to the basic communication model, what are
      you dealing with here?
      A. Noise and decoding
      B.   Encoding and feedback
      C. Message and feedback
      D. Broken English
   4. Which of the following is not an output of communication
      planning?
      A. Methods of communication
      B.   Communication constraints
      C. Frequency of reporting the project status
      D. Stakeholder management strategy
376   Chapter 9 | Project Communication Management


           5. Which of the following is not an output of the Manage
              Communication process?
               A. Work performance information
               B.   Project risk reports and status reports
               C. Performance reports and quality reports
               D. Project presentation
           6. The issues log is not an input used in the following
              process:
               A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
               B.   Plan Communication Management
               C. Manage Communication
               D. Monitor Communication
           7. What of the following is not a part of communications?
               A. Presentations
               B.   Emails
               C. Risk reports
               D. To send an e-mail message
           8. Which of the following is not an input to the Manage
              Communication process?
               A. Risk report
               B.   Resource management plan
               C. Project communications
               D. Stakeholder engagement plan
           9. Which one of the following items will be certainly updated
              as a result of the Manage Communication process?
               A. Enterprise environmental factors
               B.   Organizational project assets
               C. Work performance report
               D. Resource management plan
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   377



10. You have created the work performance report about
    the project that you are managing.Which process will you
    use to distribute the report among the stakeholders?
     A. Manage Stakeholders
     B.   Distribute Reports
     C. Distribute Information
     D. Manage Communication
11. The sponsor of your project wants to look at the raw
    data from executing the project--that is, the work
    performance data. Which process should you run to get
    this information?
     A. Manage Communication
     B.   Execute Project
     C. Direct and Manage Project Work
     D. Monitor Communication
12. The sponsor of your project wants to look at the work
    performance information. Which process should you run
    to get this information?
     A. Monitor and Control Project Work
     B.   Manage Communication
     C. Direct and Manage Project Work
     D.Control Scope, Control Schedule, Control Cost, or
       Monitor Communication
13. The Monitor Communication process is performed
    according to the following plan or plans: (choose the best
    answer)
     A. Communication plan
     B.   Stakeholder engagement plan
     C. Stakeholder management plan
     D.Communication plan and stakeholder engagement
       plan
                                                              PA R T


                                                              IV

Quality,
Risk, and
Procurement
By the very definition of quality, a project cannot possibly be completed
without implementing quality, as quality can be looked upon as the degree
to which the characteristics of project deliverables, project objectives, and
project requirements are fulfilled. With quality, and in all areas of project
management, we make assumptions and estimates and face constraints. These
other sources of uncertainty can give rise to risks, which must be dealt with.
There may be some expected outcome items of the project that will not be
developed by the project team, but rather will be purchased or acquired--a
process called procurement.
So, in this last part of the book, we will cover quality management, risk
management, and procurement management.
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                      10

Project Quality
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 7 percent of the exam,
equivalent to about 9 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how it helps generate the output, as well as what a given tool or
technique does in a given process.
You should understand very well how to apply quality management tools and
methods of such as logical data model, mind mapping, root-cause analysis,
audits, and process analysis.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how the
tasks can be tailored to your needs, and also recognize an agile environment
in action; e.g.; continual assessment generates change requests, which lead to
changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_10
382   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Quality Management:
         1. Understand the three project management processes in the project quality
            management knowledge area.
         2. Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the three quality
            management processes.
         3. Understand the reasons for and approaches to adapting quality management in
            different project environments.


      Project work is incomplete without implementing quality, and an incomplete
      project is obviously a failed project. Quality refers to the degree to which a
      set of completed characteristics of project deliverables and objectives fulfills
      the project and product requirements. It is about delivering the complete and
      correct product in the right way.The "right way" refers to the project quality--
      according to planned schedule and cost. In other words, the core objective
      of quality management is to ensure that the project will satisfy the needs and
      requirements for which it was undertaken. Accordingly, quality management
      consists of three core elements: planning quality management, managing
      the quality, and controlling the quality. Quality management includes managing
      the quality of both the project and its product. Whereas the techniques of
      product quality management, such as measuring the quality, may depend
      on the type of product, the techniques for project quality management are
      independent of the type of product.
      The core question in this chapter is: How do you mange quality? In search
      of an answer, we will explore three avenues: planning quality management,
      managing quality, and controlling quality.


      Managing Quality: Big Picture
      The knowledge area covering quality has three processes, explained in the
      following list:
             *    Plan Quality Management. This process is used to
                  identify which quality requirements and standards are
                  relevant to the project at hand and how to determine
                  whether that project and its deliverables meet these
                  requirements and conform to the standards.
             *    Key: Identify quality requirements.
             *    Manage Quality. This process develops tests, evaluation
                  procedures, and other activities based on the quality
                  management plan and quality control measurements
                  taken in the Control Quality process.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth          383



       *       Key: Develop test and evaluations.
       *       Control Quality. This process executes the activities
               developed in the Manage Quality process to verify
               that the project and its deliverables meet the quality
               requirements and conform to the quality standards.
       *       Key: Verify by executing the activities.
Table 10-1 presents the list of processes of quality management along with the
major output of each process and the process group it belongs to.
Table 10-1. Processes of Quality Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Quality Management Process Group              Major Output              Performed
Process
Plan Quality             Planning             Quality management        Once or at
Management                                    plan                      pre-defined points
                                              Quality metrics
Manage Quality           Executing            Quality reports           Throughout the
                                              Test and evaluation       project
                                              documents
                                              Change requests
Control Quality          Monitoring and       Quality control           Throughout the
                         Controlling          measurements              project
                                              Verified deliverables
                                              Change requests



Caution! In addition to the three quality management processes shown in Table 10-1, the
performing organization might have its own quality policy and procedures, which will need to be
incorporated into quality management by the Manage Quality process.


The big picture of quality management is presented in Figure 10-1, where
the two processes named in oval-shaped boxes do not belong to quality
management but, as shown, interact with it in an important way.
384   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management



                                            WY
                                            D


                      Y     Y
                      Y   Y 
                          
                        YZZ
                     D      ZZ
                         Y                                            Y
                                           dZ
                                            Z
                                                                            
                                          
                                                             tZ
                                          
                                                             Z
                                                             
                     WZ                                           tZ
                    /                                             Z
                                                Z
                    ZZ                                            Z
                                                

      Figure 10-1. Processes of quality management in a big picture


      Note Two outputs, quality reports and verified deliverables, of quality management are used
      by processes in other knowledge areas.


      Before talking about quality planning, let's take a look at a few quality concepts.


      Some Concepts in Quality
      In this section, we will discuss some general concepts in quality. While dealing
      with quality, you should be able to distinguish between the terms in the
      following pairs:
             *    Grade and Quality. Grade is a category assigned to
                  products with the same overall functional use but differing
                  technical characteristics and features, whereas quality is
                  the degree to which the inherent characteristics of a
                  product meet the requirements. A number of defects is
                  an example of poor quality, whereas a limited number of
                  features is an example of low grade.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth          385



       *    Precision and Accuracy. Precision is the spread of
            different measurements of the same quantity, constant,
            or variable, such as gravity or cost.The smaller the spread
            of measured values the better the precision is. Accuracy
            is a measure of how close the measured values are to the
            true value of the quantity. The closer the measured value
            is to the actual (or true) value, the better the accuracy of
            the measurements is.
       *    Prevention and Inspection. Prevention is a direction to
            perform an activity that will keep an error from entering
            the product and the process. Inspection is a technique to
            examine whether an activity, component, product, result,
            or service complies with the planned requirements. So,
            the goal of inspection is to ensure that errors do not
            reach the customer.


Note Although quality treatment in PMBOK does not talk about precision and accuracy that
much, we have discussed these concepts here because of their importance for project managers.


Project management and quality management have come a long way as separate
disciplines of knowledge and practice. It should not come as a surprise that
quality management is one of the ten knowledge areas in standard project
management. In a complementary way, both modern quality management and
project management recognize the importance of the following critical issues:
            Continuous Improvement. Continuous improve
            ment means to keep improving the quality through a
            process of planning for quality, implementing quality,
            auditing quality, and re-planning based on lessons
            learned or auditing. So, really, quality improvement is
            an endless cycle, called the plan-do-check-act cycle,
            as defined by Shewhart and modified by Deming.
            Performing organizations can also use techniques such
            as Six Sigma TQM to improve the quality.
            Customer Satisfaction. Customer satisfaction can
            be a very vague notion that could mean different things
            to different parties. However, in project management
            and quality management, customer satisfaction means
            planned customer requirements are met. In order to
            achieve customer satisfaction in the real world, you
            need to understand, define, and evaluate customer
            expectations and also manage those expectations,
386   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


                 in addition to meeting the planned requirements.
                 Otherwise, you might meet the planned requirements,
                 and the customer may still be dissatisfied. Bypassing
                 the proper quality procedure will cost customer
                 satisfaction and lead to more costs on rework.
                 Management Responsibility. This refers to the
                 responsibility of the management to provide the
                 resources needed for the project team to succeed.
                 Although all team members should be responsible
                 for the success of their parts of the project, they
                 cannot succeed without management fulfilling its
                 responsibilities.
                 Prevention over Inspection. One of the fundam
                 ental tenets of modern quality management is: plan,
                 design, and build in quality as opposed to inspect in
                 quality. The cost of preventing mistakes is much less
                 than finding them through inspections and then fixing
                 them. Therefore, the cost of quality (COQ) is less
                 in prevention than through inspection. The COQ is
                 defined as the total cost of quality-related efforts
                 throughout the product lifecycle.

                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.1

         You are trying out a Monte Carlo simulation program that estimates the value of a
         parameter by using some random variables. You know through the data that the exact
         value should be 40. You ran the program three times and it gave you three values: 50,
         51, and 52. Based on these values, answer the following questions:
            Q1. How precise is the program in making the estimates?
            Q2. How accurate are the estimates?
            Q3. Are the values generated by the program more accurate or more
                precise?

      The process for managing quality is part of executing the project, quality
      control is used as part of monitoring and controlling the project, and quality
      planning is performed during the project planning stage and is discussed next.
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth       387




Planning Quality
Planning quality management is the process to accomplish the following:
        *   Identify quality requirements and standards for the
            project and its deliverables.
        *   Determine how to test and verify that the quality
            requirements have been implemented and standards have
            been conformed to.
Table 10-2 presents the Plan Quality Management process in terms of input,
tools and techniques, and output.

Table 10-2. The Plan Quality Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                        Tools and Techniques          Output
1.Project charter            1.Data gathering:             1.Quality management plan
2.Project Management Plan:      *Benchmarking              2.Quality metrics
  *Scope baseline: scope        *Brainstorming             3.Project Management Plan:
   statement, WBS, WBS          *Interviews                   *Scope baseline
   dictionary
                             2.Data Analysis:                 *Risk management plan
  *Stakeholders
                                * Cost-benefit analysis    4.Project document updates:
   management plan
                                *Cost of quality              *Requirement
  *Requirement plan
                             3.Decision making:                traceability matrix
  *Risk management plan
                                *Multicriteria decision       *Stakeholder register
3.Project document:
                                 analysis                     *Risk register
  *Requirement
                             4.Data presentation:             *Lessons learned register
   documentation
                                *Flow charts
  *Requirement
   traceability matrix          *Matrix diagrams
  *Assumptions log              *Logical data model
  *Risk register                *Mind mapping
  *Stakeholder register      5.Test and inspection
                               planning
4.Enterprise environmental
  factors                    6.Expert judgment
5.Organizational project     7.Meetings
  assets
388   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      Core of Planning Quality Management
      As discussed earlier, planning quality management consists of identifying
      quality requirements and standards for the project and its deliverables and
      determining how to test and verify that the quality requirements have been
      implemented. To make sense of the following material, you should know the
      story of quality management as it relates to the project and its stakeholders.
      The stakeholders have some project and product needs and requirements,
      including quality requirements, the fulfillment of which is affected by quality-
      related assumptions and constraints. In this light, the Plan Quality Management
      process may be explained in the following steps in terms of the items from
      Table 10-2:

            1. Get Background and Reference "How-to"
               Information. From the requirement management plan,
               extract the information on how the requirements were
               identified, analyzed, and managed. As stakeholders' needs
               and expectations are crucial to managing quality, get the
               information from the stakeholder engagement plan on
               what methods were used to document the stakeholders'
               needs and expectations. As risk and quality are closely
               related, from the risk management plan get information on
               how risks were identified, analyzed, and monitored.
            2. Determine Quality Standards. Quality standards and
               quality objectives can, at least partially, be determined
               by using WBS and deliverables in the project scope
               statement, which are parts of the project scope baseline.
               The acceptance criteria for deliverables is in the scope
               baseline, and measurable project objectives linked to
               project success criteria in the project charter will also
               help this determination as well as influence quality
               management.
            3. Get Information about Deliverables and Quality
               Requirements. Fetch the quality requirements for
               the project and its product from the requirement
               documentation. Then, link the product requirements to
               deliverables using the requirement traceability matrix. This
               helps make sure that each requirement is tested through
               the Manage Quality process. The requirements will be
               compared with the actual project results in the Control
               Quality process.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       389



      4. Get Quality Assumption and Risk Information.
         Extract quality-related assumptions and constraints
         from the assumptions log; get the risks and opportunities
         from the risk register that can influence or impact quality.
         There, assumptions and risks are used to determine how
         to perform the Manage Quality and Control Quality
         processes.
      5. Get Stakeholder Information. Use the stakeholder
         register to identify the stakeholders with specific
         interest in specific quality items. This will help with
         prioritization--e.g.; quality interests of customers and
         the project sponsor will be high on priority list. This
         information will also help to determine how to perform
         the Manage Quality and Control Quality processes.
Use the tools and techniques listed in Table 10-2 to convert the information
from steps 1 through 5 into quality metrics and a quality management plan.
If the performing organization lacks a quality policy, the project team will need
to develop one for the project. Once a quality policy is in place, it is your
responsibility to ensure that the project stakeholders are aware of it and are
on the same page.
Some of these tools will be explained in the next section.

Tools and Techniques Used for Quality Planning
The tools and techniques used for quality planning include benchmarking,
cost-benefit analysis, experiment design, brainstorming, and more.

Data-Gathering Techniques
The following data-gathering techniques can be used to gather data in order
to identify quality requirements and standards and for other matters regarding
planning quality management.
Benchmarking. Benchmarking is comparing the practices, products, or
services of a project with those of some reference projects for the purpose of
learning, improving, and creating the basis for measuring performance. These
reference projects might be previous projects performed inside or outside
of the performing organization. Improvement and performance are of course
quality-related factors, in this case. For example, you might have a similar
project performed in the past that accepted no more than two defects in each
feature. You might use that as a quality criterion--a benchmark--for your
project. The benchmarked project could be in the same or different industry
as the current project is in, same or different application area, and inside or
outside the performing organization.
390   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      Brainstorming and Interviews. Brainstorming and interviews, covered in
      Chapters 3 and 4, can also be used in this process. For example, brainstorming
      sessions in a group environment can be held with team members and quality
      experts during the process of developing the quality management plan.
      Similarly, interviews can be conducted with appropriate stakeholders to
      collect information regarding planning quality matters, such as project and
      product quality needs.


      Data Analysis
      To select the best of several alternatives available in implementing quality, the
      following data analysis techniques can be used.
      Cost of Quality. Cost of quality is the total quality-related cost during the
      lifecycle of the project and the product. That includes the costs incurred
      in implementing conformance to the requirements as well as cost of
      nonconformance.
      The cost of conformance consists of prevention costs and appraisal costs.
      Prevention costs include the costs of implementing quality, such as for
      appropriate equipment, documenting and performing processes, time and
      effort to perform the project work the right way, and needed training for
      team members. The appraisal costs include the cost of inspecting, testing, and
      loss due to destructive testing. Destructive testing refers to tests in which the
      product under test is destroyed or harmed by design.
      Cost of nonconformance refers to the cost of failure--both internal failure
      and external failure. Internal failures, i.e., failures found during the project,
      include rework and waste (for example, the product is rejected internally
      because it did not meet the quality standards, so it's now scrap). External
      failures, i.e., failures found by the customers, include warranty work and more
      fatal consequences, including liabilities and loss of business.
      Cost-benefit Analysis and Decision-making Techniques. During quality
      planning, you must consider the tradeoff between the cost and the benefit
      of implementing quality, striking the appropriate balance for a given project.
      Cost-benefit analysis is performed to choose the best of several alternatives
      available in implementing quality. The chosen alternative will have minimum
      work and cost and maximum productivity and rise in stakeholder satisfaction
      and expected benefit.
      The decision-making technique of multicriteria decision analysis, explained in
      Chapter 6 in the context of resource selection, can be combined with cost-
      benefit analysis to select the best of the alternatives available for implementing
      quality. This decision-making technique can be used for decision making in
      other quality-planning matters, such as prioritizing quality metrics.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth       391




Data Presentation
Data presentation techniques are used for various purposes: 1) examine data
integrity; 2) find the key quality metrics; 3) establish quality requirements; 4)
understand and estimate the cost of quality for a process; 5) improve the
process, and 6) identify points where quality defects may occur.
Some of them are discussed next.
Matrix Diagrams. This method is used to explore the strength of the
relationships between different entities, such as objectives and causes, by
displaying these entities in a matrix, with cells of the matrix representing the
relationships. These relationships are explored to find the key quality metrics
important for project success.
Logical Data Model. In this technique, the relevant data from the
organization is visually presented in business lingo and does not depend on
any specific technology. This is a visual display via which quality-related logical
loopholes such as data integrity are discovered.
Mind Mapping. This is a diagrammic technique, explained in Chapter 4, in
which various ideas from information collected through various means and
methods are mapped around a central or key concept in order to expose
commonalities and differences among ideas. In quality planning, each key
concept would be a single quality concept linked to various ideas around it.
This technique may help in figuring out quality requirements, constraints, and
relationships, such as dependencies.
Test and Inspection Planning. When, during the planning stage of your
project, you are planning the tests and inspections of the project outcome
that will see if it meets the stakeholders' needs and expectations, these tests
and inspections should cover the quality aspect as well. These quality-related
tests and inspections depend on which industry the project belongs to; e.g.;
field tests in some sciences, inspections in manufacturing, strength tests in
construction and manufacturing, and alpha beta tests in software engineering.
Flowcharts. Also called process maps, flowcharts visually display the
sequence of steps of a value chain, including the process converting input
into output. A value chain, in general, may include activities, decision points,
branching possibilities, and parallel paths. As a simple example of flowcharts,
Figure 10-2 presents a version of a value chain called SIPOC, which stands for
supplier, input, process, output, and customer. How do you obtain information
from these flowcharts? The answer: 1) figure out frequencies associated with
workflow branches; and 2) use these frequencies to estimate the monetary
value of quality conformance and the cost of rework in case of nonconformance.
These flowcharts have multiple uses, including 1) understanding and estimating
the cost of quality for a process; 2) improving the process; and 3) identifying
points where quality defects might occur.
392   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


                                  Input                                    Output
          Supplier           Feedback loop          Process            Feedback loop        Customer
                           Requirements list                        Requirements list

      Figure 10-2. The SIPOC value chain flowchart

      Of course, you will be holding meetings to collect the information and develop
      the quality management plan.


      Caution! Part of the cost of quality is the failure cost, which is the cost of the rework resulting
      from the failure to meet the requirements during product development. Failure cost, also called
      cost of poor quality, is grouped into two categories: external failure cost, which is the cost of fixing
      problems found by the customer, and internal failure cost, which is the cost of fixing problems
      found within the project. Failures occurring at the hands of the customers can also result in fatal
      consequences, including law suits and loss of business.


      You usually use more than one of these techniques to generate the output of
      quality planning.


      Output of Quality Planning
      A major output of the quality planning process is the quality management plan
      and quality metrics.
      Quality Management Plan. The quality management plan contains the
      following information:
              *     What are the quality-related roles and responsibilities
                    assigned to each role?
              *     What are the project and deliverable quality requirements
                    and standards for this project?
              *     Describes what and how the quality-related policies,
                    procedures, and guidelines will be applied to achieve
                    the project quality objectives; e.g.; procedures to deal
                    with continuous improvement, nonconformance, and
                    corrective action
              *     What resources will you or project management need to
                    meet the project quality objectives; e.g.; the quality tools
                    to be used?
              *     What are the quality objectives for this project?
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth         393



       *    Describes activities of the quality management and quality
            control processes for this project.
       *    Which deliverables and processes will go under quality
            review?
This plan becomes a component of the overall project management plan.

Tip Whether the quality management plan is informal and high-level or formal and detailed
depends upon the size, complexity, needs, and requirements of the project.


Quality Metrics. A metric in quality metrics is a product attribute
accompanied by the information on how the quality control process will
verify its quality conformance. For example, it is not specific enough to say the
defects in the product will be minimized. Rather, specifying something such
as that no feature will have more than two defects is a measurable criterion
and hence a metric. Some examples of quality metrics are cost performance
in CPI; schedule performance, e.g.; percentage of task completed in time;
defect frequency, e.g.; number of defects experienced per day; failure rate; and
downtime per week. The metrics that you set during quality planning will be
used in quality management and quality control.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.2

   Knowing the Plan Quality Management process, answer the following:
       Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
       Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
       Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of
           Figure 10-2 will be updated.

Once you have prepared the quality management plan, you have to ensure
that the quality is being implemented according to the plan. You do that by
managing quality, discussed next.


Managing Quality
Quality planning is used to identify quality requirements and standards relevant
to the project and its product and to determine how to implement those.
Actual implementation is carried out in two processes: Manage Quality and
Control Quality. The Manage Quality process implements the quality plan by
executing some quality activities in light of the organization's quality policies
to examine quality measurements.
394   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      Performing organizations typically have a department called Quality Assurance
      (QA) that oversees the quality assurance activities and fosters continuous
      process improvement, which is an iterative method for improving the quality
      of all processes. Your project management team can work with the QA
      department.


      Tip Continuous process improvement enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of the
      processes by minimizing waste (unnecessary activities) and duplication of efforts. It includes
      identifying and reviewing the business processes inside the organization, such as the coding of
      modules within software programs and the process of project approval.


      In project management, while quality assurance only focuses on project
      process improvement, quality management includes quality assurance and
      project product design and process improvement.
      Table 10-3 presents the Manage Quality process in terms of input, tools and
      techniques, and output.
      Table 10-3. The Manage Quality Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                         Tools and Techniques                  Output
      1.Project Management          1.Data gathering:                     1.Quality reports
        Plan:                          *Checklists                        2.Test and evaluation
         *Quality management        2.Data analysis:                        documents
          plan                                                            3.Change requests
                                       *Root-cause analysis
      2.Project documents:                                                4.Project management
                                       *Process analysis
         *Quality control                                                   plan updates:
                                       *Alternatives analysis
          measurements                                                       *Quality
                                       *Document analysis
         *Quality metrics                                                     management plan
                                    3.Decision making:
         *Risk report                                                        *Scope baseline
                                       *Multicriteria decision analysis
         *Lessons learned                                                    *Schedule baseline
          register                  4.Data presentation
                                                                             *Cost baseline
      3.Organizational project         *Affinity diagrams
                                                                          5.Project document
        assets                         *Flow charts                         updates:
                                       *Cause and effect diagrams            *Risk register
                                       *Matrix diagrams                      *Issues log
                                       *Histograms                           *Lessons learned
                                       *Scattered diagrams                    register
                                    5.Audits
                                    6.Design for X
                                    7.Problem solving
                                    8.Quality improvement method
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       395




Core of Performing Quality Management
The main input to the Manage Quality process comes from quality planning,
directing, and quality control. Performing the Manage Quality process can be
explained in the following steps in terms of the items from Table 10-3:
      1. Get "How-to" Information. This process is performed
         according to the quality management plan. The following
         information in this plan will be very helpful: acceptable
         quality levels for project and its deliverables; how to
         check that this level has been implemented; and what to
         do with the items that are found not to meet this quality
         level, e.g.; start a change request.
      2. Get Quality-Related Risk Sources. Use the risk
         report to identify the sources of overall project risks that
         can impact the project's quality objectives.
      3. Get Quality Control Measurements. These are
         found in the quality control measurements document, an
         output of the Control Quality process discussed later in
         this chapter. Compare these quality measurements for
         project processes and deliverables against the quality
         requirements and standards that are supposed to be met.
         This will need analysis and the techniques from Table 10-3.
      4. Get Quality Metrics. The quality metrics are an output
         of planning quality. Use them as a reference or basis
         for developing the test of quality and for suggesting
         improvement; e.g.; change request.
      5. Using the information from these steps and other reports,
         review, examine, analyze the result, and develop tests to
         verify quality.
From the information produced in steps 1 through 5, generate quality reports
and develop tests, evaluation documents, and change requests--the output of
this process.
To develop quality reports and tests and evaluations to examine and test
quality, you use a host of tools to explore different quality aspects and issues,
such as the following:
      1. Verify that a set of required steps has been performed
         and a set of requirements has been met.
      2. Rank the defects; determine the relationship between
         different project elements and defects; and identify the
         root causes of quality problems, and a cause leads to a
         defect, and important areas that cause quality problems.
396   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


             3. Identify problematic processes that may create obstacles
                in meeting quality requirements.
             4. After finding faulty processes, determine how they can be
                improved and identify the root causes of quality problems.
             5. Explore different quality options and approaches in order
                to select the best one to apply.
             6. Make quality-related decisions about projects and
                products.
      Some of these tools and techniques are discussed next.

      Tools and Techniques for Performing Quality
      Management
      The techniques and methods used in quality management are listed in
      Table 10-3 and discussed in the following sections.

      Data Gathering and Data Analysis
      You can use the data-gathering technique called checklists, discussed in the
      next section on quality control, to verify that a set of required steps has been
      performed and a set of requirements has been met.
      In managing quality, data-analysis tools can be used to find faulty processes,
      determine how they can be improved, identify the root causes of quality
      problems, and so forth. The data-analysis techniques that can be used
      for managing quality include root-cause analysis, document analysis, and
      alternatives analysis.You will use alternatives analysis, explained in Chapter 6, to
      explore different options and approaches in order to select the be st one to
      apply. Other data-analysis processes are discussed next.
      Document Analysis. In this process, you can use document analysis to
      identify problematic processes that may create obstacles in meeting quality
      requirements. Document analysis involves accessing the relevant documents,
      studying them, and extracting the needed information from them. In this case,
      the relevant documents would be the ones generated as outputs of the control
      processes, such as performance reports, test reports, and variance analyses.
      You will be analyzing such documents to identify problematic processes.
      Root-cause Analysis. This is a general method to solve a problem. It involves
      collecting information about the problem and analyzing it to find the root
      causes. The problem's solution would lie in removing all the root causes. This
      approach can also be used in managing quality to identify the root causes of
      various defects and risks, and also to address other quality problems. Once
      the root cause of the defect is found, you can examine the possibility of that
      root cause generating other defects.
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       397



Process Analysis. This is a technique used to identify the ways a process can
be improved. It examines the problems, constraints, and unnecessary (non-
value added) activities identified during the implementation of the process.
Process analysis also typically includes examining the following:
      1. Problems in the process
      2. Constraints faced or caused by the process
      3. Process waste: activities with little or no value that
         happen while performing the process

Data Presentation
Data-presentation techniques are used for various purposes, such as to
quantify and rank the defects; expose the relationship between different
project elements and defects; and identify the root causes of quality problems,
how a cause leads to a defect, and how important areas cause quality problems.
In this process, affinity diagrams, covered in Chapter 4, can be used to identify
the most important areas of causes of defects or other quality problems on
which we should focus. Using affinity diagrams, causes are organized into
groups, and these focus areas are identified.
You can use the flowcharts, discussed in the plan quality section, to identify the
series of steps that lead to a defect or other quality problem. Matrix diagrams
can be used to find the strength of the relationships between objectives,
causes, and factors by examining the rows and columns of the matrix.
Cause and effect diagrams, histograms, and scattered diagrams are discussed
in the next section.


Decision Making: Mmulticriteria Decision Analysis
The decision-making technique of multicriteria decision analysis, explained in
Chapter 6 in the context of resource selection, can be used in managing quality
to make quality-related decisions about projects and products. Some examples
are choosing from between different approaches to quality implementation
and, while dealing with defects, choosing from different options regarding
schedule, cost, stakeholder satisfaction, and product lifecycle.


Quality Audit
An audit, in general, is a structured and independent review to check or verify
compliance with some of the policies, processes, and procedures. In project
management, a quality audit is an independent review to check whether
project activities comply with the policies, processes, and procedures of the
398   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      project and the performing organization. Audits can occur as scheduled or at
      random and can be conducted by a third party or by properly trained in-house
      auditors of the performing organization. The main objectives of quality audits
      are the following:
            *    Identify all good practices being implemented in the
                 project.
            *    Identify shortcomings and gaps in implementing comparing
                 to what was planned, or otherwise.
            *    Offer assistance for improvement and share knowledge
                 gathered from the implementation of good practices at
                 similar projects in the organization or the industry.
            *    Record contributions from each audit in the lessons
                 learned database of the project.
      These auditst accomplish the following:
            *    Because one of the objectives of a quality audit is to
                 identify inefficient and ineffective policies, processes, and
                 procedures being used for the project, audits reduce the
                 cost of quality on subsequent projects.
            *    Audits increase customer satisfaction and acceptance of
                 the product or service delivered by the project.

      Other Tools
      Design for X. Design for X (DfX), also called Design for Excellence, is a
      set of guidelines of product design. DfX uses a formal methodology to
      optimize a specific aspect of a design, i.e., X, a variable. Some examples of
      X are performance, cost, reliability, yield, recycling, safety, quality, assembly,
      and logistics. The use of DfX in quality management may improve the overall
      quality, with the performance improvement including cost performance, hence
      increasing the stakeholders' satisfaction.
      Problem Solving. This very general technique, described in Chapter 2, can
      be used in solving problems arising in audits, such as controlling the quality
      process and so forth.
      Quality Improvement. Some findings and recommendations would come
      out of managing and controlling quality methods such as auditing and problem
      solving. Based on those, common quality-improving techniques, such as Six
      Sigma and Plan-do-check-act, mentioned earlier in this chapter, can be used to
      analyze and evaluate options for quality improvement.
      The work performed during managing quality produces the output discussed
      in the next section.
                                                                CAPM(R) in Depth   399




Output of Performing Quality Management
The main output of performing quality assurance includes quality reports, test
and evaluation documents, and change requests, discussed here:
Quality Reports. Quality reports can include the following:
      *    Summary findings in the quality control process; e.g.; from
           quality control measurements
      *    Recommendation in inspection
      *    Change requests such as corrective actions recommended
           for defects and bugs; e.g.; rework or repair
      *    Recommendation on quality improvement for project,
           processes, and product
      *    List of quality management issues escalated by the team
As for the format of the reports, they may be in or include numerical,
qualitative, and graphical material.
Change Requests. The goal of quality management is to ensure that the
quality requirements are being met, and where they are not, improving quality.
For that or any other change by this process, you will have to make change
requests, which will be processed by the Perform Integrated Change Control
process.
Test and Evaluation. Following the project's industry needs or requirements
and the organization's templates, these test and evaluation documents are
composed for testing and evaluation purposes. They may include checklists
and a requirement traceability matrix. These documents are used as an input
item by the Control Quality process.
In a nutshell, the Manage Quality process identifies quality problems by
comparing quality control measurements against the quality requirements
and standards that are planned to be met; examining these problems; making
recommendations and change requests to eliminate or fix them; and developing
tests and evaluations to be used by the Control Quality process to check or
verify they have actually been fixed.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.3

   Name the processes that will use quality reports as input.
400   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.4

          Knowing the Manage Quality process, answer the following:
              Q1. List the organizational process assets that can influence this
                  process.
              Q2. Which component or components of the project management
                  plan, out of the ones listed in the output column of Table 10-3,
                  will need to be modified as a result of quality activities?
              Q3. Which component or components of the project management
                  plan, out of the ones listed in output column of Table 10-3, will
                  need to be modified as a result of actual results from project
                  execution?


      Tip Change requests generated by the Manage Quality process are processed through the
      Perform Integrated Change Control process, while approved requests are implemented using the
      Direct and Manage Project Work process, and implementation goes to the Control Quality process
      in the form of deliverables and work performance data.

      Quality reports will be used by a host of processes; see Study Checkpoint 10.3.


      Quality control measurements used as an input in the quality management
      process come from controlling quality, the process discussed next.


      Controlling Quality
      Quality is controlled by performing the Quality Control process, which is a
      high-level process to oversee and control the quality management activities
      with the goal of ensuring that the project outcome is complete and correct.
      To that end, the following is accomplished:
              1. Verify that all the planned requirements and specifications
                 have been implemented and complied with or conformed
                 to.
              2. To be specific, measure the completeness and compliance
                 of the project in its outcome.
              3. In these measurements, include all steps, variables, and
                 attributes.
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth           401




Note The phrase "project outcome is complete and correct" says it all--because it is complete
and correct, it has met all the planned requirements and hence meets stakeholders' expectations,
and the project outcome does what it was planned to do.


Table 10-4 presents the Control Quality process in terms of input, tools and
techniques, and output.

Table 10-4. The Control Quality Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                            Tools and Techniques              Output
1.Project Management Plan:       1.Data gathering:                 1.Quality control
   *Quality management plan         *Checklists and check            measurements
2.Project documents:                 sheets                        2.Verified deliverables
   *Test and evaluation             *Statistical sampling          3.Work performance
    documents                       *Questionnaires and              information
   *Quality metrics                  surveys                       4.Change requests
   *Lessons learned register     2.Data analysis:                  5.Project management
                                    *Root-cause analysis             plan updates:
3.Approved change requests
                                    *Performance reviews              *Quality management
4.Work performance data
                                                                       plan
5.Deliverables                   3.Data presentation:
                                                                   6.Project document
6.Enterprise environmental          *Control charts
                                                                     updates:
  factors                           *Cause and effect diagrams
                                                                      *Test and evaluation
7.Organizational project            *Histograms                        documents
  assets                            *Scattered diagrams               *Risk register
                                 4.Test product and evaluation        *Issues log
                                 5.Inspection                         *Lessons learned
                                 6.Meetings                            register


Core of Performing Quality Control Process
The key word in the Control Quality process is verify. Performing the Control
Quality process can be explained in the following steps in terms of the items
from Table 10-4:

        1. Get "How-to" Information. This process is performed
           according to the quality management plan.
402   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


             2. Get What to Verify. You run verification on deliverables
                and work performance data from the Direct and Manage
                Project Work process. The work performance data,
                discussed in Chapter 3, includes quality schedule and
                cost quality information, measurements for technical
                performance, quality metrics, and other quality
                information such as that from observations.
             3. Verify. You perform various tasks to run verifications,
                such as the following:
                  *    Inspect the deliverables to determine if they conform
                       to the standards as planned, and examine if they meet
                       the acceptance criteria defined in the project scope
                       statement.While doing this, use information from the
                       work performance data.
                  *    Also, use deliverables and work performance data to
                       verify that approved change requests from the Perform
                       Integrated Change Control process are correctly and
                       completely implemented.
                  *    Run tests from test and evaluation documents from
                       the Manage Quality process to check the quality
                       implementation and if various project and product
                       variables comply with the quality specified in the
                       quality metrics.
                  *    Also related to the test and evaluation documents,
                       perform evaluations about overall quality objectives'
                       achievement.
             4. Generate Output. From the information and results
                obtained from verifications, you can generate the output
                for this process, such as quality control measurements,
                verified deliverables, work performance information, and
                change requests.


      Caution! Note that according to PMBOK you are using the project scope statement in the
      preceding steps, but Table 10-4 also based on PMBOK does not have project scope statement as
      input.
                                                                 CAPM(R) in Depth   403




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.5
      Q1. Which quality process generates quality control measurements?
      Q2. Which quality process uses quality control measurements?
      Q3. Which quality process generates quality metrics?
      Q4. Which quality process uses quality metrics?

To facilitate verification, you can use a plethora of tools and techniques,
discussed next.


Tools and Techniques for Quality Control
The tools and techniques used for quality control are explained in the
following sections.


Data Gathering
The following techniques can used to collect data for and during verification,
e.g.; inspection.
Questionnaires and Surveys. This technique, discussed in Chapter 4, can
be used to collect data about customer satisfaction with project outcome.
Statistical Sampling. Statistical sampling involves randomly selecting a
part of the population for study. In quality control, you can select a subset of
features for inspection, measurements, and quality verification. This can save a
substantial amount of resources.To get reasonably accurate results, make sure
that the sample is random and of reasonable size; i.e., not too small.
Quality Checklist. A checklist is a structured tool used to verify that a
predetermined set of required steps has been performed. The checklists can
come in imperative form--e.g.; "to do" lists--or in interrogative form ("have
you done this" lists). Checklists are prepared--or identified, if they already
exist--in quality planning and used in quality control and are part of input in
test and evaluation documents.
Check Sheets. In many data-collection scenarios where you want to put the
data in organized form, a very useful tool called check sheets or tally sheets
can be used. This tool is particularly suitable when data to be collected is
about the variables--e.g.; different errors in a software module. For example,
Table 10-5 presents different kinds of errors found in a sample of software
modules during inspection.
404   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      Table 10-5. Errors Found in Software Modules

      Errors / Module         1        2       3     4       5       Total
      Number
      Functionality Errors    5        2       7     0       1       15
      Communication Errors    0        1       6     4       1       12
      Missing Command         5        0       0     4       1       5
      Errors
      Syntactic Errors        1        7       3     8       2       21
      Error-handling Errors   1        1       4     0       0       6
      Calculation Errors      0        1       6     4       8       19
      Control-flow Errors     7        6        3    0       1       17



      Data Analysis
      You perform root-cause analysis, discussed in the Manage Quality section, to
      identify the root causes of defects. Also, you can analyze and measure the
      quality metrics defined in the Plan Quality Management process using the
      work performance data and compare these measurements with their planned
      values. This is called the performance review.


      Data Presentation
      In this process, data-presentation techniques are used to identify causes of
      defects, find the potential effects of quality defects and errors, rank defects
      and their causes, and find if the processes are stable.
      Scatter Diagrams. A scatter diagram is used to show the pattern of the
      relationship between two variables--an independent variable and another
      variable that depends on the independent variable. The dependent variable is
      plotted corresponding to the independent variable. For example, a variable
      representing a cause, such as temperature, can be the independent variable, and
      a variable representing the effect, such as operational errors, can be a
      dependent variable. The closer the data points are to a diagonal line, the
      stronger the relationship (called the correlation) is between the two variables.
      So, scatter diagrams can be used to find the causes of defects.
      Histograms. In general, a histogram is a representation of the distribution of
      numerical data. It could be a bar chart that shows a distribution of variables.
      Each bar can represent an attribute, such as defects due to a specific cause,
      and its height can represent the frequency of the attribute, such as number of
      defects. This tool helps rank the defects and causes behind defects, and also
      ranks the processes in term of numbers or frequency of defect.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       405



You might ask how many defects are acceptable. To find an answer to this
question, you need to understand another tool, called the control chart.
Control Charts. Control charts, in general, are used to determine if a
process is stable--i.e., if its performance can be predicted. In other words,
they are used to monitor whether the variance of a specified variable is within
the acceptable limits dictated by quality control. A variance is a measurable
deviation in the value of a project variable, such as cost from a known baseline
or expected value. This is a way to monitor the deviations and determine
whether the corresponding variable is in or out of control. The values are
taken at different times to measure the behavior of a variable over time.
The mean value in the control chart represents the expected value, and a
predetermined spread from the mean value (usually 3) is used to define the
limits within which an acceptable value can fall.
Control charts can be used to monitor the values of any type of output
variables. To illustrate their main features, consider the example of a control
chart shown in Figure 10-3. In this example, assume that a manufacturer
produces 100 units of a product each day, and it is expected that 95 out of
100 units should have no defect--that is, the expected number of defective
units is equal to five. The control limits are set to 3. In other words, 95 units
out of 100 must be correct, give or take three. That puts the lower limit at 92
and the upper limit at 98. Crossing the lower limits is not acceptable to the
customer, and crossing the upper limits might require an unjustifiable cost.




Figure 10-3. An example of a control chart
406   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      Controlling quality includes dealing with defects and the problems that cause
      them. So, studying causes of a problem is critical to quality control.


      Caution! The upper and lower limits are based on requirements set in specifications, while
      control limits are statistically determined from actual data on how the process is performing.


      As mentioned earlier, the control charts, in general, are used to determine
      if a process is stable, and their particular uses can include monitoring the
      following:
             *    Volume
             *    Cost and schedule variance
             *    Frequency of scope changes
      They can also be used for tracking repetitive activities to produce manufactu
      ring lots.
      Cause and Effect Diagram. A cause and effect diagram is used to explore
      all the potential causes (inputs) that result in a single effect (output), such as a
      problem or a defect. This type of diagram is the brainchild of Kaoru Ishikawa,
      who pioneered quality management processes in the Kawasaki shipyards, and
      therefore these diagrams are also called Ishikawa diagrams. Due to the shape
      of these diagrams, they are also known as fishbone diagrams, and due to what
      they do--find multiple causes--they are also called why-why diagrams.
      For example, to construct and use cause and effect diagrams effectively, you
      can perform the following simple steps:
             1. Identify the Problem. Write down the problem in a
                box drawn on the right side of a large sheet of paper.This
                represents the head of the fish. Starting from the box,
                draw a horizontal line across the paper. This represents
                the spine of the fish.
             2. Identify the Possible Areas of Causes. Identify the
                areas or factors from which the potential causes of the
                problem might come. Environment, people, materials,
                measurements, and methods are some examples of areas
                (factors) of causes. For each factor relevant to the problem
                under study, draw a line off the spine and label it with the
                name of the factor. These lines represent the fish bones.
             3. Identify the Possible Causes. For each factor, identify
                possible causes. Represent each possible cause with a line
                coming off the bone that represents the corresponding
                factor.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth       407



       4. Analyze the Diagram. Analyzing the diagram includes
          narrowing down the most likely causes and investigating
          them further.
Figure 10-4 shows an example of a cause and effect diagram. The problem in
this example is the delay in the release of a website.The factors considered are
environment, methods, people, and time. Of course, the diagram is incomplete
in the sense that more factors and related causes can be explored, and causes
for each factor can be explored further. But you get the point.




                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       




Figure 10-4. An example of a cause and effect diagram: explore the causes for a delay in a
website release


Tip While constructing the cause and effect diagram, you can use the brainstorming method
to identify the potential factors of causes and the potential causes for each factor.


A cause and effect diagram offers a structured way to think through all
possible causes of a problem. You can use these diagrams to carry out a
thorough analysis of a problematic situation. This kind of analysis is useful in
complex situations when, to discover the real causes, you need to explore all
the potential causes and not just the obvious ones.
In the Manage Quality process, cause and effect diagrams can be used to
identify the main or root causes of defects, while in the Control Quality
process, they can be used to find the potential effects of quality defects and
errors.
In addition to the seven quality tools we have discussed, there are some other
tools that you can use for quality control.
408   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


      Other Quality Control Tools
      Two other quality control tools are discussed in the following:
            *    Inspection. This is a technique to examine whether an
                 activity, component, product, service, or result conforms
                 to specific requirements. This can also be used to verify
                 defects and implications to their removal. Inspections can
                 be conducted at various levels of project execution. For
                 example, you can inspect the results of a single activity,
                 or you can inspect the final product of the project,
                 or both. Nevertheless, inspection generally includes
                 measurements. There are various forms of inspections,
                 such as reviews, peer reviews, audits, and walkthroughs.
            *    Testing and Product Evaluation. This technique is
                 used to find bugs, defects, and errors in the product, and
                 also to verify its conformity to quality requirements and
                 standards. Testing does not have to wait until toward the
                 end of project. Rather, it should be performed side-by-
                 side with development. As a product or its component
                 is developed, it can be tested. This approach will be less
                 costly. The kinds of tests depend upon the application
                 areas of the project.

                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.6

         Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
         column.

         Data Presentation Tool        A Use
         A.Flowchart                   1.To identify the most important area of causes of
                                       defects
         B.Tally sheets                2.To find the relationship between two variables and
                                         find potential causes of defects
         C.Scatter diagram             3.To anticipate what quality problems might be and
                                         where they might occur
         D.Histogram                   4.To monitor whether the variance of a specified
                                         variable is within the acceptable limits
         E.Affinity diagrams           5.To find frequency of defects
         F.Control chart               6.To explore all the potential causes of a problem,
                                         not just the obvious ones
         G.Cause and effect diagram 7.To display the relative importance of different
                                      variables, e.g.; its causes
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth      409



All this works by using these tools to generate the output items for this
process, discussed next.


Output of Quality Control
The quality control measurements, verified deliverables, work performance
information, and change requests are the main output items of the Control
Quality process. These and other output items are discussed in the following
list.
Quality Control Measurements. These are the results of the Control
Quality activities and are fed back to the Manage Quality process in the form
of a document as specified in the quality management plan. They are also used
to make recommendations for corrective and preventive actions or other
change requests.
Verified Deliverables. These are the deliverables whose correctness and
conformity with quality requirements and standards have been verified through
the Control Quality process. They are fed into the Validate Scope process
discussed in Chapter 4. The rejected deliverables come back to verification
after repair.
Work Performance Information. This document from this process
includes information about the following items:
      *   List of verified deliverables
      *   Causes of rejections
      *   Status of project requirement fulfilment
      *   Status of quality metrics
      *   Recommendations for corrective actions and process
          adjustments
Change Requests. If in the Control Quality process changes need to
occur that affect a component of the project management plan or a project
document, you need to generate change requests that must go through the
standard process.
Of course, you can have meetings regarding topics relevant to quality control,
and you have to make needed modifications to documents such as those listed
for modification in the output column of Table 10-4.
410   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.7

         Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
         column. An item in the first column may match with more than one item in the second
         column and vice versa.

         Item                                  Appears In
         A.Quality metrics                     1.Input to Plan Quality Management
         B.Quality control measurements        2.Input to Plan Quality
         C.Quality report                      3.Input to Control Quality
         D.Test and evaluation documents       4.Output of Plan Quality Management
         E.Approved change requests            5.Output of Manage Quality
         F.Work performance data               6.Output of Control Quality
         G.Deliverables                        7.Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
         H.Verified deliverables               8.Output of Perform Integrated Change
         I.Work performance information          Control
         J.Change requests                     9.Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
                                              10.Monitor and Control Project Work




      In a nutshell, the Control Quality process verifies the deliverables and
      makes quality control measurements by using inspection, data analysis, data
      presentation, and other techniques to check if quality requirements are met
      and quality standards are conformed to.
      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
            1. The goal for quality planning is twofold: identify quality
               requirements and standards for your project and specify
               how to determine if the process and its product satisfy
               these requirements and standards.
            2. Use the Manage Quality process to verify that the
               process and its product satisfy these requirements and
               standards. Incorporate the organization's quality policies
               and procedures into these activities.
            3. In the Monitor Quality process, execute these activities
               and verify that the project and its deliverables meet the
               quality requirements and conform to the quality standards.
               This includes making the quality control measurements
               based on the actual project performance data.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth      411




Summary
Quality management includes planning quality, managing quality, and controlling
quality. The quality management plan and quality metrics are the major output
items of the quality planning process, called Plan Quality Management. The
Manage Quality process identifies quality problems by comparing quality
control measurements to the quality requirements and standards that are
planned to be met; examines these problems; makes recommendations and
change requests to eliminate or fix them; and develops tests and evaluations
to be used by the Control Quality process to check or verify they have
been actually fixed. The quality control measurements used by the Manage
Quality process are made by the Control Quality process based the actual
performance data from project execution. This process performs the tests
and evaluations developed by the Manage Quality process to verify project
deliverables.


Exam's Eye View
Comprehend
*Quality management has two quality components to manage: project quality and project
 product quality, which is linked to project deliverables.
*Planning quality is all about identifying quality requirements and standards for the
 project and its deliverables and determining how to test and verify that they have been
 implemented.
*The Manage Quality process identifies quality problems by comparing quality control
 measurements against the quality requirements and standards; examines these problems;
 and makes recommendations and change requests to eliminate or fix them.
*The Manage Quality process also develops tests and evaluations to be used by the
 Control Quality process to check or verify problems have been actually fixed.
*The Control Quality process verifies the deliverables and makes quality control
 measurements by using inspection, data analysis, data presentation, and other techniques
 to check if quality requirements are met and quality standards are conformed to.

Look Out
*Quality is not only about defects in the products; it also includes things like process
 improvements, completing tasks on time, cost, others aspects of project performance, and
 so forth.
*Tests and evaluations, an output of the Manage Quality process, can be used by the
 Control Quality process to verify that quality has been applied.
*Approved change requests are input to the Control Quality process to verify that they
 are correctly and completely implemented.
412   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management



      Memorize
      *The output of the Plan Quality Management process includes quality metrics in addition to
       a quality management plan.
      *The Manage Quality process generates test and evaluation documents as an output item,
       which become an input into the Control Quality process.
      *The Control Quality process generates quality control measurements as an output item,
       which become an input into the Manage Quality process
      *The project charter is used in quality planning.




      Review Questions
              1. What is the name of a quality-planning technique that
                 involves comparing the results of similar activities?
                   A. Brainstorming
                   B.   Benchmarking
                   C. Cost/benefit analysis
                   D. Quality metrics
              2. What of the following about matrix diagrams is not true?
                   A. It is used in planning quality management.
                   B.   It is used managing quality.
                   C. It is used to explore the effects of defects.
                   D.It helps to find the key quality metrics important for
                     project success.
              3. What of the following about quality metrics is not true?
                   A.A metric in quality metrics is a product attribute
                     accompanied by information on how the quality
                     control process will verify its quality conformance.
                   B.They are an output of planning quality.
                   C.They can be used as a reference or basis for
                     developing a test for quality and for suggesting
                     improvement; e.g.; a change request.
                   D.They help to find the key quality metrics important
                     for project success.
                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth   413



4. Which of the following is not an input to the Manage
   Quality process?
    A. Quality metrics
    B.   Quality control measurements
    C. Risk report
    D. Work performance data
5. You are the project manager for the Mind The Gap project.
   You are going to meet with your project team, where you
   are going develop quality tests that incorporate the
   organization's quality policies and procedures. Which of
   the following processes are you performing?
   A. Quality control
   B.    Manage quality
   C. Quality planning
   D. Quality assurance
6. Quality audits are part of which of the following quality
   management processes?
   A. Manage Quality
   B.    Control Quality
   C. Plan Quality Management
   D. Quality Inspection
7. You are the project manager of the Green Schools project.
   Your supervisor has asked you to make some self-checks
   and inspections before the stakeholders ask for a formal
   inspection. It is time to perform which process?
   A. Plan Quality
   B.    Perform Quality Control
   C. Perform Quality Assurance
   D. Manage Quality
414   Chapter 10 | Project Quality Management


           8. You are using an Ishikawa diagram to find real causes of a
              problem by exploring all the possible causes. Which one
              of the quality processes are you performing?
               A. Manage Quality
               B.   Plan Quality Management
               C. Control Quality and Perform Quality Assurance
               D. Control Quality
           9. You want to examine the results of a process to determine
              whether the process is in or out of control. Which of the
              following is the most suitable tool to use?
               A. Control chart
               B.   Cause and effect diagram
               C. Inspection
               D. Scatter diagram
          10. You are managing a software project with limited
              development resources. The QA department has
              discovered a large number of defects in the product, and
              the project sponsor is very concerned about this. You
              want to get the maximum number of defects repaired
              with minimal effort and cost. Which quality-control tool
              are you going to use before you direct the efforts of the
              project team to fix specific problems?
               A. Control chart
               B.   Cause and effect diagram
               C. Inspection
               D. Scatter diagram
          11. You are the project manager for a software development
              project that has limited resources. The customer is
              concerned about the quality of the code developed and
              wants you to conduct the code review. The product
              contains a large body of code with millions of lines.Which
              approach will you take?
               A. Tell the customer it's not possible.
               B.   Use statistical sampling.
               C. Use automated testing tools.
               D. Arrange to review each line of the code.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   415



12. Which of the following is not an input to controlling
    quality?
     A. Project deliverables
     B.   Work performance measurements
     C. Quality control measurements
     D. Test and evaluation documents
13. Which of the following tools or techniques is not listed
    in PMBOK to be used in the perform quality control
    process?
     A. Statistical sampling
     B.   Performance reviews
     C. Fishbone diagrams
     D. Change control tools
14. What about flowcharts is not true?
     A.They can be used to understand and estimate the
       cost of quality for a process.
     B.   They can help in improving processes.
     C.They can used to identify points where quality
       defects may occur.
     D.They help in figuring out the frequency of defects
       from different attributes of the product during
       inspection.
15. What about mind mapping is not true?
     A.This technique is used in the perform quality
       assurance process.
     B.This technique may help with figuring out quality
       requirements.
     C. It can be used to find constraints.
     D. It can help to find relationships such as dependencies.
16. The plan-do-check-act cycle of quality management was:
     A. Defined by Shewhart and modified by Deming.
     B.Originally defined by Deming and then modified by
       Shewhart.
     C. Defined by Crosby and modified by Deming.
     D. Defined by Crosby and modified by Juan.
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                      11

Project Risk
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 8 percent of the exam,
equivalent to about 11 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how it helps generate the output, as well as what a given tool or
technique does in a given process.
You should understand very well how to apply risk tools and methods, such
as probability and impact matrix, breakdown structure (RBS), SWOT analysis,
root-cause analysis, decision-tree analysis, and EMV analysis. Know how to
perform simple risk calculations.
While studying this knowledge area and its processes, pay attention to how the
tasks can be adapted to your needs, and also recognize an agile environment
in action; e.g.; continual assessment generates change requests, which lead to
changing plans--i.e., adapting.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_11
418   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Risk Management:
         1. Understand the seven project management processes in the project risk
            management knowledge area.
         2. Identify the input, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in project risk
            management.
         3. Identify the key documents in project risk management.
         4. Perform simple risk calculations.
         5. Recognize when and how to adjust risk based on the project environment.


      Uncertainties are all around us and in our projects. Risk refers to an uncertain
      event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on meeting
      the project objectives. After the project starts executing, you will not have
      enough time to plan a response to a risk if it occurs, so you need to plan the
      risk responses before the project starts executing. To do that, you need to
      identify the risks and analyze them. Not all risks are equal. You prioritize the
      risks based on the analysis and plan responses accordingly, then implement
      the risk response plan. Also, you need to monitor the risks and their overall
      management.
      So, the core question in this chapter is: how do you manage risks? In search
      of an answer, we will explore three avenues: planning risk management and
      planning and executing risk responses; identifying and analyzing risks; and
      monitoring and controlling risks.


      Managing Risks: The Big Picture
      To most of us, risk means danger--if it happens, it will result in negative,
      undesired consequences. However, in project management, a risk is an
      uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative impact
      on meeting project objectives related to components such as schedule (time),
      cost, scope, or quality. A negative impact poses a threat while a positive impact
      offers opportunity. For example, one of the obvious schedule objectives for a
      project is to complete the project by the scheduled deadline. If a risk related
      to the schedule occurs, it can delay the completion of the project, or it can
      make it possible to finish the project earlier. So, the two characteristics of a
      risk in project management are the following:
             *    It stems from the elements of uncertainty.
             *    It might have negative or positive effects on meeting the
                  project objectives.
                                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth                419



Risk management includes planning risk management, identifying and
analyzing the risks, planning and preparing risk responses, implementing the
risk response if the risk occurs, and monitoring the risks. Figure 11-1 shows
the corresponding processes used to accomplish these tasks, which are also
explained in the following list.



                                   Monitor Risks


                      Risk management plan          Updated risk register
                                                      and risk report

                                                        Risk management          Implement
                                    Plan Risk                 plan
                                                                                    Risk
                                   Management
                                                                                 Responses
           Risk management                                     Risk management            Updated risk
                 plan                                                plan                 register and risk
                                     Risk management                                      report
                                           plan
                            Perform                  Perform
    Identify                                                                      Plan Risk
                           Qualitative             Quantitative
      Risks                                                                      Responses
                          Risk Analysis            Risk Analysis

               Risk register and       Updated risk register      Updated risk register
                  risk report            and risk report            and risk report

Figure 11-1. Processes used in risk management


       *    Plan Risk Management. A process to determine the
            HOWs of the risk management: how to conduct risk
            management for the project at hand; e.g.; what will be
            the risk management activities and how would they be
            performed?
       *    Identify Risks. A process to identify and document
            the risks that might occur for the given project, and also
            sources of overall project risk.
       *    Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. A process used
            for estimating the overall probability of risks occurring
            and their impact, and for prioritizing them accordingly for
            further analysis.
       *    Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. A process used
            to analyze numerically the effect of identified risks on
            meeting the project objectives.
420   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


              *    Plan Risk Responses. A process used to prepare a risk
                   response plan in order to increase the positive impact
                   and decrease the negative impact of risks on the project.
              *    Implement Responses. The process makes sure that
                   all the planned risk responses are executed as planned.
              *    Monitor Risks.This process is used for tracking identified
                   risks, identifying new risks, and executing and evaluating
                   the effectiveness of risk management processes.


      Tip The data flow between the different processes shown in Table 11-1 is true in general.
      However, note that depending upon the project and the experience of the risk management team,
      shortcuts can be taken. For example, you can go directly from risk identification to quantitative risk
      analysis, or even to risk-response planning; or you may need only qualitative risk analysis and not
      quantitative risk analysis.


      These processes are listed in Table 11-1 with the major output from each
      process.

      Table 11-1. Processes of Risk Management Mapped to the Process Groups

      Risk Management          Process Group          Major Output              Performed
      Process
      Plan Risk                Planning               Risk management plan      Once or at pre-defined
      Management                                                                points
      Identify Risks           Planning               Risk register             Throughout the
                                                      Risk report               project

      Perform Qualitative      Planning               Risk register and risk    Throughout the
      Risk Analysis                                   report updates            project
      Perform Quantitative     Planning               Risk register and risk    Throughout the
      Risk Analysis                                   report updates            project
      Plan Risk Responses      Planning               Risk register and risk    Throughout the
                                                      report updates            project
      Implement Risk            Executing             Risk register and risk    Throughout the
      Responses                                       report updates            project
      Monitor Risks             Monitoring and        Work performing           Throughout the
                                Controlling           information               project
                                                      Risk register and risk
                                                      report updates
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth    421



The Implement Risk Responses and Monitor Risks processes are part of
the executing process group and the monitor and control process group,
respectively, whereas all other risk management processes belong to the
planning process group. It's evident that planning risk management demands a
considerable effort.


Planning Risk Management
Risk management planning is the process used to determine how the risk
management activities for the project at hand will be performed. The major
goals for planning risk management are threefold: ensure that the type, level,
and visibility of risk management fit with the actual risk involved in the project
and the importance of the project to the organization; secure sufficient
resources, including time for risk management activities; and set up an agreed-
upon basis for evaluating risks. In a nutshell, you use the risk management
planning process to determine the following:
        *   The risk management activities for this project
        *   How to execute the risk management activities
Table 11-2 presents the Plan Risk Management process in terms of input, tools
and techniques, and output.

Table 11-2. The Plan Risk Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                  Tools and Techniques         Output
1.Project charter                      1.Data Analysis:             1.Risk management
2.Project Management Plan:                *Stakeholder analysis       plan
  *Core and all subsidiary plans       2.Expert judgment
3.Project documents:                   3.Meetings
  *Stakeholder register
4.Enterprise environmental factors
5.Organizational project assets



Developing the Risk Management Plan
You perform risk management planning to develop a document called the risk
management plan. Take a closer look at the input column of Table 11-2; ignore
item 2. We have the project charter used to start the project, the stakeholder
register containing information about project stakeholders, and the project
environment in terms of enterprise environmental factors and organizational
project assets. In other words, we have a project, with its environment and
422   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      stakeholders, that has just started. Now, add item 2--all the plans from the
      start to the completion of the project. That is what it takes to manage risks--
      the whole project. Risks could be anywhere, and you should look for them in
      all aspects of your projects.
      As risk management should initially be planned very early in the project, we
      need the project charter that contains a high-level description of the project
      and its scope, including boundaries, requirements, and risks. From the project
      register, you can learn about what roles different stakeholders are playing in
      the project and what their attitude is toward and relationship is with different
      types of risks. This will help in planning risk management; i.e., determining risk
      management roles and responsibilities and the risk threshold by performing
      stakeholder analysis as described in Chapter 8.
      The enterprise environment factors relevant to risk planning include the
      overall risk threshold set by the organizational or key project stakeholders.The
      organizational project assets relevant to risk planning include organizational
      risk policy--i.e., approaches toward risk management; definitions of concepts
      and terms about risk used within the organization; standard risk templates you
      can use; a roles and responsibilities list; authority levels for decision making;
      and lessons from similar projects.
      You develop the risk management plan by holding planning meetings with
      relevant stakeholders, such as the following:
            *    Project manager
            *    Selected members from the project team
            *    Selected stakeholders
            *    Any member from the performing organization who has
                 the responsibility for risk planning and executing
      All these efforts generate a document called the risk management plan.


      Risk Management Plan
      The only output of the Plan Risk Management process is the risk management
      plan, which includes the following elements.
      Strategy and Methodology. The strategy refers to the general approach of
      handling risks for the project under way, while the methodology specifies the
      system of approaches, tools, and data sources that will be used to perform risk
      management on the project at hand. Note that these tools and approaches
      might vary over the projects, so you have to make the best selection for the
      given project.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth         423



Identifying and Assigning Resources. This identifies the need for
resources for risk management, such as human resources, cost, and time:
       *    Roles and Responsibilities. This specifies the roles and
            responsibilities for each role involved in risk management.
            These roles are or will be assigned to the members of
            the risk management team.
       *    Funding. The cost for risk management activities needs
            to be estimated and included in the budget and the
            project cost baseline.
       *    Timing and Scheduling. The plan specifies how often
            the risk management processes will be included in the
            project schedule, which is planned and developed by
            using the processes discussed in Chapter 5, "Project
            Schedule Management." It also specifies what activities
            will be executed in these risk management processes.


Tip It's a good idea for the risk management team to include members from outside the
project team to ensure unbiased risk evaluations.


Stakeholders' Risk Tolerance. For each key stakeholder, the risk tolerance
in terms of measurable threshold of objection should be recorded. These
threshold values should be taken into account when assessing the priority of
individual risks.
Risk Categories. This element, used to facilitate the identification of individual
project risks, specifies how risks will be categorized.The risk categories typically
correspond to the sources of risks. Depending upon the size and complexity
of the project, you might need to develop a risk breakdown structure (RBS),
which is a hierarchical structure that breaks the identified risk categories into
subcategories. In developing this structure, you will end up identifying various
areas and causes of potential risks. The performing organization might already
have prepared a categorization of typical risks. However, you need to examine
this categorization for each project and tailor it to the needs of the project
at hand. The risk categorization helps you identify risks to the extent that you
will be identifying various areas and causes of potential risks for your project.


Caution! Some project management literature uses the terms risk sources and risk categories
synonymously; be ready to handle it if happens in the CAPM or PMP exam questions.
424   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Definition of Risk Probability and Impact. Defining different levels of
      risk probabilities and impacts is necessary to ensure the quality and credibility
      of the qualitative risk analysis, which we will discuss later in this chapter.
      The basic issues are defining the scale of likelihood that the risk will happen
      and defining the scale of the strength of its impact if the risk occurs. These
      definitions, even if they already exist in the organization, must be examined
      and tailored to the needs of the specific project. In qualitative analysis, we are
      talking about relative impact levels.
      As an example, Table 11-3 shows the risk impact definitions for four project
      objectives: cost, quality, scope, and time. Note that this example only shows
      the negative impact. The heading of the table presents the impact scale, and
      each cell in the following rows from column 2 to column 6 specifies the
      impact on a specific objective corresponding to a point on the overall impact
      scale. For example, the cell corresponding to the first row and fifth column
      reads that high impact (0.65) means a 50 to 80% increase in cost.

      Table 11-3. Risk Impact Definitions for Four Project Objectives

      Risk Impact/ Very Low              Low (0.10)     Moderate      High (0.65)      Very High
      Project      (0.05)                               (0.35)                         (0.90)
      Objectives
      Cost          Less than 1% cost 1-20% cost        20-50% cost   50-80% cost      80-100%
                    increase          increase          increase      increase         cost
                                                                                       increase
      Time          Insignificant time   1-10% time     10-30% time 30-60% time        60-100%
                    increase             increase       increase    increase           time
                                                                                       increase
      Scope         Scope decrease       Scope of       Sponsor       Scope            Project and
                    unnoticeable         only a few     approval      reduction        item are
                                         minor areas    necessary     unacceptable     effectively
                                         affected       for scope     to the sponsor   useless
                                                        reduction
      Quality       Unnoticeable         Only a few     Quality       Quality          Project and
                    quality reduction    applications   requires      reduction        item are
                                         will be        sponsor       unacceptable     effectively
                                         affected       approval                       useless



      You can define the risk probability scale from very unlikely to almost certainly,
      called the relative scale. As an alternative, you can define a numerical scale in
      which the probability is represented by numbers, in which case a value close
      to 0.0 means very unlikely and a value close to 1.0 means almost certainly.
      The impact scale represents the size of the risk impact on the given project
      objective should the risk occur. Just like the probability scale, you can define
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth        425



the impact scale relatively or numerically. The relative scale can range from
very low impact to very high impact, with points in the middle such as low,
moderate, and high. As an alternative, you can define the impact numerically; it
might be linear, such as the first point at 0.1, the second point at 0.2, and the
tenth point at 1.0, or it might be nonlinear, such as the first point at 0.001, the
second point at 0.01, and the third point at 0.1.
Probability and Impact Matrix. Risks are prioritized according to the
values of probabilities of risk occurrences and the sizes of their impacts on
the project objectives as estimated; e.g.; a qualitative analysis. The values are
recorded in what is called a probability-impact matrix. For a given risk, its
priority is determined by comparing its value in this probability-impact matrix
with the value in the reference probability-impact matrix used as a lookup
table. Even if your organization already has this reference matrix, you should
examine it and tailor it to the needs of the specific project. I will discuss the
probability and impact matrix in more detail later in this chapter.
Risk Reporting and Tracking. The risk reporting part of the risk
management plan describes what kind of content and in what format each
output of the risk processes--e.g.; risk register and risk report--will be. This
about how to document the output of the risk management processes. It may
also include how these outputs will be communicated.
Risk tracking describes how each risk management process used in the project
would be audited. Obviously, should the performing organization decide to
audit the risk management process, one should be able to track these activities.
During the process of planning risk management for a specific project, you
revisit the tolerance levels of the stakeholders for certain risks, and these levels
may be revised. So, risk management planning is the process that generates the
risk management plan document, which contains the information that will be
used in risk identification, risk analysis, and responding to risks.
You cannot manage a risk if it's not identified.


Identifying Risks
Risks are identified by using the risk identification process. An unidentified
risk is a danger lurking out of your sight and waiting to attack the project.The
significance of the risk identification process cannot be overemphasized. You
use the risk identification process to accomplish the following tasks:
      *    Identify the individual risks that might affect the project at
           hand, and also identify the overall sources of project risks.
      *    Document the characteristics and other information
           about the identified risks in a document called the risk
           register.
426   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Table 11-4 presents the Identify Risks process in terms of input, tools and
      techniques, and output.

      Table 11-4. The Identify Risks Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                Tools and Techniques         Output
      1.Project Management Plan:           1. Data Gathering:           1.Risk register
        *Risk management plan                 * Checklists              2.Risk report
        *Requirement management plan          *Interviews               3.Project document
        *Schedule management plan             *Brainstorming              updates:
        *Cost management plan              2.Data Analysis:                *Assumptions log
        *Quality management plan              *Document analysis           *Issues log
        *Resource management plan             *Root-cause analysis         *Lessons learned
                                                                            register
        *Scope baseline                       *Assumption and
        *Schedule baseline                     constraint analysis
        *Cost baseline                        *SWOT analysis
      2.Project documents:                 3.Interpersonal and team
                                             skills: Facilitation
        *Cost and duration estimates
         for project activities            4.Prompt lists
        *Requirement documentation         5.Expert judgment
        *Resource requirement              6.Meetings
        *Assumptions log
        *Issues log
        *Stakeholder register
        *Lessons learned register
      3.Agreements
      4.Procurement documentation
      5.Enterprise environmental factors
      6.Organizational project assets


      We can use the items in this table to perform the Identify Risks process.


      Performing Risk Identification
      Remember, the goal of this process is to identify the individual project risks
      and overall sources of project risks. The risk management plan will give basic
      guidance on how to perform this process for your project, while here we will
      discuss in general how to do it. As the long list of input items in Table 11-4
      indicates, risks are hiding in almost all areas of the project. The key to finding
      them lies in the uncertainty coming from various sources; e.g.; assumptions,
      ambiguity, estimates, ranges as uncertainty gives rise to risks.
                                                                          CAPM(R) in Depth           427



So, as a starting point in identifying risks, look for areas of assumptions,
ambiguities, and estimates in agreements, procurement documentation, and
project documents and plans listed in Table 11-4. For example, cost and duration
estimates for project activities and the assumptions log are obvious places to
start. You can use document analysis, discussed in Chapter 4 and other places
in the book, on these input documents to identify individual project risks.
Furthermore, the knowledge database related to risk management from
previous projects can also be reviewed with this technique.
To identify the individual project risks and overall sources of project risks,
you can also use the other tools and techniques listed in Table 11-4, as
discussed next.


Data-Gathering Techniques
To identify risks and project risk sources, you need to gather risk-related
information from a variety of sources. The following are some of the
information-gathering techniques used for this purpose.
Checklists. A checklist is a kind of to-do list--a list of actions to be taken or
points to be considered. They can be used as a tool in this process, such as a
checklist of all the documents that must be looked at for risks. The carefully
prepared checklists in any process are great no-brainer timesavers. Projects in
the same organization will more often than not have similarities.As a result, you
can develop a risk identification checklist based on the information gathered
from a similar set of projects previously performed. Also, if you developed the
risk breakdown structure (RBS) in risk planning, the lowest level of RBS can
often be used as a checklist, which could be the list of risk categories.


Note Risk identification checklists are rarely exhaustive. Always explore what is left out of the
checklist you are using. Also, make sure the checklist is up-to-date when you close the project to
enhance its value for future projects.


Interviewing. This is one of the common methods used for information
gathering for risk identification. You interview the appropriate stakeholders
and subject-matter experts to gather information that will help identify risks
for the project at hand.
You can then conduct a brainstorming session based on the information
gathered.
Brainstorming. This technique, defined in Chapters 3 and 4, can be used
to identify risks and risk sources. The goal here is to get a comprehensive list
of potential risks so that no risk goes unidentified. The project team, along
428   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      with the relevant experts from different disciplines, can participate in the
      brainstorming session. Brainstorming is better performed under the guidance
      of a facilitator. You can use the categories of risks or the RBS as a framework
      to keep the session focused on the issue.
      When you have gathered the risk-related data, you can analyze it to identify
      the individual project risks and overall sources of project risks.

      Data-Analysis Techniques
      The data-analysis techniques used to identify the individual project risks and
      overall sources of project risks may include those in the following sections.
      Assumption and Constraint Analysis. Assumptions in the project, by
      definition, represent uncertainty--hence, risk. You analyze these assumptions
      to identify the risks. Assumption and constraint analysis is the technique used
      to examine the validity of assumptions and constraints and thereby to identify
      the risks resulting from the inaccuracies, inconsistencies, or incompleteness
      of each assumption. For example, assume that there is only one person in
      the organization who has a rare skill needed for the project. An obvious
      assumption would be that the person will not quit the organization before
      completing the assignment. The likelihood of this assumption being false--i.e.,
      the inaccuracy of this assumption--amounts to the risk. Constraints, by their
      limiting factor, also create uncertainty, hence, risk.
      Root-cause Analysis. Discussed in Chapter 10, root-cause analysis is a
      powerful way to identify new risks by identifying the root cause of known
      risks. After you spot a potential cause for risks, it's simple to identify the risks
      resulting from that cause. Furthermore, knowing the cause of a risk helps you
      plan an effective response. In this technique, you obviously end up identifying
      the sources, or causes, of project risks.
      You can also look for risks by starting from the impacts of risks.
      SWOT Analysis. While the root-cause analysis technique looks into the
      causes of the risks to identify the risks, a SWOT analysis looks at the potential
      impacts of the risks to identify the risks. If you examine the strengths,
      weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of a given project, you will
      be exposing the risks involved. Remember that a strength is an opportunity,
      a weakness is a threat, and opportunities and threats are posed by risks. This
      helps broaden the spectrum of risks considered. For example, a strength
      of your project might be that most of its parts are well understood from
      previously executed similar projects. Therefore, the risks involved in those
      parts will be easy to identify. A weakness of your project might be that one of
      the parts involves new technology that is not well tested. So, this is a source
      of unknown risks. An opportunity might be that your organization will be the
      first one to take this product to the market. An example of a threat might be
      that the government is considering a bill that, if it becomes a law, will have
      profound implications for your project.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth           429




Note Prompt Lists. A prompt list is a predetermined list of risk categories that can be used
to generate ideas to identify individual project risks and also acts as the lowest level in the risk
breakdown structure (RBS).


Of course, you can always use the judgment of experts on the topic. You will
generally be using more than one of these tools and techniques to identify
risks. During risk identification, you might discover the causes of the risks, and
you might even think of some potential risk responses. All this is part of the
output of the risk identification process.


The Output of Risk Identification
Two documents, risk register and quality report, are initiated with the results
of the Identify Risks process and are completed by other risk management
processes.


Risk Register
The risk register is a document that contains the risk output of the risk
identification process; i.e., information about the individual project risks. You
will see later in this chapter that the risk register, which is initiated in the risk
identification process, will also contain information or results from other risk
management processes.To begin, you store the following information from the
risk identification process in the risk register:

        *    List of Identified Risks. These are the individual risks
             that you identified in the risk identification process, each
             risk with a unique ID. These risks should be described in
             reasonable detail, which may include the following:
             *    The Risks. The definition and nature of each risk
                  itself and the causes that will give rise to that risk.
             *    List of the Root Causes of the Risks. This is a
                  list of events or conditions that might give rise to the
                  identified risks.
             *    Updates to Risk Categories. Risk categories were
                  originally identified in the risk management planning
                  process. However, in the process of identifying risks
                  you might discover new categories or modify existing
                  categories. The updated risk categories must be
                  included in the risk register.
430   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


                 *    Risk Owner. Each risk must be assigned an owner. If
                      not identified yet, it will be in the Perform Qualitative
                      Risk Analysis process. If the owner is known, it should
                      be confirmed during the Perform Qualitative Risk
                      Analysis process.
            *    List of Potential Responses. Risk-response planning is
                 a separate process that is performed after risk analysis.
                 However, during risk identification, you might identify
                 potential risk responses that you must document in the
                 risk register. These responses can be further examined
                 and planned in the risk-response planning process.

      Risk Report
      From this process, the risk report has 1) information about sources of overall
      project risks, answering the question: what are the main risk drivers for this
      project? and 2) summary of individual project risks stating their distribution
      across the risk categories, threats and opportunities that they present,
      their impact, and trends resulting from them. Some results from other risk
      management processes are added to this report.

                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.1

         Problem: Knowing the Identify Risks process, make lists of some EEFs and OPAs that
         can influence this process.


      The results of the risk identification process usually lead to qualitative risk
      analysis. However, depending upon the project and the experience of the
      risk management team, risk identification might lead directly to quantitative
      risk analysis and even to risk-response planning.


      Analyzing Risks
      Once the risks have been identified, you need to answer two main questions
      for each identified risk: what are the odds that the risk will occur and, if it
      does, what will its impact be on the project objectives? You get the answers by
      performing risk analysis, which comes in two forms: qualitative and quantitative:
            *    Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. This is used
                 to prioritize the identified individual project risks by
                 estimating the probability of their occurrence, their
                 impact on the project objectives, and other risk factors.
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth        431



        *   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. This is used to
            perform numerical analysis to estimate the combined
            effect of identified individual project risks and other
            uncertainty sources on the overall project objectives.
Usually, you prioritize the risks by performing qualitative analysis on them
before you perform quantitative analysis.


Qualitative Risk Analysis
Because qualitative analysis is an estimate, it is less precise than the quantitative
analysis, which is based on numbers from detailed analysis. However, qualitative
analysis is quicker and cheaper. It gives you some feel about the risks, and
then you can determine which risks need to be analyzed further by using
quantitative analysis.
Table 11-5 presents the qualitative risk analysis process in terms of input, tools
and techniques, and output.

Table 11-5. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                            Tools and Techniques            Output
1.Project Management Plan:       1.Data Gathering:               1.Project document
  *Risk management plan             *Interviews                    updates:
2.Project documents:             2.Data Analysis:                   *Risk register
  *Risk register                    *Assessments of risk data       *Risk report
  *Assumptions log                  *Assessments of risk            *Assumptions log
  *Stakeholder register              probability and impact         *Issues log
3.Enterprise environmental          *Assessments of other
  factors                            risk parameters
4.Organizational project         3.Data Presentation:
  assets                            *Probability and impact
                                     matrix
                                    *Heterarchical charts
                                 4.Categorization of risks
                                 5.Interpersonal and team
                                   skills: Facilitation
                                 6.Expert judgment
                                 7.Meetings
432   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Table 11-5 shows the input, tools and techniques, and output for qualitative
      analysis, which are discussed in the following sections.
      We can use the items in this table in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
      process.


      Performing Qualitative Risk Analysis
      Recall that the goal of this process is to prioritize risks by estimating the
      probability of their occurrence, their impact on the project, and other risk
      factors. To do that, you need information from items in the input column
      of Table 11-5. For example, the risks that need to be prioritized are in the
      risk register along with information about them. The information about
      assumptions and constraints in the assumptions log will help prioritize the
      risks, and information about stakeholders in the stakeholder register will help
      assign the owners of each risk.
      "How-to" information for qualitative risk analysis can be obtained from the
      risk management plan, which also contains other useful information for this
      process, such as the following:
            *    Roles and responsibilities for performing risk management
            *    Budgeting for risk management
            *    Definitions of probabilities and impacts
            *    The probability and impact matrices
            *    Risk categories
            *    Risk timing and scheduling
            *    Stakeholders' risk tolerances
      If any of these input items was not developed during risk management planning,
      it can be developed during this process.
      With this information at hand, you use tools and techniques to generate the
      output of this process.


      Tools and Techniques for Qualitative Risk Analysis
      Prioritizing risks based on their probability of occurrence and their impact if
      they do occur is the central goal of qualitative risk analysis. Accordingly, most
      of the tools and techniques used involve estimating probability and impact.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth            433



Assessment of the Risk Data Quality. Qualitative risk analysis is
performed to analyze risk data in order to prioritize risks. However, before
you do this, you must examine the risk data for its quality, which is crucial
because the credibility of the results of qualitative risk analysis depends upon
the quality of the risk data. If the quality of the risk data is poor, you might
decide to gather better-quality data. The technique to assess the risk data
quality involves examining the accuracy, reliability, and integrity of the data
and also examining how good that data is relevant to the specific risk and
project for which it is being used. Biases and attitudes of the data sources--
e.g.; peoples--must be collected and used as a corrective factor applied to the
raw data to improve its quality.
Assessment of Risk Probability and Impact. Risk probability refers to
the likelihood that a risk will occur, and impact refers to the effect the risk will
have on a project objective if it occurs. The probability for each risk and its
impact on each project objective, such as cost, quality, scope, and time, must
be assessed. The definitions of probability and impact used in this assessment
come from the risk management plan. Note that probability and impact are
assessed for each identified risk.
Methods used in making the probability and impact assessments include
holding meetings, interviewing, considering expert judgment, and using an
information database from previous projects.The assessed levels of probability
and impact for each risk are recorded with the assumptions made in assessing.
To prioritize the risks, you need to look at both probability and impact.


Caution! Remember, the impact can be negative, posing a threat, or positive, representing an
opportunity. Also, a risk with a high probability might have a very low impact, and a risk with a low
probability might have a very high impact, and vice versa.


Assessments of Other Risk Parameters. In addition to probability and
impact, you may consider other risk factors in prioritizing risks, such as risk
urgency; manageability, i.e., ease of managing risk; controllability, i.e., how much
the risk owner is able to control the risk's output; and connectivity, i.e., how
many other risks this risk is connected to. For example, a risk that is going to
occur now is more urgent to address than a risk that might occur a month
from now. Similarly, the higher the value of the mentioned factor, such as
controllability, the higher the risk priority is.
Probability and Impact Matrix. Risks need to be prioritized for entries
into quantitative analysis, response planning, or both. The prioritization can
be performed by using the probability and impact matrix--a lookup table
that can be used to rate a risk based on where it falls both on the probability
434   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      scale and on the impact scale, combined. There are multiple ways of forming
      a probability and impact matrix and determining the risk priority, such as the
      following:
              *     You can separate probability and impact matrix for each
                    project objective.
              *     Determine the priority for each risk by:
                    a. Combining the impact of a given risk on each objective;
                       e.g.; weighted average
                    b. Taking the highest value of impact on any objective as
                       the final overall value
      Table 11-6 presents an example of a probability and impact matrix by showing
      both the probability scale and the impact scale. Here is an example of how
      to read this matrix: risk R45 has a probability of 0.70 (that is, seven out of
      10 chances) for occurrence and an impact of 0.45 on the project objective
      for which this matrix is prepared. How to calculate the numerical scales for
      the probability and impact matrix and what they mean depends upon the
      project and the organization, and they must be defined in the risk management
      plan. However, remember the relative meaning: higher value of a risk on the
      probability scale means a greater likelihood of risk occurrence, and a higher
      value on the impact scale means a greater effect on the project objective
      should the risk occur. The higher the value for a risk, the higher its priority is.
      For example, risk R38 a has higher priority level than risk R23.


      Note By priority value, in this discussion, we mean the priority level, as in qualitative analysis
      we are interested only in relative level. However, each risk cell in Table 11-6, e.g.; R14, can have a
      value computed from corresponding values of probability and impact using the formula given in
      the risk management plan.



      Table 11-6. A Risk Probability and Impact Matrix for an Objective*

      Probability Impact
      0.00            0.05      0.15      0.25      0.35      0.45      0.55      0.65       0.75      0.90
      0.10            R11       R12       R13       R14       R15       R16       R17        R18       R19
      0.30            R21       R22       R23       R24       R25       R26       R27        R28       R29
      0.50            R31       R32       R33       R34       R35       R36       R37        R38       R39
      0.70            R41       R42       R43       R44       R45       R46       R47        R48       R49
      0.90            R51       R52       R53       R54       R55       R56       R57        R58       R59

      * Rij, where i and j are integers, represent risks in the two-dimensional (probability and impact) space.
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       435



According to the scheme in Table 11-6, each risk is rated (prioritized) based
on the probability and the impact value assigned to it separately for each
objective. Generally, you can divide the matrix in Table 11-6 into multiple areas;
e.g.; three areas--high-priority risks represented by higher numbers, such as
R59, medium-priority risks represented by moderate numbers, such as R23, and
low-priority risks represented by lower numbers, such as R12. However, each
organization has to design its own risk score and risk threshold to guide the
risk response plan.
Note that impact can be a threat (a negative effect) or an opportunity
(a positive effect). The same matrices will be used for both threats and
opportunities, but the interpretation will be different. Threats in the high-
priority area might require priority actions and aggressive responses. Also, you
will want to capitalize on those opportunities in the high-priority area, which
you can do with relatively little effort. Risks posing threats in the low-priority
area might not need any response, but they must be kept on the watch list.
Hierarchical Charts. For assessments of risk priority, when you use not
just probability and impact, but more than two parameters, then a two-
dimensional probability-impact matrix, a table, would be enough. You will use
multidimensional graphical techniques to assess priority for individual risks.
For example, for two parameters in addition to impact, you can represent the
values of the two parameters using the x and y axes, and the impact values can
be expressed by the size of the data symbol representing the values of the
two parameters. One such plot, where disk symbols represent data points,
is called a bubble chart. All the multidimensional charts used to assess risk
priority are collectively called hierarchical charts.
Risk Categorization.You defined the risk categories during risk management
planning and the risk identification processes. Now, you can assign the
identified risks to those categories. Because you now have more information
about risks for the project, you can also revisit the categorization schemes--
categorization by risk sources such as RBS, by risk-affected project areas such
as WBS, or by root causes. Categorizing risks by their causes often helps you
develop effective risk responses.
Expert Judgment. You may need expert judgment to assess the probability
and impact of each risk. To find a person with expertise, look for people
who have experience with similar projects in the not too distant past. While
weighing the expert judgments, look for possible biases. Often, experts are
biased for their area against other areas.
Of course, you will be using meetings in this process.
You need to update the risk register and risk report with the result of the
qualitative risk analysis.
436   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Output of the Qualitative Risk Analysis
      The output of the qualitative risk analysis is as follows.


      Updated Risk Register
      The risk register was initiated during the Identify Risks process and is updated
      with the new information or results from the qualitative risk analysis. The
      updates include the following:
             *     Probability, Impact, and Priority. Each individual
                   risk is assigned an assessment for probability, impact, and
                   priority of risk as estimated in this process.
             *     Owner. Each individual risk is assigned an owner.
             *     Risk Urgency Information.
             *     Risk Categorizations. This means making sure every
                   category has information assigned to it. This helps in
                   various ways; for example, you can identify the common
                   root causes of the risks and the areas of the project that
                   might require special attention. Furthermore, categorizing
                   risks can bring order to a chaotic situation and makes the
                   management of these risks easier and more effective.
             *     List of Risks. Using some criteria, you can make different
                   lists of risks for effective management. The following are
                   some examples:
                   *    Further Analysis. List of risks for additional analysis
                        and response, such as quantitative analysis.
                   *    Watch List of Low-priority Risks. This list
                        contains the risks that are deemed unimportant
                        by the qualitative risk analysis but that need to be
                        monitored continually.
                   *    List of Risks with Time Urgency. This list includes
                        urgent risks that require attention now or in the near
                        future.


      Tip Trends in the Analysis Results. By examining the results from the qualitative risk analysis,
      you might recognize a trend for specific risks. That trend might suggest further analysis or a
      specific risk response.
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth     437




Updated Risk Report
The risk report is updated with the following information:
      *    A list of the most important individual project risks; e.g.;
           risks at the top of the priority list based on the probability
           and impact matrix discussed earlier in this chapter.
      *    Priority list of all identified risks in the project
      *    Summary conclusion
The assumptions log will be updated with new assumptions made or found in
this process or old assumptions that have changed, and the issues log will be
updated with the addition of new issues or changes in the existing issues.
The main result of qualitative risk analysis is the prioritization of risks based
on a probability and impact matrix for each objective. So, each objective can
have its own prioritized list of risks.
Qualitative risk analysis is a relatively quick and cost-effective way to prioritize
risks for risk planning. It also does the groundwork for the quantitative risk
analysis if one is required for some risks, as noted in the risk register.


Quantitative Risk Analysis
Quantitative risk analysis is generally performed on the risks that have
been prioritized using qualitative risk analysis. However, depending upon
the experience of the team and their familiarity with risk, it is possible to
skip qualitative risk analysis and move directly, after risk identification, to
quantitative risk analysis. The quantitative risk analysis has three major goals:
      *    Assess the probability of achieving specific project
           objectives.
      *    Quantify the aggregated effect of the individual risks
           and other uncertainty sources on the overall project
           objectives.
      *    Prioritize risks by their contributions to the overall
           project risk.
Table 11-7 presents the Quantitative Risk Analysis process in terms of input,
tools and techniques, and output.
We can use the items in this table to perform the Quantitative Risk Analysis
process.
438   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Table 11-7. The Quantitative Risk Analysis Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                Tools and Techniques                  Output
      1.Project Management Plan:           1.Data Gathering:                     1.Risk report
        *Risk management plan                 *Interviews                          update
        *Scope baseline                    2.Representations of uncertainty
        *Schedule baseline                 3.Data Analysis:
        *Cost baseline                        *Simulations
      2.Project documents:                    *Sensitivity analysis
        *Risk register                        *Decision-tree analysis
        *Risk report                          *Influence diagrams
        *Resource requirements             5.Interpersonal and team skills:
        *Schedule forecast                   Facilitation
        *Milestones list                   6.Expert judgment
        *Duration estimate
        *Cost forecast
        *Cost estimates
        *Basis of estimate
        *Assumptions log
      3.Enterprise environmental factors
      4.Organizational project assets


      Performing Quantitative Analysis
      The fact that most of the input items for this process are related to project
      scope, schedule, and cost, the three fundamental components constituting the
      project base, is a reflection of the fact that risks can affect all aspects of the
      project.These input items also hold information about three key items that we
      need to start performing the quantitative risk analysis: individual project risk,
      reference points to measure the effect of individual risks, and reference points
      to measure the variability--i.e., uncertainty--as is explained next. In light of
      this, performing the Quantitative Risk Analysis process may be explained in
      the following steps in terms of the items from Table 11-7:

              1. Get Risk and "How-to" Information. The "how-to"
                 information about this is in the risk management plan,
                 which also explains the resources, or analysis tools, to
                 use and how often the process should be run.The needed
                 information about individual project risks and about the
                 sources of overall project risk can be found in the risk
                 register and risk report, respectively.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth   439



      2. Get Information about Reference Points to
         Measure the Effect of Individual Risks. The reference
         points, or starting points, as the PMBOK 6th Edition
         calls it, refers to the planned values (e.g.; $700 to build a
         component), and the effect of the related individual risk
         is deviation from the planned values (e.g.; $100 more
         if the risk occurs). Information about these reference
         points can be obtained from the cost baseline. Information
         about other reference points can be obtained from other
         inputs: scope baseline and schedule baseline.
      3. Get Information about Reference Points to
         Measure the Variability. Even before or without any
         individual project risk occurrence, the project has built-in
         uncertainties in the form of estimates. Therefore, the
         deviation or variability should be measured in reference
         to these built-in uncertainties. Information about these
         reference points to measure variability can be obtained
         from cost estimates, duration estimate, and resource
         requirements. Also, uncertainties due to the basis of
         estimate and relevant entries in the assumptions log should
         be modeled in the quantitative analysis.
      4. Check the Result of Quantitative Analysis. When
         you use statistical methods in an analysis, there should
         always be a way to determine how believable the result
         from the analysis is; i.e., the confidence level. In our case,
         we can determine the confidence level by comparing the
         different parts of the analysis results against information
         from the targets in the milestones list and schedule forecast,
         and values of quantities predicted in the cost forecast:
         BAC, EAC, ETC, TCPI, etc., covered in Chapter 7.
      5. Model the Individual Project Risks Effects and
         Other Uncertainty Sources. In steps 2 and 3 we
         discussed measuring the effect of individual project risks
         on project objectives such as cost and schedule as well
         as other uncertainty sources, such as assumptions, basis
         of estimates, and estimates. For quantitative analysis,
         we model uncertainty as probability distributions. The
         effects of individual project risks may be included in these
         distributions or can be modeled separately as probability
         branches.
With this information in hand, you can use various tools and techniques to
generate the results of quantitative risk analysis.
440   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Tools and Techniques for Quantitative Analysis
      The quantitative risk analysis can be looked upon as a two-step process--
      gathering and representing the data, and analyzing and modeling the data.
      Accordingly, all the techniques fall into two categories: data gathering and
      representation techniques, such as interviewing, probability distributions, and
      expert judgment; and analysis and modeling techniques, such as sensitivity
      analysis, EMV analysis, decision-tree analysis, and modeling and simulation.
      Interviewing. This technique is used to collect the data for assessing the
      probability of achieving specific project objectives. You are looking for results
      such as: We have a 70 percent probability of finishing the project within
      the schedule desired by the customer. Or perhaps: We have a 60 percent
      probability of finishing the project within the budget of $100,000. The goal is
      to determine the scale of probabilities for a given objective; for example, there
      is a 20 percent probability that the project will cost $50,000, a 60 percent
      probability that it will cost $100,000, and a 20 percent probability that it will
      cost $150,000.
      The data is collected by interviewing relevant stakeholders and subject-matter
      experts. Most commonly, you will be exploring the optimistic (best-case),
      pessimistic (worst-case), and most-likely scenarios for a given objective. For
      example, for the project cost, the optimistic estimate might be $10 million, the
      pessimistic estimate might be $50 million, and the most-likely estimate might
      be $25 million.
      Representation of Uncertainty: Probability Distributions. The risks
      and uncertainty in the input to the quantitative risk analysis, discussed in the
      previous section, need to be modeled. In step 5 of the previous section, we
      discussed that uncertainty can be modeled as probability distributions, and the
      effects of individual project risks may be included in these distributions or can
      be modeled separately as probability branches.The data on meeting the project
      objectives can be presented in a probability distribution for each objective
      under study. Note that, by definition, a distribution represents uncertainty, and
      a risk also represents uncertainty, or vice versa. For example, if you know for
      sure the project will cost $25 million, there will be no distribution because it
      is only one data point.
      Probability distribution comes into the picture when you have several possible
      values with a probability assigned to each value. There are distributions of
      different shapes in which the data can be presented. The commonly used
      distributions, according to PMBOK Edition 6, are uniform, beta, triangular,
      normal, lognormal, and discrete distributions. The uniform distribution is
      used when all the values of an objective have the same chance of being true.
      Figure 11-2 shows some of them for the cost objective. The x-axis represents
      the cost, and the y-axis represents the corresponding probability that the
      project will be completed within that cost.
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   441



We do all this modeling for analysis.
Sensitivity Analysis. This is a technique used to determine which individual
risks and other sources of uncertainty have the greatest impact on the project
outcomes. Just for the sake of understanding, imagine you study the impact




Figure 11-2. Examples of probability distributions commonly used in quantitative risk
analysis


of one risk or uncertain element on a project objective by keeping all other
uncertain elements fixed at their baseline values. You can repeat this analysis
for several objectives, one at a time.You can also repeat this study for several
uncertain elements (creating risks) one element at a time. This way, you can
see the impact of each element (or risk) on the overall project separate from
other elements (or risks).
442   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Practically, you will be using a software package to run this analysis. The
      strength of impact is measured by investigating the correlation of the variation
      in project outcome with the variations in different elements of the analysis
      model; e.g.; various risks and other uncertainty sources. A higher value of
      the correlation coefficient of an element indicates a higher impact of that
      element in the project outcome.The analysis may generate plots of correlation
      coefficients of elements--e.g.; a tornado diagram, which has one bar for each
      element with non-zero impacts on project outcome along the x-axis, with the
      height of the bar along the y-axis representing the value of the correlation
      coefficient for that element.
      Modeling and Simulation. A model is a set of rules to describe how
      something works; it takes input and makes predictions as output. The rules
      might include formulas and functions based on facts, assumptions, or both. A
      simulation is any analytical method used to imitate a real-life system. Simulations
      in risk analysis are created using the Monte Carlo technique, which is named
      after Monte Carlo, Monaco--known for its casinos that present games of
      chance that are based on random behavior. Monte Carlo simulation models
      take random input iteratively to generate output for certain quantities as
      predictions. This technique is used in several disciplines, such as physics and
      biology, in addition to project management.
      In risk analysis, Monte Carlo is used to simulate the combined effect of
      identified individual project risks and other uncertainty sources on project
      outcomes to see their impact on meeting the various project objectives. The
      input is taken randomly from a probability distribution--e.g.; about cost and
      duration estimates--and the output for impact on the project objectives is
      predicted. The name "Monte Carlo" refers to the random behavior of the
      input. (In that spirit, it could easily be called "Las Vegas.")


      Tip S-curve: Simulation analysis can generate cumulative probability diagrams, called
      S-curve, in which the x-axis represents the predicted value of a project variable such as cost,
      while the y-axis represents the cumulative probability for the predicted values.


      As already mentioned, the effects of individual project risks may be included in
      these distributions or can be modeled separately as probability branches. We
      now will discuss probability branches, for which you need to understand the
      concept of expected monetary value.
      Expected Monetary Value Analysis. Expected monetary value (EMV)
      analysis is used to calculate the expected value of an outcome when different
      possible scenarios exist for different values of the outcome with some
      probabilities assigned to them. The goal here is to calculate the expected final
      result of a probabilistic situation. EMV is calculated by multiplying the value
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth     443



of each possible outcome by the probability of its occurrence and adding the
results. For example, if there is 60 percent probability that an opportunity will
earn you $1,000 and a 40 percent probability that it will only earn you $500,
the EMV is calculated as follows:

                         EMV = 0.60 x 1000 + 0.40 x
                           500 = 600 + 200 = 800
So, the EMV in this case is $800.When you are using opportunities and threats
in the same calculation, you should express EMV for an opportunity as a
positive value, and that for a threat as a negative value. For example, if there is
60 percent chance that you will benefit from a risk by $1000, and 40 percent
probability that you will lose $400 as a result of this risk, the EMV is calculated
as follows:

                         EMV = 0.60 x 1000 - 0.40 x
                           500 = 600 - 200 = 400
Therefore, the EMV in this case is $400.
The concept of EMV can be presented in a decision-making technique, such
as a decision-tree analysis.
Decision-tree Analysis. This technique uses the decision-tree diagram
to choose from different available options; each option is represented by a
branch of the tree. This technique is used when there are multiple possible
outcomes with different threats or opportunities with certain probabilities
assigned to them. EMV analysis is done along each branch, which helps you to
make a decision about which option to choose.
Figure 11-3 presents a very simple decision-tree diagram that depicts two
options: updating an existing product or building a new product from scratch.
The initial cost for the update option is $50,000, whereas the initial cost for
the build-from-scratch option is $70,000. However, the probability for failure
is 40 percent for the update option, compared to 10 percent for the build-
from-scratch option, and the impact from failure in both cases is a loss of
$200,000. As Study Checkpoint 11.2 shows, even though the initial cost for
the update option is less than the initial cost for the build-from-scratch option,
the decision will be made in favor of the build-from-scratch option because
when you combine the initial cost with the EMV resulting from the probability
of failure, the build-from-scratch option turns out to be a better deal.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.2

   Problem: Perform an EMV analysis of the decision tree presented in Figure 11-3 to
   make a decision on which option to take.
444   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management




      Figure 11-3. Example of a decision-tree diagram

      Influence Diagram. An influence diagram is a graphical representation of
      uncertain situations that shows relationships among various variables and
      outcomes, such as causal influences and time-ordering of events. By examining
      these diagrams, the risk management team can recognize the potential
      problem areas and thereby identify risks in various options and make the right
      decisions under uncertainty.
      Interviews and Expert Judgment. In quantitative risk analysis, interviews
      can be used as a data-gathering tool to get information from experts, and
      expert judgment can be used too; e.g.; selecting appropriate risk-modeling
      techniques, validating the collected risk data and the analysis used for the
      project at hand, and so on.
      The risk register is updated with the results of the quantitative risk analysis.


      Output of the Quantitative Risk Analysis: Updated Risk
      Report
      The risk report that is used as an input item to the quantitative risk analysis
      is updated with the results of this analysis. The updates include the following:
             *    Project Success: Probability of Achieving the
                  Project Objectives. Chances of project success are
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       445



           evaluated by factoring in the project risks and estimating
           the probability of meeting project objectives, such as cost
           and schedule set forth by the current project plan. For
           example, the likelihood of completing the project within
           the current budget plan of $2 million is 70 percent.
      *    Overall Project Risk Effect: Probabilistic Analysis
           of the Project. This includes the key outputs from
           quantitative risk analysis, with some details, such as
           estimates of the project schedule and cost, with a
           confidence level attached to each estimate. Confidence
           level can be expressed in percentage form, such as 95
           percent, and it represents how certain you are about
           the estimate. You can compare these estimates to the
           stakeholders' risk tolerances to see whether the project
           is within the acceptable limits. The detail can also include
           S-curve, tornado diagrams, and so forth.
      *    Prioritized List of Risks. The risks are prioritized
           according to the threats they pose or the opportunities
           they offer.The risks with greater threats (or opportunities)
           are higher on the list.The priorities are determined based
           on the total effect of each risk on the overall project
           objectives. The purpose of prioritizing risks is to help
           with planning the response efforts to eliminate (or
           minimize) the impact of the threats and capitalize on the
           opportunities.
      *    Trends in the Results. By repeating the analysis several
           times and examining the results, you might recognize a
           trend for specific risks. That trend might suggest further
           analysis or a specific risk response.
      *    Risk-Response Recommendations. The risk report
           can recommend a specific response to key risks based on
           their overall effect on the project.
The emphasis in quantitative analysis is on two tasks: assess the probability of
meeting each project objective and prioritize the risks based on their total
effect on the overall project objectives. Subsequently, the resulting prioritized
list of risks can be used to prepare the risk response plan.
446   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Planning the Risk Response Plan
      The Plan Risk Response process develops the risk response plan, which
      includes options, actions, and strategies for responding to risks at both levels:
      individual project risks and overall project risk.
      Accordingly, the central task in risk-response planning is to develop actions
      and options to meet the following three goals:
             *     Minimize threats to meeting project objectives.
             *     Maximize opportunities.
             *     Reduce the overall project risk effect.


      Tip Remember the five-prong golden rule for risk-response planning, AARCO: A risk response
      must be appropriate, matching to the significance of the risk, agreed upon, realistic within the
      context of the project, cost effective, and owned by appropriate stakeholder.


      The Table 11-8 presents the Plan Risk Response process in terms of input,
      tools and techniques, and output.


      Core of Risk-Response Planning
      Performing the Plan Risk Response process includes the following:
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth     447



Table 11-8. The Plan Risk Response Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                      Tools and Techniques               Output
1.Project Management       1.Data Gathering:                  1.Change requests
  Plan:                       *Interviews                     2.Management Plan Updates:
  *Risk management         2Data Analysis:                      *Schedule management
   plan                                                          plan
                              *Cost-benefit analysis
  *Recourse                                                     *Cost management plan
                              *Alternatives analysis
   management plan
                           3.Multicriteria decision-making      *Quality management
  *Cost baseline                                                 plan
                             analysis.
2.Project documents:                                            *Resource management
                           4.Strategies for negative risks:
  *Risk register             threats                             plan
  *Risk report             5.Strategies for positive risks:     *Procurement
  *Resource calendars        opportunities                       management plan
  *Project schedule        6.Strategies for overall project     *Scope baseline
  *Project team              risk                               *Schedule baseline
   assignments             7.Strategies for contingent          *Cost baseline
  *Stakeholder register      response                         3.Project document updates:
  *Lessons learned         8.Interpersonal and team skills:     *Risk register
   register                  Facilitation
                                                                *Risk report
3.Enterprise               9.Expert judgment
                                                                *Cost forecasts
  environmental factors
                                                                *Project schedule
4.Organizational project
                                                                *Project team
  assets
                                                                 assignments
                                                                *Assumptions log
                                                                *Lessons learned register


        1. Determine the responses to individual project risks and
           overall project risk.
        2. Determine the strategy to implement the responses.
        3. Determine the response implementation-related
           activities and manage to insert them in appropriate
           project and plan documents.
In light of this, performing the Plan Risk Response process may be explained
in the following steps in terms of the items from Table 11-8:
448   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


            1. Get Information about Risks and Response
               Strategy. From the risk report, you can obtain a
               prioritized list of individual project risks, overall project
               risk, the specific response recommendations for key risks,
               and overall response strategy. More detailed information
               about any identified risks can be obtained from the risk
               register, such as priority, owner, cause, and data that may
               help to determine response.
            2. Get Information about Risk Owners and Roles.
               The owner of each is assigned in the risk register. The
               risk management plan contains the information on risk
               management roles and the responsibilities assigned to
               each role, as well as the risk threshold. The owner and
               persons assigned to roles will play important roles in
               finding and allocating resources for implementing risk
               responses.
            3. Use Information about Risks to Determine Risk-
               Response Strategies. Use these strategies to develop
               risk-response activities.
            4. Get Information about Resources to Implement
               Risk Responses. From the project team assignments and
               resource calendars, you can get information on resources
               and their availability. Information on contingency funds
               allocated to risk responses can be found in the cost
               baseline.
            5. Integrate the Risk-Response Activities with
               Project. From the resource management plan, get
               information on how the resources allocated to risk-
               response activities will be coordinated with other project
               resources. You will need the project schedule to schedule
               risk-response activities with other scheduled project
               activities.
      For step 3, to consider different risk-response strategies and select appropriate
      ones for our project, we will need to use some tools and techniques.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth        449




Tools and Techniques for Risk-Response Planning
The main goal of this process is to determine the appropriate risk-response
strategies and schedule the related activities.When developing risk responses,
you can interview the appropriate stakeholders to collect needed information
or data, and interpersonal and team skills like facilitation will be useful, such as
to help the risk owner understand the risk and appropriate response strategy.
You can also use expert judgment on the topic of different risk strategies.
To understand risk strategies, let's start from risk, which as you have already
learned, can come in two categories: negative risks, which pose threats to
meeting the project objectives, and positive risks, which offer opportunities.
The goal here is to minimize the threats and maximize the opportunities. In
project management, there are three kinds of possible responses to risks--
take an action, take no action, or take a conditional action. When you want
to take an action, different response strategies for negative and positive risks
need to be planned. Also, we want to strategize the responses to overall
project risk. Accordingly, there are three kinds of strategies available to handle
three kinds of scenarios:
      *    Strategies to respond to negative risks (threats) when
           action is required
      *    Strategies to respond to positive risks (opportunities)
           when action is required
      *    Strategies that can be used to respond to overall project risks


Response Strategies for Threats
There are two strategies in which no proactive action is taken:
Escalate. The risks that are out of the scope of the project or project team
authority are escalated to a higher level; e.g.; program, portfolio, or some
other part of the organization. It is done with the consent of the project
sponsor or another authorized person.
Accept. This strategy is usually applied to low-priority risks or risks for which
there is no viable response. Here, the risk is accepted without taking any proactive
action. In passive mode, nothing except periodic review is done until the risk
priority gets higher. In active mode, some contingency resources are reserved to
handle the situation if the risk occurs; this is called a contingent response.
For risks that need action by the project team, there are only three
commonsense ways to take action against a potential problem: get out of
harm's way, pass it to someone else, or confront it to minimize the damage.
In project management, these three strategies are called avoid, transfer, and
mitigate--the ATM approach.
450   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Avoid. This is used for high-priority threats with high impact and high
      probability of occurring. The goal is to eliminate the risk or impact on the
      project; e.g.; you avoid the risk by changing your project management plan in
      such a way that the risk is eliminated. Depending upon the situation, this can
      be accomplished in various ways, including the following:
            *   Obtaining information and clarifying requirements for
                risks based on misunderstanding or miscommunication.
                This answers two questions: Do we really have this risk
                and, if yes, how can we avoid it?
            *   Removing the cause of the risk
            *   Acquiring expertise for risks that exist due to a lack of
                expertise
            *   Isolating the project objectives from the risk whenever
                possible
            *   Relaxing the objective that is under threat, such as
                extending the project schedule or putting resources to
                use
      Transfer. Risk transfer means you shift the responsibility for responding to
      the risk (the ownership of the risk) and the negative impact of the risk to
      another party. Note that transferring the risk transfers the responsibility for
      risk management and does not necessarily eliminate the risk. Risk transfer
      almost always involves making payment of a risk premium to the party
      to which the risk has been transferred. Some examples include buying an
      insurance policy, contracting out the tasks involving risk, and risk transfers
      included in a agreement.
      Mitigate. Mitigation in general means taking action to reduce or prevent the
      impact of a disaster that is expected to occur. Risk mitigation means reducing
      the probability of risk occurrence, reducing the impact of the risk if it does
      occur, or both. A good mitigation strategy is to take action early on to first
      reduce the probability of the risk happening, and then to plan for reducing
      its impact if it does occur rather than letting it occur and then trying to
      reduce the impact or repair the damage. The following are some examples of
      mitigation:
            *   Adopting less complex processes
            *   Conducting more tests on the product or service of the
                project
            *   Choosing a more stable supplier for the project supplies
            *   Designing redundancy into the system so that if one part
                fails, the redundant part takes over and the system keeps
                working
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       451



Each of these three strategies has a counter-strategy to deal with the
opportunities.


Response Strategies for Opportunities
There are two strategies, escalate and accept, in which no proactive action is
taken, and they are applied the same as in the case of threats.
For risks that need action by the project team, just like in the case of threats,
you have three strategies to deal with opportunities. Not surprisingly, each
response strategy to deal with an opportunity is a counterpart of a response
strategy to deal with a threat--a one-to-one correspondence:
      *    Share corresponds to transfer
      *    Exploit corresponds to avoid
      *    Enhance corresponds to mitigate
You use the SEE (share, exploit, enhance) approach to deal with opportunities
presented by the positive risks.
Share. Sharing a positive risk that presents an opportunity means transferring
the ownership of the risk to another party that is better equipped to capitalize
on the opportunity. Some examples of sharing are:
      *    Forming risk-sharing partnerships
      *    Starting a joint venture with the purpose of capitalizing
           on an opportunity
      *    Forming teams or special-purpose companies to exploit
           opportunities presented by positive risks
Exploit. This is used for high-priority opportunities with high impact and high
probability of occurring. Exploiting an opportunity means ensuring that the
opportunity is realized--that is, the positive risk that presents the opportunity
does occur. This is accomplished by eliminating or minimizing the uncertainty
associated with the risk occurrence. An example of exploiting is assigning
more talented resources to the project to reduce the completion time and
therefore to be the first to market. Another example could be to provide
better quality than planned to beat a competitor, and using new technology.
Whereas exploiting refers to ensuring that the positive risk occurs, enhancing
refers to increasing the impact of the risk once it occurs.
Enhance. This strategy means increasing the size of the opportunity by
increasing its probability, impact, or both. You can increase the probability by
maximizing the key drivers of the positive risks or by strengthening the causes
of the risks. Similarly, you can increase the impact by focusing on the factors
that drive in risk impact.
452   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      You have just learned the different strategies that you need to plan for negative
      and positive risks if you intend to take action. If, on the other hand, you intend
      to take no action or a conditional action, then the response-planning strategies
      for both negative and positive risks are the same.


      Response Strategies for Overall Project Risk
      Overall project risk, like individual risk, can be either a threat or an opportunity.
      So, the same strategies as were used for individual risks can be applied to
      overall project risk in a similar manner. These strategies are share/transfer,
      exploit/avoid, enhance/mitigate, and accept.


      Contingency
      Generally speaking, contingency means a future event or condition that
      is possible but cannot be predicted with certainty. So, your action will be
      contingent upon the condition; that is, it will be executed only if the condition
      happens. In risk management, a contingent response is a response that is
      executed only if certain predefined conditions (or events) happen. These
      events trigger the contingency response. Some examples of such triggers are
      missing a milestone or escalating the priority of a feature by the customer.
      The events that can trigger a contingency response must be clearly defined
      and tracked.


      Caution! While designing a response to a risk, also design a backup plan to fall back on in
      case the response does not work. Also, think through and plan for responding to the risks that the
      response to the original (primary) risk may cause. These risks are called secondary risks.


      To select which of the strategies to apply for your project, you use data-
      analysis and decision-making techniques.


      Data Analysis and Decision Making
      Already discussed in this book more than once, alternatives analysis, cost-
      benefit analysis, and multicriteria decision-making analysis can be used to select
      the appropriate risk-response strategy in a given situation. In this process,
      alternatives analysis is applied by comparing the features and requirements of
      risk responses from different strategies, and in this way deciding which is best.
      In cost-benefit analysis, the cost effectiveness of a response is computed as:
      cost effectiveness = (change in risk impact level) / (response implementation
      cost).
                                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth     453



The higher the cost effectiveness value, the better the risk-response strategy.
In multicriteria decision-making analysis, the response strategies are selected
by ranking them on several criteria; e.g.; resource availability, response
effectiveness, creation of secondary risks by the response, and time constraints.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.3

   You are the project manager of a movie project. The first column lists some actions
   you are taking to deal with risks. Match each item in the first column to one item in
   the second column of this table.

   Action                                                        Risk-Response Type
   A.One of the scenes is to be shot in a country that has       1.Avoid
     enormous bureaucracy and red tape. They possibly can
     create roadblocks and make it difficult for you. There is
     nothing much you can do about it.
       he jungle where you are going to shoot a few scenes is 2.Accept
   B. T
      a wetland and very hot and humid, and the probability of
      damage happening to the equipment is very high. So, you
      have decided to buy insurance to protect you against this
      possible damage.
   C.You have learned that during certain parts of the year, the 3.Exploit
     locals hunt in the jungle in large numbers. So, you have
     decided not to do the shoot during that part of the year.
   D.Although the movie does not depend on it, it will add     4.Share
     a lot of marketing value to the movie if your cameras
     could capture an endangered species of bird that lives in
     the jungle.You are choosing the time of year for shooting
     and taking some other actions to increase the probability
     that the birds will show up.
   E. T
       he movie has something to do with Thanksgiving Day.       5.Mitigate
      You have allotted some extra resources to ensure that
      the movie is completed in a timely manner for a release
      on Thanksgiving Day.
   F.You have learned that there could be mosquitoes in the 6.Enhance
     area that you are going to shoot. So, you have planned to
     take plenty of mosquito repellant and other products to
     prevent mosquito bites.
   G.You know of another movie team that's going to shoot        7. Transfer
     some scenes in the same jungle at a different time of the
     year.You have signed a contract with them to share or
     trade shots of the endangered bird species.
454   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      You use these strategies to generate the output of the risk-response planning
      process.


      Output of Risk-Response Planning
      The main output of this process is appropriate risk response and strategies
      and the related schedule activities with assigned resources. The Plan Risk
      Response process does not create any such document as a risk response
      management plan. Instead, its output is inserted into already existing project
      plans and project documents as discussed in the following.
      Risk Register and Risk Report Updates. The appropriate risk responses
      and strategies planned and agreed upon by the risk management team are
      included in the risk register. The responses to high- and moderate-priority
      risks are entered in detail, while the low-priority risks can be put on a watch
      list for monitoring. Other items added to the risk register as a result of this
      process may include the following:
            *   Planned and agreed-upon risk-response strategies and
                specific actions to implement each strategy
            *   Symptoms and warning signs of risk occurrences,
                contingency plans, and triggers for contingency risks
            *   Budget and schedule activities to implement the planned
                responses, including the contingency reserve, which is the
                amount of funds, time, or both needed
            *   Fallback plans in case the planned responses prove to be
                inadequate
            *   A list of risks to remain, which include the following:
                *    Passive, accepted risks
                *    Residual risks that will remain after planned
                     responses have been performed
            *   A list of secondary risks that will arise as a result of
                implementing the responses. You must plan for these
                risks like any other risk.
      Similarly, the risk report can be updated with planned responses to the overall
      project risk and the resulting impact changes that are expected from the
      implementation of these responses.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth           455



Other Document Updates. The documents that may change in this
process are listed in the output column of Table 11-8. The change or update
is triggered by the action of inserting the output of this process into project
plans and project documents. For example, scheduling the risk response-
related activities updates the project schedule and project team assignments.
These changes may require or lead to changes in or updates to the scope
baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline, and other items listed in the output
column of Table 11-8.
Change Requests. For proposed changes to any component of the project
plan, such as scope baseline, schedule baseline, and schedule management plan,
change requests must be generated and processed through the Perform
Integrated Change Control process.


Note A residual risk is the remains of a risk for which a response has been performed, whereas
a secondary risk is a risk that is expected to arise as a result of implementing a risk response;
therefore, a response for a secondary risk must be planned.


In a nutshell, risk-response planning examines and selects the risk-response
strategies, uses these strategies to plan responses to individual project risks
and overall project risk, and assigns resources to these response activities and
schedules them.
Once risk responses have been planned, you need to implement them.


Implementing Risk Responses
The Implement Risk Responses process makes sure that all the planned risk
responses are executed as planned. Remember, the goal here is to minimize
the impact of threats and maximize the impact of opportunities on the project.
Table 11-9 presents the Implement Risk Responses process in terms of input,
tools and techniques, and output.
456   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Table 11-9. The Implement Risk Responses Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                         Tools and Techniques        Output
      1.Project Management Plan:    1.Project management        1.Change requests
        *Risk management plan         information system        2.Project document updates:
      2.Project documents:          2.Interpersonal and team       *Risk register
                                      skills: Influencing
        *Risk register                                             *Risk report
                                    3.Expert judgment
        *Risk report                                               *Project team assignments
        *Lessons learned register                                  *Issues log
      3.Enterprise environmental                                   *Lessons learned register
        factors


      Recall that planned risk-response activities have already been scheduled with
      resources assigned to them through the Plan Risk Responses process. In this
      process, you make sure they are executed. That said, the Implement Risk
      Responses process may be explained in the following steps in terms of the
      items from Table 11-9:

              1. Get "How-to" and Other Information about Risk.
                 The "how-to" information from this process can be
                 found in the risk management plan, which also contains
                 information on
                  *    risk management roles and responsibilities assigned
                       to each role; these persons will play important role in
                       implementing risk responses; and
                  *    risk thresholds acceptable to relevant stakeholders;
                       i.e., the acceptable remaining risk impact level after
                       risk implementation.
              2. Get Information about Risks and Planned Risk
                 Responses. From the risk report, you can obtain
                 information on the overall project risk and planned
                 responses to it.The detailed information on the individual
                 risks, their owners, and planned responses is in the risk
                 register.
              3. Ensure the Planned Responses Are Implemented.
                 You can use the influence skill to help the relevant
                 stakeholders, e.g.; risk owner, realize that it is time to take
                 action. To validate or modify risk responses before and
                 after their implementation, you can use expert judgment
                 from an appropriate source.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth   457



      4. Integrate Activities. You can use tools available in the
         project management information system--e.g.; software
         to manage resource, cost, and schedule--to seamlessly
         integrate the risk-response activities and other project
         activities, and in this way keep both kinds of activities
         synchronized.
      5. Modify Documents. The documents that may change in
         this process are listed in the output column of Table 11-9.
         For example, the project team assignments will be updated
         with allotted resources like funding and persons to
         execute response. As a result of risk implementation, the
         risk register and risk report will be updated with a modified
         set of "to implement" responses to individual risks and
         overall project risk, respectively.
      6. Generate Needed Change Requests. During or as
         a result of executing this process, some changes may be
         needed, such as more funds or a schedule change. As
         always, for proposed changes to any component of the
         project plan, such as schedule baseline or cost baseline,
         change requests must be generated and processed
         through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
While performing all these processes in risk management, the risks need to
be monitored.


Monitoring Risks
Risks are monitored by using the Monitor Risks process, which includes the
following:
      *   Tracking the status of identified risks
      *   Monitoring residual risks (risks that remain after risk
          responses have been implemented)
      *   Identifying new risks and making sure that they are
          analyzed and responded to if needed
      *   Evaluating the effectiveness of risk processes
However, the risk situation can change with time. Therefore, monitoring and
controlling risks also includes monitoring risk dynamics, which involves the
following:
      *   Ensuring that the project execution is conforming to the
          risk management policies and procedures.
458   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


              *   Determining whether the project assumptions are still
                  valid. If an assumption becomes invalid, it may eliminate a
                  risk or give rise to a new risk.
              *   Determining whether the current analysis has changed
                  the risk assessment. The change in the risk assessment
                  may require changes in other aspects of the project, such
                  as cost, schedule, and contingency reserves.
      The Table 11-10 presents the Monitor Risks process in terms of input, tools
      and techniques, and output.

      Table 11-10. The Monitor Risks Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                         Tools and Techniques          Output
      1.Project Management Plan:    1.Data analysis:              1.Work performance
        *Risk management plan          *Technical performance       information
      2.Project documents:              analysis                  2.Change requests
        *Risk register                 *Reserve analysis          3.Project management plan
                                    2.Audit                         update: any component
        *Risk report
                                    3.Meetings                    4.Project document updates:
        *Issues log
                                                                    *Risk register
        *Lessons learned register
                                                                    *Risk report
      3.Work performance data
                                                                    *Assumptions log
      4.Work performance report
                                                                    *Issues log
                                                                    *Lessons learned register
                                                                  5.Organizational project
                                                                    assets updates


      That said, the Monitor Risks process may be explained in the following steps
      or tasks in terms of the items from Table 11-10:

              1. Get "How-to" and Other Information about Risk.
                 The information about how, how often, and when risks
                 should be reviewed can be found in the risk management
                 plan that also contains information on risk management
                 roles and the responsibilities assigned to each role to
                 monitor risks.
                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   459



2. Get Information about Risks and Planned Risk
   Responses. From the risk report, you can obtain up-to-
   date information on the overall project risk and planned
   responses to it. All information on the individual risks
   needed for this process can be obtained from the risk
   register.
3. Get Project Risk Results. You can get risk-related
   results from the project execution from work performance
   data, an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work
   process, and from the work performance report, an output
   of the Monitor and Control Project Work process. The
   work performance data basically provides the project sta-
   tus, including the risk status, such as risks to which the
   responses have been implemented, those currently active,
   those already closed out, and those newly occurred. The
   work performance report contains information about work
   performance measurements. The data and information
   from both of these documents are analyzed to assess the
   effectiveness of risk management, as shown next.
4. Generate Work Performance Information, an
   Output Item. As already mentioned, the work per-
   formance report contains the information about work
   performance measurements, which can be analyzed to
   generate work performance information, which includes
   how much the risk results vary from the plan, and earned
   values and forecast in terms of risks. In a nutshell, the
   work performance information tells how effective the risk
   response and implementation processes are.You can also
   use relevant data from the work performance data in the
   preparation of the work performance information.
5. Technical Performance Measurement. Technical
   performance analysis compares actual versus planned
   quantities related to the technical progress of the proj-
   ect. The deviation determines the degree of the potential
   impact of risks. For example, for a software product proj-
   ect, the technical performance measurement quantities
   could include running time of a module to complete a job,
   number of bugs, and how often the program crashes. In
   general, the parameters and quantities chosen to measure
   technical performance could be any parameters that rep-
   resent something important related to the project objec-
   tives and requirements; software performance, human
   resource performance, and system test performance are
   some examples.
460   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


           6. Reserve Analysis. Recall that the contingency reserve
              is the amount of funds or time (in the schedule) in addi-
              tion to the planned budget that is reserved to keep the
              impact of risks to an acceptable level when the project is
              executing. The risks occurring during project execution
              can have positive or negative effects on the contingency
              reserve. You perform reserve analysis at a given time to
              compare the remaining reserve amount to the remaining
              risk to determine whether the remaining reserve amount
              is adequate to handle the risk.
           7. Audit. You will be responsible for conducting risk audits
              with the frequency suggested in the risk management plan.
              These audits are usually done to assess the effectiveness
              of risk management processes. They may be conducted
              as a part of project review meetings or risk review meet-
              ings, or just separate audit meetings. As is true for any
              audit and meeting, the objective should be clearly defined
              before it starts.
           8. Risk Review Meetings. You can put risk reviews as an
              agenda item at project status meetings or hold separate
              risk review meetings. These regular reviews can include
              activities such as assessment of current risk, closing out-
              dated risks, identifying new risks or secondary risks that
              occurred as a result of applying the responses, recoding
              lessons learned, and discussing other risk-related issues.
              Having these risk reviews on a regular basis helps make
              risk management smoother and more effective.
           9. Modify Documents. The documents that may change in
              this process are listed in the output column of Table 11-10.
              For example, as a result of risk monitoring, the risk regis-
              ter and risk report will be updated with new information
              and the status of individual risks and overall project risk,
              respectively. Also, the risk report can include the results
              of risk audits on the current effectiveness of the risk
              management processes.
               As a result of the risk monitoring and controlling pro-
               cesses, some organizational process assets might need
               to be updated, such as savings templates for the proj-
               ect management plan, risk register, risk report, risk
               breakdown structure (RBS), and the lessons learned
               knowledge database.
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth     461



     10. Generate Needed Change Requests. During or as
         result of monitoring risks, some changes may need to be
         made; e.g.; preventive or corrective action, more funds, or
         schedule change. As always, for proposed changes to any
         component of the project plan, such as schedule base-
         line or cost baseline, change requests must be generated
         and processed through the Perform Integrated Change
         Control process.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.4

   Q1.Why do you end up updating the assumptions log and lessons learned register
      during the Monitor Risks process?
   Q2.The work performance information, an output item of the Control Risks process,
      is an input to which process?
   Q3.Which other processes generate work performance information?


The qualitative risk analysis prioritizes these risks based on the probability
and impact matrix for each objective, whereas the emphasis in quantitative
risk analysis is on assessing the probability of meeting each project objective
and prioritizing the risks based on the total effect of each risk on the overall
project objectives.
The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      1. The risk identification process initiates the risk register
         and risk report, which are added to or modified by other
         risk management processes.
      2. The goal for risk-response planning is to minimize the
         threats (the negative effects of risks) and maximize the
         opportunities (the positive effects of risks).
      3. The risk monitoring process is used to not only monitor
         the identified risks, secondary risks, and residual risks, but
         also to identify new risks and put them onto the path of
         analysis to response management.
462   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Summary
      Risk refers to an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a
      positive or negative effect on meeting the project objectives, hence posing
      threats or offering opportunities, respectively. Risk management includes
      planning risk management, identifying and analyzing the risks, planning and
      preparing the risk responses, implementing the risk response if the risk
      occurs, and monitoring the risks. The only output of risk management
      planning is the risk management plan, which includes elements such as a
      list of tools and approaches to be used for risk management, identification
      and assignment of resources for risk management, definition of risk
      categories, risk probabilities and impacts, and the format of risk reporting
      and tracking. This information is used in the remaining processes of risk
      management--Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform
      Quantitative Risk Analysis, Plan Risk Responses, Implement Risk Reponses,
      and Monitor Risks.
      The risk identification process initiates two documents as output: the risk
      register, which contains information about identified individual project risks,
      and the risk report, which contains information about overall project risk.
      Both of these items are added to or modified by other risk management
      processes. The main output of qualitative risk analysis is the prioritization
      of risks based on a probability and impact matrix for each objective. Each
      objective might have its own prioritized list of risks. However, the emphasis
      in quantitative analysis is on two things--assessing the probability of
      meeting each project objective and prioritizing the risks based on the total
      impact of each risk on the overall project objectives. Subsequently, the
      resulting prioritized list of risks can be used to prepare the risk response
      plan.
      Risk-response planning examines and selects the risk-response strategies,
      uses these strategies to plan responses to individual project risks and overall
      project risk, and assigns resources to these response activities and schedules
      them. This risk response plan is executed to minimize the impact of threats
      and maximize the impact of opportunities on the project. While performing
      all these processes in risk management, you monitor risks by activities such
      as tracking the status of identified risks, evaluating the effectiveness of risk
      processes, and identifying new risks.
      Road Ahead: While performing risk management, do not lose sight of the
      risks attached to the items that are to be procured. Procurement management
      is discussed in the next chapter.
                                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth        463




Exam's Eye View
Comprehend
*Risk categorization is a part of the risk management plan and helps in the risk
 identification process.
*Defining the risk probability and risk impact are parts of the risk management plan, and
 they are assessed in the qualitative risk analysis to prioritize risk.
*Risk identification is performed before any risk analysis, and the qualitative risk analysis, if
 performed, is performed before quantitative risk analysis because it takes less effort and
 time and its results can be used for quantitative analysis.
*The emphasis in quantitative analysis is on two tasks: assess the probability of meeting
 each project objective and prioritize the risks based on their total effect on overall
 project objectives.
*An important update added to the risk register by the qualitative and quantitative risk
 analyses is the prioritized list of risks.
*Implementation of risk responses is managed by the Implement Risk Responses process
 and not by the Monitor Risks process.
*The risk response plan is executed to minimize the impact of threats and maximize the
 impact of opportunities on the project.

Look Out
*Risk stems from elements of uncertainty and can have a negative or positive effect on
 meeting the project objectives. Positive effect is called opportunity.
*The risk register and risk report are initially prepared during the risk identification
 process, and some results of the other risk management processes are added to them.
*Depending upon the experience of the team and the nature of the risk, a risk can be
 moved directly after identification to the quantitative risk analysis or even to risk-
 response planning.
*For simple projects, quantitative risk analysis may not be needed.
*There is no document called a risk response management plan. The risk response-related
 activities are inserted into appropriate project and plan documents.
*A residual risk is the remains of a risk on which a response has been performed, whereas
 a secondary risk is a risk that arises as a result of implementing a risk response.

Memorize
*A prompt list is a predetermined list of risk categories that can be used to generate ideas
 to identify individual project risks.
*The risk register contains information about individual project risks, and the risk report
 contains information about the sources of overall project risks and a summary of
 individual project risks.
*Work performance data generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process is
 used as an input to the Monitor Risks process to generate work performance information.
464   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


      Review Questions
           1. Which of the following is a false statement about project
              risks?
               A. A risk arises out of uncertainty.
               B. A risk can only have a negative effect on a project.
               C.Identified risks are usually listed in a document called
                 the risk register.
               D.Risks can be categorized by developing a risk
                 breakdown structure (RBS).
           2. The risk register is not an input to which of the following
              processes?
               A. Identify Risks
               B. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
               C. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
               D.Implement Risk Responses
           3. Which of the following is not an information-gathering
              technique listed in PMBOK Edition 6 for use in the risk
              identification process?
               A. Brainstorming
               B. Delphi technique
               C. SWOT analysis
               D. Root-cause analysis
           4. Which of the following statements about risk analysis is
              false?
               A.Quantitative risk analysis can only be performed on
                 risks on which a qualitative risk analysis has already
                 been performed.
               B.Qualitative risk analysis is usually performed before
                 quantitative risk analysis.
               C.An updated risk report is the output of both
                 qualitative risk analysis and quantitative risk analysis.
               D.The risk register is an input to both qualitative risk
                 analysis and quantitative risk analysis.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   465



5. You are managing a project to set up data servers to
   support a website for an enterprise customer. The
   location of the servers has been chosen to be close to
   the customer due to their requirements. However, this
   location is prone to natural disasters, such as hurricanes
   and flooding. You have decided to install some extra
   servers in another city that will act as backup if a disaster
   happens. This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Risk avoidance
    B. Risk mitigation
    C. Risk acceptance
    D. Risk transfer
6. The risk management team of a software project has
   decided that due to the lack of adequate talent in your
   company, development of a specific part of the system is
   under high risk, so they have decided to outsource it.This
   is an example of which of the following?
    A. Risk avoidance
    B. Risk mitigation
    C. Risk acceptance
    D. Risk transfer
7. You are in the process of evaluating the probability and
   impact of a risk by assigning numbers, such as expected
   monetary value. This is an example of which of the
   following?
    A. Monte Carlo simulation
    B. Qualitative risk analysis
    C. Quantitative risk analysis
    D.Risk-response planning
8. Consider Figure 11-4. Assume that the risk has a 50
   percent probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur,
   it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to
   $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities
   shown in the figure.
466   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management




      Figure 11-4. Example of positive and negative risk impact

                  What is the EMV for the positive impact?
                  A. $80,000
                  B. $200,000
                  C. $50,000
                  D. $40,000
             9. Consider Figure 11-4. Assume that the risk has a 50
                percent probability of occurrence. If the risk does occur,
                it could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to
                $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities
                shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
                  A. $25,000
                  B. $55,000
                  C. $110,000
                  D. $50,000
            10. Which of the following is a correct statement about
                secondary risks?
                  A. These are the residual risks.
                  B. These are the risks that have medium or low priority.
                  C. These are the risks that will be avoided.
                  D.These are the risks that can result from responses to
                    the identified risks.
            11. Which of the following is not a valid risk response?
                  A. Risk acceptance
                  B. Risk sharing
                  C. Risk mitigation
                  D. Risk rejection
                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth   467



12. Which of the following is a valid statement about SWOT?
     A. It is an analysis technique to identify risks.
     B.It refers to the analysis of scope, work, options, and
       timing.
     C.It is a technique used to plan a risk response.
     D.It is a technique used to perform quantitative risk
       analysis.
13. Which of the following is not an output of qualitative risk
    analysis?
     A.A prioritized list of risks for a given project objective
       based on the probability and impact matrix of the
       objective
     B. A watch list of low-priority risks
     C.A list of risks prioritized based on the total effect of
       each risk on the overall project objectives
     D. A list of trends in the analysis results
14. Which of the following is not an output of quantitative
    risk analysis?
     A.Probability of meeting the project objectives, such as
       cost and schedule
     B.A list of risks prioritized based on the total combined
       effect of each risk on the overall project objectives
     C.A list of trends in the analysis results
     D.Decision about a risk-related contractual agreement
15. A project manager is recommending corrective actions
    related to risk. In which of the following processes is the
    project manager involved?
     A. Perform Integrated Change Control
     B. Plan Risk Responses
     C. Identify Risks
     D. Monitor Risks
468   Chapter 11 | Project Risk Management


          16. A project manager is getting the risk-related recommended
              corrective actions approved. In which of the following
              processes is the project manager involved?
               A.Perform Integrated Change Control
               B. Plan Risk Responses
               C. Identify Risks
               D. Monitor and Control Risks
          17. In project risk management, which of the following
              statements is not true?
               A.The risk report contains information about the
                 overall project risk.
               B.Exploiting an opportunity ensures that the positive
                 risk does occur.
               C.An output of the Implement Risk Responses process
                 is a document called risk response plan.
               D.The lowest level of RBS can often be used as a
                 checklist, which could be the list of risk categories.
          18. Which of the following is not an input to the Monitor
              Risks process?
               A. Work performance reports
               B. Work performance information
               C. Work performance data
               D. Risk management plan
                                                                  CHAPTER


                                                                      12

Project
Procurement
Management
The objectives covered in this chapter make up 4 percent of the exam,
equivalent to about 4 questions. Study the whole chapter in detail.
It's enough to just remember the name of the input, tools and techniques, and
outputs. You should know what is in a given input item that the given process
uses and how it helps generate the output, as well as what a given tool or
technique does in a given process.
You should understand very well how to apply procurement management
concepts, tools, and methods, such as make-or-buy analysis, source-selection
analysis, contract types, bid documents and procurement documentation,
audits and inspections, and earned value analysis.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2_12
470   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      CAPM Exam Objectives
      Project Procurement Management:
         1. Understand the three processes in the project procurement management
            knowledge area.
         2. Identify the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs defined in the three project
            procurement processes.
         3. Identify key concepts and tailoring considerations for project procurement
            management, including trends and emerging practices.
         4. Identify various types of contracts, agreements, source-selection methods, and
            contract types.


      Some of the expected outcome items of the project will be developed by the
      project team, while others will be purchased or acquired, a process called
      procurement, which may also include items that are needed to complete
      the project and are not necessarily the end product of the project. Project
      management includes processes for acquiring products, services, or results
      from outside the project. Obviously, you need to plan for these procurements,
      and then you need to follow up on your plan and conduct these procurements.
      As you can imagine, procurement management, like any other process area,
      will need to be monitored or controlled.
      So, the core question in this chapter is: how do you manage procurements?
      This issue breaks down into three avenues that we will explore: planning
      procurements, conducting procurements, and controlling them.


      Procuring the Project Resources: Big Picture
      Procurement refers to obtaining--purchasing or renting--products, services,
      or results, collectively called procurement items, from outside the project
      team to complete the project. Accordingly, procurement management is the
      performing of a set of processes used to plan and obtain (procure) those
      things from outside the project team to complete the project.
      There are two main roles involved in procurement management:
             *    Buyer. The party purchasing--i.e., procuring--the items
             *    Seller. The party delivering the procurement items to
                  the buyer
      As illustrated in Figure 12-1, procurement management includes the following
      components:
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth    471



       1. Plan Procurements. This is the process of making
          purchasing decisions on what to procure, identifying
          potential sellers, determining the procurement strategy,
          and making the overall procurement management plan.
       2. Conduct Procurements. This is the process of
          soliciting seller responses, selecting sellers, and awarding
          contracts.
       3. Control Procurements. This is the process of
          monitoring and controlling the contract execution,
          making approved changes and corrections, managing
          relationships among the parties involved in the
          procurement, and obtaining the procurement items.


                                        Plan
                                    Procurements

              Procurement
          documents including                              Procurement
           statement of work     Procurement              management plan
                                management plan


                                      Procurement
            Conduct                  documentation             Control
         Procurements                  Agreements           Procurements

Figure 12-1. Big picture of procurement management

Table 12-1 lists the procurement management processes along with their
process groups and major outputs.

Table 12-1. Processes of Procurement Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Procurement              Process Group       Major Output
Management Process
Plan Procurements        Planning            Procurement management plan, including
                                             procurement statement of work and make-
                                             or-buy decisions.
Conduct Procurements     Executing           Selected sellers, agreements, and change
                                             requests
Control Procurements     Monitoring and      Closed procurements, work performance
                         Controlling         information, change requests
472   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management



      Caution! Referring to Figure 12-1, procurement documentation refers to all the records of
      procurement; it keeps on growing. So, it wouldn't be identical for the Plan Procurements and
      Conduct Procurements processes.


      Before you can conduct procurements, you've got some planning to do.

      Planning for Procurement
      Planning procurements includes making and documenting purchasing decisions
      on what to acquire from outside of the project, and when; identifying potential
      sellers; and developing a procurement approach. Although procurement
      planning should be done early in the project, like most of the planning, the
      need might also emerge at any stage due to approved changes or other
      circumstances. Table 12-2 presents the Plan Procurement Management
      process in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.
      Table 12-2. The Plan Procurement Management Process: Input,Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                              Tools and Techniques      Output
      1.Project charter                  1.Data gathering:         1.Procurement management
      2.Business documents:              *Market research            plan
        *Business case                   2.Data analysis:          2.Procurement strategy
        *Benefit management plan            *Make-or-buy           3.Make-or-buy decisions
      3.Project Management Plan:             analysis              4.Statement of work
                                         3.Source-selection          (SOW)
        *Scope management plan
                                           analysis                5.Bid documents
        *Scope baseline
                                         4.Expert judgment         6.Source selection criteria
        *Resource management plan
                                         5.Meetings                7.Independent cost
        *Quality management plan
                                                                     estimates
      4.Project documents
                                                                   8.Change requests
        *Milestones list
                                                                   9.Project document update:
        * Project team assignments
                                                                      *Milestones list
        *Requirement documentation
                                                                      *Requirement
        *Requirement traceability                                      documentation
         matrix
                                                                      *Requirement
        *Resource requirements                                         traceability matrix
        *Stakeholder register                                         *Stakeholder register
        *Risk register                                                *Risk register
      5.Enterprise environmental                                      *Lessons learned
        factors                                                        register
      6.Organizational project assets                              10.Organizational project
                                                                      assets
                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth   473




Core of Performing Plan Procurement Management
Performing the Plan Procurement Management process can be explained in
the following steps in terms of the items from Table 12-2:
     1. Get High-level Project Information. Because you
        are considering acquiring a piece or component of the
        project, you better have a good overall understanding of
        your project. Get information about project objectives,
        milestone summary, approved resources, and description
        from the project charter; and what the project benefits
        are and when they are expected to be yielded from the
        benefit management plan. For example, the milestones list
        determines delivery time from the sellers. Also, you will
        want to know about the project's business case so as to
        keep the procurement strategy aligned with it.
     2. Fetch Information about Procurement Scope.
        From the scope baseline, draw the scope of the component
        to be procured, and from the scope management plan you
        will know how this scope will be managed. This will help
        you to develop a statement of work (SOW) and terms of
        reference (TOR).
     3. Know What to Procure. Steps 1 and 2 will expose what
        needs to be procured. The resource management plan and
        resource requirements may already have information about
        resources that need to be procured. From the quality
        management plan, you can get quality information such
        as standards and codes that the project needs to follow;
        this information may be used in bidding documents,
        determining supplies' prequalification, and determining
        selection criteria. Also, from information in the project
        team assignments, you can determine if some team
        members would be able to perform the procurement
        activities or if additional resources need to be acquired
        or procured.
     4. Get Requirements of Procurement. From requirement
        documentation, you can fetch the requirements for the
        items to be procured, which you and other sellers will
        need to follow. These may include technical requirements
        and requirements with legal and contractual obligations,
        such as safety, security, permit, and intellectual property
        rights. You can use the requirement traceability matrix
        to link seller deliverable requirements to the product
        requirements.
474   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


            5. Get Information about Relevant Risks and
               Stakeholders. From the risk register, get information
               about risks belonging to the items to be procured; these
               risks will need to be transferred to the procurement
               contract. Also, get information about contract and legal
               personnel, as well as regulatory agencies, from the
               stakeholder register.
            6. Consider Enterprise Environmental Factors.
               When handling procurement, consider relevant EEFs,
               such as market conditions; availability of the product in
               the market; past performance of the potential suppliers;
               unique local conditions regarding regulation, labor, sellers,
               and so forth; contract management and payment systems;
               and financial accounting systems.
            7. Consider Organizational Process Assets. When
               handling procurement, also consider relevant OPAs,
               such as procurement policies and procedures of the
               performing organization; approved list of sellers; and
               different contract types supported by the organization,
               which may include fixed price (FP), cost-reimbursable
               contracts, and time and material (T&M) contracts.
            8. Decide Whether to Make or Procure. Information
               collected during steps 1 through 7 will also help in
               determining whether an item is to be made or a piece
               of work is to be performed by the project team or be
               procured.
      In order to determine what type of contract you will use for the procurement,
      you need to be aware of what contract types are supported by the organization
      and what they are.


      Determining Contract Types
      A contract is a mutually binding agreement between a buyer and a seller that
      obligates the seller to provide the specified product, service, or result and
      obligates the buyer to make the payment for it. Contracts generally fall into
      the three categories discussed in this list.
      Fixed-price Contracts. A fixed-price contract is a contract that contains
      a fixed price, used for a well-defined product, with the expectation that
      the scope will not change. Actually, this contract may contain another cost
      component in addition to the fixed price. This gives rise to various sub-types
      of fixed-price contracts:
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth   475



     *   Firm Fixed Price (FFP). Also sometimes called a
         lump-sum contract, this is an agreement that specifies
         the fixed total price for the product, service, or result
         to be procured. The price is set in the beginning and is
         not subject to change unless the scope of the product
         or the service changes. This type is commonly used, and
         is preferred by buyers. An example of a firm fixed-price
         contract is a purchase order for the specified item to be
         delivered by a specified date for a specified price. This
         category of contract is generally used for products and
         services that are well defined and have good historical
         information. A firm fixed-price contract for a poorly
         defined product or a service with very little historical
         record is a source of high risk for both the seller and the
         buyer.
     *   Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment
         (FPEPA). This is a fixed-price contract that contains a
         special provision to adjust the price according to changes
         in external conditions, such as inflation or price changes
         for some specific commodities relevant to the product
         or service to be procured. The adjustments are well
         defined at the start. For example, this contract type is
         useful when the seller delivers over a long period during
         which external conditions such as inflation or currency
         rate may change.
     *   Fixed-price Incentive Fee (FPIF). This is a fixed-price
         contract that contains extra rewards for the seller tied
         to achieving the agreed-upon metrics, the quantitative
         measures of performance used to express progress or
         achievement against the planned goals. These metrics or
         performance targets are defined at the beginning (outset),
         and the total price--including the incentives--will be
         determined at the end of the work. The performance
         metrics may include cost and schedule in addition to other
         factors, such as technical performance.This contract type
         offers some flexibility in deviating from the target goals.
Cost-reimbursable Contracts. A contract in this category includes two
kinds of costs:
     1. Actual Cost. This is the payment (reimbursement) to
        the seller for the actual cost of the item or work.
     2. Fee. This typically represents the seller's profit.
476   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      This contract type is used when the work scope is expected to change. As
      discussed in the following list, there are three types of cost-reimbursable
      contracts:
             *     Cost Plus Fixed Fee (CPFF). The payment to the
                   seller includes the actual cost and a fixed fee.The fixed fee
                   can be calculated as a percentage of the initially estimated
                   project cost. In this case, the CPFF is sometimes also
                   called the cost-plus percentage of cost (CPPC).The fee is
                   fixed and does not vary unless the scope changes.
             *     Cost Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF). The payment to the
                   seller includes the actual cost and a predetermined incentive
                   bonus based on achieving certain objectives. If the actual
                   cost is predetermined in the contract, and the final cost
                   deviates from the estimate, the buyer and seller usually split
                   the difference based on the pre-determined formula.
             *     Cost Plus Award Fee (CPAF). In structure, this sounds
                   pretty much like CPIF.The payment to the seller includes all
                   the legitimate costs and an award fee. However, the award
                   fee may be based on meeting broadly defined performance
                   objectives. If the performance is broadly defined, the
                   determination of the award fee may depend on the subjective
                   judgment by the buyer; it is not subject to appeal.


      Note Both fixed-price contracts and cost-reimbursable contracts can optionally include
      incentives--for example, a bonus from the buyer to the seller if the seller meets certain target
      schedule dates or exceeds some other predetermined expectations.


      Time and Material (T&M) Contracts. Also referred to as time and means,
      this type of contract is used in situations where both cost-re-imbursement
      and fixed-price features need to be applied. In other words, this is a hybrid
      that contains some aspects from both the fixed-price category and the cost-
      reimbursable category. The contracts in this category resemble the contracts
      in the cost-reimbursable category because the total cost and the exact quantity
      of the items is not fixed at the time of the agreement.The contracts resemble
      fixed-price contracts because the unit rates can be fixed in the contract.These
      types of contracts are useful when you do not know the quantity of the
      procured items. For example, you do not know how much time a contract
      programmer will take to develop a software program, so you determine the
      hourly rate in the contract, but not the total cost for writing the program. In
      this category of contracts, the risk is high for the buyer because the buyer
      agrees to pay for all the time the seller takes to produce the deliverables.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth       477



Table 12-3 shows lists of risk bearers for various types of contracts.

Table 12-3. Lists of Risk Bearers for Various Types of Contracts

Contract Type            Risk Bearer          Explanation
Fixed Price (FP)         Buyer and Seller     The cost overrun is borne by the seller,
                                              whereas the price's being fixed higher than the
                                              actual cost hurts the buyer.
Cost Plus Fixed          Buyer                Cost overrun is paid by the buyer.
Fee (CPFF)
Cost Plus Award          Seller               Award fee is usually the major part of the cost
Fee (CPAF)                                    and is based on the subjective determination of
                                              the seller's performance by the buyer.
Cost Plus Incentive      Buyer and Seller     Cost overrun is shared by the buyer and the
Fee (CPIF)                                    seller.
Time and Material        Buyer                The increased cost due to the increased
(T&M)                                         quantity of resources, such as work hours by a
                                              contractor, is borne by the buyer.



                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.1

    Rajinder, the project manager, is now working on procurement planning for a portion
    of the project. She is looking at all the following options for procuring different pieces.
    Match each consideration in the first column with the corresponding contract type in
    the second column of the following table.

    Consideration                                                Contract type
    A.Rajinder will pay $3,000 for the use of a facility and 1.Fixed Price (FP)
      $5,000 per month for the employees working for the
      procured piece for the duration of work. However,
      there is a cap of $50,000 for the maximum cost.
    B.Rajinder will pay for the labor of the cost and a lump 2.Time and Material
      sum of $5,000                                            (T&M)
    C.Rajinder will pay $50,000 to maintain the website for 3.Cost Plus Fixed Fee
      the project for two years.                              (CPFF)
    D.She will provide $10,000 for developing a software      4.Cost Plus Percentage of
      program and an extra $1,000 if less than 10 bugs are      Cost (CPPC)
      discovered in the program in the first year of its use.
    E.She will pay the labor cost each month plus 5         5.Cost Plus Incentive Fee
      percent of this cost as coffee and snacks at work and   (CPIF)
      for recognition and rewards for the labor.
478   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      Tools and Techniques for Planning Procurement
      Management
      Various tools can be used in planning procurement management, such as
      market research, make-or-buy decision analysis, and source-selection analysis.
      Market Research Analysis. Market research, in this process, is conducted
      via data-gathering techniques and is focused on the industry and seller
      qualifications regarding the items to be procured. For this analysis, the sources
      of information that can be used include relevant conferences, web reviews,
      and industry magazines. In your analysis, you may have to consider and balance
      between various factors, including the many options for technology and sellers,
      maturity of technology, and risks to meet the procurement objectives.
      Make-or-Buy Decision Analysis. Obviously, procurement refers to buying
      something as compared to making it in-house in the project.The make-or-buy
      decision analysis can be used to determine if the item should be procured or
      made in-house by the project team. The factors considered in this analysis
      include the organization's current resource allocation, availability of resources
      with the right skills and abilities, need for special and rare expertise, and risks.
      An example of factors is listed in Table 12-4.

      Table 12-4. Some Factors and Reasons to Make or Buy

      Factor                        Reasons to Make In-house        Reasons to Buy
      Cost                          Less cost                       Less cost
      Skills availability           Use in-house skills             In-house skills don't exist
                                                                    or are not available
      Skills acquisition            Learn new skills that will be   These skills are not
                                    used even after this project    important to the
                                                                    organization
      Risks                         Deal with the risk in-house     Transfer the risk
      Work                          Core project work               Not core project work
      Human resource availability   Staff available                 Vendor available



      The make-or-buy decision analysis may also use techniques like cash flow, net
      present value, cost-benefit analysis, and return on investment.This analysis will
      generate a make-or-buy decision, an output item of this process.
      Source-Selection Analysis. This analysis is performed by the buyer
      to develop source-selection criteria, also called evaluation criteria, during
      procurement planning to rate responses from the sellers. Depending on the
      procurement need, the evaluation criteria could be as simple as the price for
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth           479



off-the-shelf standard items, or it could be a combination of factors for a more
complex proposal. The common methods used in this analysis are explained
in Table 12-5.

Table 12-5. Methods to Be Considered in the Source-Selection Analysis

Selection Method       Why                              Summary
Least cost             Procurement is of routine        Items with different prices will
                       nature with well-established     generate the same well-defined output.
                       standard.
Quality based          High-quality technical           Seller with highest ranked technical
                       solution is main priority        proposal is selected given that the
                                                        related cost is accepted after possible
                                                        negotiations.
                                                        Also called: Highest technical proposal
                                                        score
Quality and cost       Cost matters in addition to      Strike the right balance between
based                  quality                          quality and cost; e.g.; for a high-risk
                                                        project, quality will have higher priority
                                                        than cost.
Qualifications only    Value of procurement is          Bidder with best relevant expertise,
                       relatively low                   capabilities, skills, experience, and
                                                        qualification is selected.
Sole source            The seller is a given            A particular seller is asked to submit
                                                        technical and financial proposals, which
                                                        are negotiated. Since no competition,
                                                        seller must be justified.
Fixed budget           Cost constraints                 Fixed budget must be disclosed to
                                                        the sellers. Seller with highest ranked
                                                        technical proposal within the budget
                                                        is selected.
                                                        Caution: To ensure that scope and
                                                        quality are not compromised, SOW
                                                        must be precise and must be checked
                                                        against the proposal.




Caution! Selections are made based on the need and priorities of procurement. In a
competitive bidding, all sellers should be provided with the same required information, such as the
proposal evaluation methods to be used in the selection.
480   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      As said earlier, source-selection analysis is performed to develop source-
      selection criteria, in which the sellers' factors could also matter:
            *    Business Aspects. This can include the following factors:
                *    Business Size and Type. Does the business size
                     or type meet a condition set forth in the contract,
                     such as being a small business or a disadvantaged
                     small business?
                *    Financial Capacity and Stability. Does the
                     seller have the financial capacity to do the job, or
                     is the seller in a position to obtain the necessary
                     financial resources to do the job?
                *    Production Capacity and Interest. Does the
                     seller have the capacity and the interest to meet
                     future potential requirements?
            *    Technical Aspects. This includes the technical approach
                 and capability:
                *    Technical Approach. Will the technical
                     methodologies, techniques, solutions, or services
                     proposed by the seller meet the procurement
                     requirements, or will they provide more than the
                     expected results?
                *    Technical Capability and Expertise. Does the
                     seller have or is the seller capable of acquiring the
                     technical skills and knowledge required to produce
                     the deliverables?
      Other. Delivery date, specific relevant expertise and experience, right
      management experience, and knowledge transfer and training.
      The major output of procurement planning is the procurement management
      plan.


      Output of Planning Procurement Management
      There is a host of output items generated by this process largely addressing
      the different aspects of how to perform procurement management.

      Make-or-Buy Decision and Source-Selection Criteria
      The source-selection criteria, generated by the source-selection analysis already
      discussed, guides how to select sellers when buying procurement items.
      Also called evaluation criteria, this is basically developed by the buyer during
      procurement planning to rate responses from the sellers.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       481



Even before that, make-or-buy analysis, already discussed, will generate a make-
or-buy decision as to whether an item should be made by the project team or
be procured.
After selecting an item for procurement, you need a procurement strategy
for it.


Procurement Strategy
The purpose of this document is tri-fold:
      1. Determine the Delivery Methods. The delivery
         methods depend on the kinds of procurement; e.g.; will
         subcontracting be allowed for procuring a professional
         service, or, in the case of procurement in the construction
         field, what would be the delivery method: build your own
         operate transfer (BOOT), design build operate (DBO), or
         turnkey, etc.
      2. Determine Hows of Phase Management. Hows
         of sequencing the procurement phases; performance
         indication and milestones in each phase; monitoring each
         phase; evaluation and tracking progress; criterion to meet
         before procurement will go next phase; and knowledge
         transfer.
      3. Determine the Contract Payment Types. There are
         already-discussed contract types, such as lump sum, firm
         fixed price, cost plus award fees, cost plus incentive fees,
         and so on.
After we have decided to procure an item, or items, and have some strategy
in place, we need to start looking for sellers, which requires putting together
documents--the bidding documents.


Bidding Documents
This is the set of procurement documents put together during procurement
planning. The buyer structures these documents with two goals in mind:
      *   To facilitate an accurate and complete response from
          each potential seller
      *   To facilitate easy evaluation of the responses
482   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      These documents include the following:
             *    A description of the desired form of the response
             *    A relevant contract statement of work (SOW)
             *    Any required contractual provisions, such as a copy of a
                  model contract, and non-disclosure provisions


      Tip In government contracting, some or all of the content and structure of a procurement
      document might already be defined by regulations.


      What Are These Documents Called? Different terms are used for these
      documents for different purposes:
             *    A term such as bid, tender, or quotation is used when the
                  seller-selection decision will be based on the price when
                  buying commercial or standard items.
             *    A term such as proposal is used when multiple factors
                  are considered, such as cost, technical skills, and technical
                  approach.
      What Do These Documents Include? Depending on the kind of
      procurement, these documents may include the items in Table 12-6.

      Table 12-6. Specific Bidding Documents

      Document Name                    Use
      Request for Information (ROI)    Get more information from sellers on the procurement
                                       items.
      Request for Quotation (ROQ)      Get more information on how the sellers would meet
                                       the procurement item requirement; e.g.; price.
      Request for Proposal (ROP)       Get more information on how the sellers would solve a
                                       given problem.
      Statement of Work (SOW)          Can be a part of the preceding documents
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth         483




Note These bidding documents travel from buyer to seller, whereas the responses to these,
such as bids, quotations, and proposals, travel from seller to buyer.


Statement of Work (SOW) and Term of Reference (TOR). The
purpose of SOW is to provide enough information about the procurement
item to enable the seller to provide back the completed item.The SOW might
change in a back and forth between the buyer and seller until it goes into the
contract. It's developed from the portion of the project scope belonging to
the procurement item. It describes the item in sufficient detail that the seller
will be able to figure out what exactly is wanted. The definition of sufficient
detail depends upon the specific item, buyer's need, and the contract form. In
general, it can include:
       *    Specification
       *    Quality level
       *    Quantity, if applicable
       *    Performance data
       *    Performance period
       *    Work location, if applicable
It should be specific and precise as opposed to vague, and concise yet complete.
The term Term of Reference (TOR) is used instead of SOW when the
procurement item is a service.


Independent Cost Estimates
During the Conduct Procurement process, sellers will respond to bidding
documents with a proposal. How will we know that the price in the proposal
is reasonable? The answer is independent cost estimates. Depending on the
size and need of the project, an independent cost estimate can be performed
for procurement items. The procuring organization prepares the independent
estimate in-house or has it done by a third party. They can then use it as a
benchmark to evaluate the proposed cost.
How the overall procurement works would be coordinated and integrated
with project work; related issues are discussed in the procurement plan.
484   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      Procurement Management Plan
      This document describes how the procurement will be managed throughout
      the project. Depending on the project need, it can be brief or detailed, informal
      or formal. The plan may include the following:
              *    How the make-or-buy decisions will be made and handled
              *    Contracts:
                   *    What types of contracts will be used for this project
                   *    The form and format for the statement of work
                        related to a procurement or a contract
                   *    Metrics to be used to evaluate potential sellers and
                        to manage contracts
                   *    Requirements for performance bonds or insurance
                        contracts that might be put in place to mitigate
                        some project risks
              *    Management and Coordination:
                   *    Time table of procurement activities
                   *    How to manage multiple sellers
                   *    How to coordinate procurement with other aspects
                        of the project, such as the project schedule, scope,
                        budget, and status progress reporting
                   *    Evaluation criteria for selecting sellers and
                        measuring their performance; e.g.; source-selection
                        criteria
                   *    How to handle legal and currency issues
                   *    Making use of pre-qualified sellers

              *    A list of assumptions and constraints that could affect the
                   procurement
              *    Any needed standardized procurement document


      Caution! The procurement management plan should describe whether to conduct local,
      national, or international competitive bidding. If the project is financed externally, make sure the
      three elements are properly aligned: funding, project schedule, and procurement management
      plan.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth      485



The decision to procure and other decisions that would follow may generate
change requests, which will cause the need to update some documents, such
as those listed in the output column of Table 12-2.
In a nutshell, the major tasks of procurement planning are 1) perform the
make-or-buy analysis to make buy-or-make decisions; 2) if a procurement decision
is made, determine the procurement strategy; 3) perform source-selection analysis
to determine the source-selection criteria; 4) prepare bidding documents,
including statement of work (SOW), for getting bids and proposals from the
sellers, which would be evaluated during the Conduct Procurement process
using the source-selection criteria; 5) determine other "how-tos" about overall
coordinating and integrating procurement work with the project and related
issues; and 6) develop procurement plan.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.2

   In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
   second column.

   Document                             Include or discuss
   A.Procurement management plan        1.Request for information (ROI)
   B.Procurement strategy               2.Delivery methods
   C.Statement of Work (SOW)            3.Request for quotation (ROQ)
   D.Bid documents                      4.Integrating procurement with project work
                                        5.Performance data
                                        6.Request for proposal (ROP)
                                        7.Stakeholders' procurement responsibilities
                                        8.Procurement phase management
                                        9.Key procurement activities
                                        10.Contract payment types
                                        11.Performance period
                                        12.Work location



With procurement planned out, you are ready to actually conduct the
procurements.
486   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      Conducting Procurements
      As you have already learned, procurement refers to obtaining (purchasing
      or renting) products, services, or results from outside the project team to
      complete the project. Procurement management is the execution of a set of
      processes used to obtain (procure) a procurement item or items. Procurement
      planning produces the procurement management plan and other documents
      to facilitate the implementation of this plan. The implementation is largely
      done in the Conduct Procurement process by seeking out sellers, getting
      responses from them, selecting sellers, and reaching an agreement with them.
      Table 12-7 presents the Conduct Procurement process in terms of input,
      tools and techniques, and output.

      Table 12-7. The Conduct Procurement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                         Tools and Techniques        Output
      1.Project Management Plan     1.Advertising               1.Selected sellers
        *Procurement                2.Bidder conferences        2.Agreements
         management plan            3.Data analysis: Proposal   3.Change requests
        *Scope management plan        evaluation                4.Project Management Plan
        *Communication              4.Interpersonal and team      Update:
         management plan              skills: Procurement         *Procurement
        *Requirement                  negotiations                 management plan
         management plan            5.Expert judgment             *Communication
        *Risk management plan                                      management plan
        *Configuration                                            *Requirement
         management plan                                           management plan
        *Cost baseline                                            *Risk management plan
      2.Project documents                                         *Quality management plan
        *Project schedule                                         *Scope baseline
        *Requirement                                              *Schedule baseline
         documentation                                            *Cost baseline
        *Stakeholder register                                   5.Project documents update:
        *Risk register                                            *Resource calendar
        *Lessons learned register                                 *Requirement
      3.Procurement                                                documentation
        documentation                                             *Requirement traceability
      4.Seller proposals                                           matrix
      5.Enterprise environmental                                  *Stakeholder register
        factors                                                   *Risk register
      6.Organizational project                                    *Lessons learned register
        assets
                                                                6.Organizational project
                                                                  assets update
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       487



In the input column of Table 12-7, item procurement documents consists of 1) bid
documents; 2) statement of work (SOW); 3) independent cost estimate; and
4) source-selection criteria; all these and the seller proposals were discussed in
the previous section. All other input items should be familiar by reaching this
point in the book.


Core of Conducting Procurements
In this section, we will discuss, in terms of the items from Table 12-7, how to
perform the Conduct Procurement process. Let's start by noting that the goal
of this process is to secure an agreement with the seller on the procurement
item. It's very important to realize that procuring an item is equivalent
to procuring, or outsourcing, a piece of your project. In other words, the
procurement item has a piece of the project attached to it in terms of its
share of scope, requirement, cost baseline, project schedule, stakeholders, and
risks. Most of the plan and project documents appearing in the input column
of Table 12-7 are carrying information about these aspects of the procurement
items; this is why these documents are there. This information was mostly
already used in preparing the bidding document and the statement of work
(SOW) in the Plan Procurement Management process and travels to sellers
that way in this process. In this process, this information would be used for
various purposes, such as in evaluating the bids or proposals and negotiating
with the sellers; e.g.; cost and schedule should stay aligned with the project
cost and schedule baselines.
Also note that some of the information will come from the seller to enter
into these documents; e.g.; lessons learned during this process for lessons
learned register and risks coming from the seller's side for the risk register.
The whole process can be summarized in the following steps:
      1. Seek Sellers. Use suitable means such as advertising
         and bidder conferences to seek the sellers and to send the
         appropriate bidder documents including SOW.
      2. Select Sellers. Use the source-selection criteria, a
         procurement document, and information from other input
         documents to evaluate the submitted bids and proposals.
         In this evaluation, check the proposed cost against that
         in your independent cost estimates, another procurement
         document. Based on this evaluation, select one or more
         sellers.
      3. Obtain Agreement. Use negotiations and other
         communication skills to reach an agreement with one or
         more of the selected sellers.
488   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management



      Tip If the proposed cost is incompatible with the independent estimate, the possible causes of
      this mismatch should be examined, which may include the vague or unclear SOW, misunderstanding
      of SOW by sellers, or simply that seller price is higher than others.



      Note Bids and quotations are typically used to ask for prices, whereas proposals are used
      to ask for solutions. Invitations for bids, requests for quotations, and requests for proposals travel
      from buyer to seller, whereas bids, quotations, and proposals travel from seller to buyer.


      In the following, we will discuss the tools and techniques referred to in this
      section.


      Tools and Techniques for Conducting Procurements
      The first goal for the tools and techniques here is to find sellers and provide
      them with information about the requests for responses. The list of potential
      sellers can be developed from various sources, such as the World Wide
      Web, library directories, relevant local associations, trade catalogs, and the
      performing organization's internal information database.
      The main techniques used in soliciting seller responses are advertising
      and bidder conferences. These and other techniques used in conducting
      procurements are discussed in the following list.
      Advertising. The request for seller responses can be advertised in the public
      media or in relevant professional journals.Whether to use advertising depends
      on the organization's policy. However, some government jurisdictions require
      public advertising of pending government contracts.
      Bidder Conferences. This refers to meetings with prospective sellers prior
      to their preparation of a response to ensure that the sellers have a clear
      understanding of the procurement, such as the technical and contractual
      requirements. These meetings can generate amendments to the documents
      depending on the need. The purpose of these meetings is that all potential
      sellers receive the same kind of detail and amount of information (or help)
      so that each seller has an equal opportunity to produce the best response.
      These conferences are also called contractor conferences, vendor conferences, or
      pre-bid conferences.


      Note In some cases, after a proposal is submitted, the buyer can request that the seller
      supplement its proposal with an oral presentation to provide some additional information, which
      can be used to evaluate the seller's proposal.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth           489



Proposals submitted by sellers need to be evaluated.
Proposal Evaluation. Using this technique, you will check if a proposal is
complete according to the bidding document, including SOW. If it is, evaluate it
using the source-selection criteria and by comparing the cost to the independent
cost estimates. As said before, the purpose of independent estimates is to have
a check on the pricing proposed by the seller. Significant differences between
the proposed cost and the independent estimate may mean vague or unclear
SOW, misunderstanding of SOW by sellers, market has changed, or the seller
has failed to offer reasonable pricing.
Based on this evaluation, you select one or more sellers. Negotiations are
conducted to reach agreements with one or more sellers.
Procurement Negotiations. Procurement negotiations, also called contract
negotiations, have the following two-pronged goal:
        *    Clarify the terms of the purchase, such as the structure
             and the rights and obligations of the parties in the contract
        *    Reach an agreement
Subjects covered during the negotiations may include the following:
        *    Applicable terms and laws
        *    Authorities, rights, and responsibilities
        *    Business management and technical approaches
        *    Contract financing
        *    Payments and price
        *    Proprietary rights
        *    Schedule
        *    Technical solutions
The conclusion of contract negotiations is a document, the contract, which
can be signed by both the buyer and the seller. The final contract signed by
both parties can be an offer by the seller or a counteroffer by the buyer.
Sometimes for simple procurement items the contract is nonnegotiable.


Tip A contract is a mutually binding legal relationship subject to remedy in court. These
negotiations are usually conducted by the procurement team. However, the project manager might
be required to be present during negotiations to provide any necessary clarification on the project
requirements.
490   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      Expert judgment involves other tools that can also be used during conducting
      procurements.


      Output of Conducting Procurements
      The main outputs of conducting procurements include the list of selected
      sellers and the agreements with the selected sellers. These and other output
      items are discussed in the following paragraphs.
      Selected Sellers. This is the list of sellers that you or the procurement team
      have selected as a result of the proposal and bid evaluations. A subset of these
      sellers would get rewarded a contract.
      Agreements. Also called procurement awards, these are the contracts
      awarded to selected sellers after negotiations. A contract is a legal document
      that obligates the seller to provide the specified procurement item or items
      and obligates the buyer to make the payment to the seller. The contract can
      be a simple purchase order or a complex document, depending on the nature
      of the procurement. A contract can include the following:
            *   List of deliverables and statement of work
            *   Schedule
            *   Performance reporting
            *   Acceptance criteria
            *   Change-request handling
            *   Inflation adjustments
            *   Penalties and incentives
            *   Terms of pricing and payment
            *   Product support
            *   Roles and responsibilities
            *   Termination and dispute-handling mechanisms
            *   Insurance
            *   Limitation of liability
            *   Warranty
      Changes and Updates. The activities of this process may generate change
      requests, which may require the updating of some documents, such as those
      listed in the output column of Table 12-7.
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth     491




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.3

   Q. True or False: The main goals of the Conduct Procurements process are select
   the sellers, award procurement contracts to them, and obtain the procurement item.


Like any other part of the project, you need to monitor and control
procurements, which you do by using the Control Procurements process.


Control Procurements
Controlling procurements is the process of ensuring that the performances
of the buyer and seller meet the agreed-upon procurement requirements, and
that the procurement is properly closed. It includes:

      1. Manage procurement-specific relationships.
      2. Monitor the performance of the procurement part of the
         project.
      3. Manage the procurement-related changes.
      4. Close procurement contracts.
Controlling procurements has a two-pronged goal: ensuring that the seller's
performance meets the procurement requirements and that the buyer's meets
its agreed-upon contractual obligations. Depending on the size and complexity
of the project and the structure of the performing organization, procurement
administration may be handled by a group outside of the project organization.
But you will still need to integrate the procure function with the project
and act as a communicator and coordinator to ensure that this function is
performed smoothly without adversely affecting the other aspects of the
project. This is accomplished by monitoring and controlling the interface of
the procurement processes with non-procurement processes such as those
from quality, risk, and integration management. Most of the input and output
items in Table 12-8 reflect that interface.
492   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      Table 12-8. The Control Procurement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                             Tools and Techniques        Output
      1.Project Management Plan:        1.Claims administration     1.Closed procurement
        *Procurement management         2.Data analysis:            2.Work performance
         plan                             *Procurement                information
        *Change management plan            performance reviews      3.Procurement
        *Requirement management           *Earned value analysis      documentation update
         plan                             *Trend analysis           4.Change requests
        *Risk management plan           3.Audits and inspections    5.Project Management
        *Schedule baseline                                            Plan update:
                                        4.Expert judgment
      2.Project documents:                                             *Procurement
                                                                        management plan
        *Milestones list
                                                                       *Risk managem ent
        *Requirement traceability
                                                                        plan
         matrix
                                                                       *Schedule baseline
        *Requirement
         documentation                                                 *Cost baseline
        *Quality reports                                            6.Project documents
                                                                      update:
        *Stakeholder register
                                                                       *Resource
        *Assumptions log
                                                                        requirement
        *Risk register                                                  documentation
        *Lessons learned register                                      *Requirement
      3.Agreements                                                      traceability matrix
      4.Procurement documentation                                      *Stakeholder register
      5.Approved change requests                                       *Risk register
      6.Work performance data                                          *Lessons learned
      7.Enterprise environmental                                        register
        factors                                                     7.Organizational project
      8.Organizational project assets                                 assets update



      Core of Controlling Procurements
      As discussed earlier, procuring an item is equivalent to procuring or
      outsourcing a piece of your project with its share of scope, requirements, cost
      baseline, project schedule, stakeholders, and risks. However, this procured
      piece is still connected to the whole project and can affect and impact it. In
      this context, the core of controlling procurement is to manage the interface
      of the procurement processes with the other processes of the project, as
      mentioned earlier. In this section, we will illustrate how you do that.
                                                               CAPM(R) in Depth     493



The input and output items in Table 12-8 represent the interface you need to
manage. From this and other chapters, you are familiar with all these items and
their roles. In the following, we explain in a compact manner how to manage
this interface.


Manage Information about the Procurement
For this process, information about the procurement seller(s) comes to and
is managed by two kinds of documents: 1) documents from procurement
processes, e.g.; agreements, procurement documentation, and procurement
management plan; and 2) documents from non-procurement processes, such
as the following:
      *    The milestones list holds the dates by which sellers must
           deliver specific results.
      *    The procurement-related assumptions go into the
           assumptions log.
      *    The risk from the seller side goes into and is managed by
           using the risk register; risk from the sellers' side may arise
           from cost, missing a milestone, delivery method, and so
           on.
      *    These risks can be managed as guided by the risk
           management plan.
      *    Procurement-related requirements, both technical that
           the seller is required to meet and contractual, become
           part of the requirement documentation.
      *    These requirements are managed as guided by the
           requirement management plan.

Analysis of Sellers' Data
The work performance data contains raw performance data from the seller
side, such as activities in progress and finished, cost incurred, and so on. As
described in Chapter 7, by using earned value analysis you will compute the
performance indexes and variances for schedule and cost. Comparing these
with the agreed-upon planned target, e.g.; SOW, will measure the deviation.
Also, as explained in Chapter 7, you can perform trend analysis to predict the
estimate at completion for cost to monitor cost; e.g.; is it on track, improving,
or getting worse?
494   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      You can also keep track of the procurement by conducting performance
      reviews, as discussed in Chapter 10. As in any control process, from the seller
      data you will measure certain quantities about schedule, resources, and cost
      performance and compare them with their expected values in the contract or
      agreement or agreed-upon procurement documents.


      Perform Audits and Inspections
      Discussed in Chapter 10, you can apply these tools here too in a similar way.
      For example, for an inspection you can perform a structural review of the
      contractor's work; e.g.; review actual work or final product--i.e., deliverable.
      Depending on the field, this review can take many forms; e.g.; in software
      engineering, it could be a code walkthrough.
      In this process, the audit would be a structural review of the overall
      procurement process. The buyer and sellers' project managers should share
      the results from the audit and make necessary changes.


      Create Work Performance Information
      Similar to any monitoring and controlling process, data analysis and audit
      and inspections will generate work performance information. In this process,
      for example, work performance information will include information on
      how the seller's performance looks in terms of schedule, cost, and technical
      performance as compared to the SOW.


      Generate Change Requests
      Some deviations found during data analysis and audit and inspections will
      generate change requests, such as to the procurement management plan,
      schedule baseline, and cost baseline. As always, change requests are processed
      through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
      Because there are two parties, buyer and seller, involved in procurement, there
      may arise disagreements as to whether the deviation or change happened
      or if the solution to the change is acceptable. The preferred method to
      resolution would be through negotiations, as may be described in the contract.
      If negotiations fail, then these changes are called disputed claims and are
      processed through alternative dispute resolution (ADR) that may be referred to
      in the contract. Handling these kinds of changes is called claim administration.
      Like in any process, change requests and some other actions may require
      some documents, such as those listed in the output column of Table 12-8, to
      be updated.
                                                             CAPM(R) in Depth       495



Close Procurements. When you or your team have accepted all the
deliverables from the sellers through the Control Procurement process and
there are no payments due or unresolved claims, then the procurement team,
through an authorized administrator, can formally close the procurement
as described in the procurement management plan and the contract. This
includes closing all the agreements/contracts.
In a nutshell, you use the Control Procurement process to monitor and
control the implication to SOW and the agreement between sellers and buyer,
which ends when the seller delivers the procurement items.
The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
      1. By using the Plan Procurement Management process, you
         identify the procurements and potential sellers, prepare
         procurements, and form a procurement strategy and plan.
      2. The procurement strategy and plan are implemented
         by using the Conduct Procurement and Control
         Procurements processes.
      3. The goal of the Conduct Procurement Process is reaching
         an agreement between the buyer and the seller; the goal
         of the Control Procurement process is the delivery the
         acceptable procurement items by the sellers to the buyer.

Summary
Procurement refers to obtaining--purchasing or renting--items (i.e., products,
services, or results) from outside the project team to complete the project.
Accordingly, procurement management is performing a set of processes used
to plan and obtain (procure) those things from outside the project team
needed to complete the project. The party purchasing (procuring) the items
is called the buyer, and the party delivering the items to the buyer is called
the seller.
Planning procurement is the process of making purchasing decisions on
what to procure, identifying potential sellers, determining the strategy, and
making the overall plan. Conducting procurement means soliciting seller
responses, selecting sellers, and awarding contracts. You administer and close
the procurements by controlling the contract execution; i.e., making approved
changes and corrections, managing relationships among the parties involved
in the procurements, making sure that all acceptable procurement items are
delivered by the seller, and ensuring the contracts are closed out. Just like the
rest of the project, the procurements need to be closed properly.
496   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


      In a nutshell, identifying procurement items and potential sellers is the Plan
      Procurement Management process; reaching an agreement with the seller is
      the Conduct Procurements process; and obtaining the procurement items in
      the Control Procurements process.
      Road Ahead. The end product of procurement management is the accepted
      procurement items. The related information is sent to the Close Project
      process.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *The major tasks of procurement planning include performing the make-or-buy analysis
       to make buy-or-make decisions; determining procurement strategy; performing source-
       selection analysis to determine the source-selection criteria; preparing bidding documents,
       including statement of work (SOW), for getting bids and proposals; and determining other
       "how-tos" about overall coordinating and integrating procurement work with the project
       and the related issues; and developing a procurement plan.
      *Conducting procurement is a process of obtaining responses from potential sellers,
       selecting sellers based on those responses, and awarding contracts to the selected sellers.
      *Invitations for bids, requests for quotations, and requests for proposals--in other words,
       bidding documents including SOW--travel from buyer to seller, whereas bids, quotations,
       and proposals travel from seller to buyer.
      *The deliverables are accepted through the procurement closure process and related
       information in the project closure process.

      Look Out
      *The proposal, an input of Conduct Procurements, is created during the same process by
       the seller.
      *SOW may be included in the bidding document.
      *The contracts are closed using the Control Procurements process.
      *The procured deliverables are provided by the sellers during this process before the
       procurement is closed.

      Memorize
      *Procurement documents consist of 1) bid documents; 2) statement of work (SOW); 3)
       independent cost estimate; and 4) source-selection criteria
      *Bidding consists of request for information (ROI), request for quotation (ROQ), and
       request for proposal (ROP). It may include SOW.
      *In procurement, a term such as bid, tender, or quotation is used when the seller-selection
       decision will be based on the price when buying commercial or standard items; whereas a
       term such as proposal is used when multiple factors are considered, such as cost, technical
       skills, and technical approach.
                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth   497




Review Questions
   1. You are a project manager at a company that is a seller for
      another company. You are coordinating the efforts to bid
      on a contract with another company to sell the product
      of your company. Which of the following contract types
      carries the most risk for your company?
       A. CPIF
       B. T&M
       C. CPFF
       D. FFP
   2. Ron Collins is the project manager for a biotechnology
      company. He is outsourcing a part of the project to a
      foreign company. The foreign company will charge Ron
      $10 per hour for each employee that will be involved
      in the outsourced part of the project. Ron will also be
      charged an extra amount of $100 per month for other
      charges, such as using the facilities for the duration of the
      project. What type of contract is it?
       A. T&M
       B. FP
       C. CPPC
       D. CPIF
   3. Which of the following is not true about planning
      procurements?
       A. Scope baseline is an input to planning procurements.
       B. SOW is an input to planning procurements.
       C.Make-or-buy decisions are an output of planning
         procurements.
       D. Project charter is an output of planning procurements.
   4. In procurement, which of the following contract types
      presents the highest risk for the buyer?
       A. Firm fixed price
       B. Cost plus fixed fee
       C. Cost plus percentage of cost
       D. Cost plus incentive fee
498   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


           5. You are managing a software project. The project is
              already in the execution stage when you discover that
              a whole software module is missing from the work
              breakdown structure (WBS). Your company does not
              have the programmers to write the module in a timely
              fashion, so you decide to procure this piece of work. The
              module will have a number of small programs working
              together, and it will take almost the same effort to write
              any of these programs. The software experts have given
              you an estimate of how much that effort will be. However,
              it is not clear at this stage how many programs will be
              needed. Which type of contract will you choose in this
              situation?
               A. Time and material
               B. Cost plus fixed fee
               C. Cost plus percentage of cost
               D. Firm fixed price
           6. The analysis to make a buy-or-make decision is performed
              during which of the following procurement process?
               A. Conduct Procurements
               B. Administer Procurement
               C. Plan Procurements
               D. Control Procurement
           7. Your company is outsourcing a part of your project and
              therefore is preparing the procurement documents.
              Which of the following is not a bidding document?
               A. Request for information (ROI)
               B. Request for quotation (ROQ)
               C. Request for proposal (ROP)
               D. Seller proposal
                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth   499



 8. Your organization is playing the seller role in doing a part
    of a project for another company, the buyer. The buyer
    has incomplete specifications for the work involved at
    this stage and wants you to start the work after signing
    the agreement.Which of the following contract types will
    be the most beneficial for your organization?
     A. Fixed price
     B. Time and material
     C. Cost plus percentage of cost
     D. Cost plus time
 9. Which of the following is the correct order in which to
    perform the listed processes for the first time?
     A.Direct and Manage Project Work, Control
       Procurements, Perform Integrated Change Control
     B.Control Procurements, Perform Integrated Change
       Control, Direct and Manage Project Work
     C.Perform Integrated Change Control, Control
       Procurements, Direct and Manage Project Work
     D.Perform Integrated Change Control, Direct and
       Manage Project Work, Control Procurements
10. Which of the following is not an activity of the Control
    Procurements process?
     A. Issuing formal acceptance of the procured products
     B.Handing over the accepted products to the
       appropriate parties, such as the customer or the
       sponsor
     C.Closing all the contracts associated with the
       procurement
     D. Archiving lessons-learned documents
11. You are in the process of closing the Stem Cells Are Us
    project. Which of the following is not an output of the
    Close Project or Phase process?
     A. Lessons learned archived
     B. Products handed over to costumers
     C. Closed procurement contracts
     D. Final project report written
500   Chapter 12 | Project Procurement Management


          12. Which of the following is the correct order of performing
              processes?
               A.Validate Scope, Quality Control, Close Project or
                 Phase
               B.Quality Control, Validate Scope, Close Project or
                 Phase
               C.Validate Scope, Close Project or Phase, Control
                 Procurements
               D.Quality Control, Close Project or Phase, Control
                 Procurements
               E.   Close Project or Phase, Validate Scope
          13. The seller proposals, an input item for Conduct
              Procurements, is created during which process?
               A. Conduct Procurements
               B. Plan Procurements
               C. Control Procurements
               D. Close Procurements
                                                                        APPENDIX


                                                                           A

Answers to Study
Checkpoint
Exercises
Chapter 1
                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.1

   Identify each of the following items as a project or an operation.
       A.   A librarian performing her daily job responsibilities
       B.   A bookseller processing customer orders
       C.   A network administrator ensuring that the network stays up and
            running 24/7
       D.   Taking a course in molecular biology

   Answers: A, B, and C are examples of operations: ongoing and repetitive efforts. D
   is a project with a definitive amount of effort (a beginning and an end) and a unique
   product or result, such as grades.


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2
502   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.2

        What is the core difference between knowledge areas and process groups? Try to
        answer this question in one sentence.
        Answer: Knowledge areas are disciplines of management that represent management
        knowledge of a certain topic, such as cost and time, whereas process groups are about
        the application of that knowledge--that is, where and when to apply that knowledge;
        for example, during initiating or during planning, and so on.
        Okay, that was a long sentence. Here is the short answer: Knowledge areas are about
        knowledge of project management topics, and process groups are about applying that
        knowledge.


                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.3

        In the following table, match each item in the first column with a corresponding item
        in the second column:

        Knowledge Area Action
        A. Message          1. While developing the schedule, Lora realized that there was
                               a risk involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts into a
                               note that she wrote on her computer.
        B. Scope            2. Manage interdependencies among different processes
                               belonging to different knowledge areas.
        C. Cost             3. Ensure the project includes the work required to complete
                               the project successfully and no extra work.
        D. Schedule         4. Plan the schedule and complete the project within the
                               planned schedule.
        E. Quality          5. Plan the budget, track what you are spending, and complete
                               the project within budget.
        F. Risk             6. Ensure that you develop the right product that will satisfy
                               the needs for which the project is undertaken.
        G. Procurement      7. Obtain the team to do the project work and lead and
                               motivate the team to keep working in the right direction in
                               an efficient and effective way.
        H. Resources        8. Generate and distribute the required project information to the
                               right stakeholders at the right time by using the right method.
        I. Communication    9. Plan for uncertain events that could happen and deal with
                               them when they do happen in such a way that possible
                               benefit is maximized and damage is minimized.
        J. Integration     10. Identify the project work that needs to be contracted out of
                               the performing organization and contract it out.
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth    503



Answers:

   A.     1
   B.     3
   C.     5
   D.     4
   E.     6
   F.     9
   G.     10
   H.     7
   I.     8
   J.     2



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.4

Match each item in the first column of the following table with one or more suitable
items in the second column.

        Entity           May Contain
        A. Project       1. Operations
        B. Program       2. Projects
        C. Portfolio     3. Programs
                         4. Portfolios
                         5. Activities to create a well-defined unique product


Answers:
   A.     5
   B.     2, 3
   C.     1, 2, 3, 4
504   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                                   STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.5

          You are about to throw a quarter and a dime several times. What is the probability of
          the following happening?
                A.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try.
                B.   The dime will land tails up on the first try.
                C.   The quarter will land heads up and the dime will land tails up on
                     the first try.
                D.   Both the quarter and the dime will land heads up on the first try.
                E.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try and also heads up
                     on the second try.
          Answers: The quarter has a probability of 0.5 to land either way: heads up or tails up.
          The same is true for the dime.
          Considering that, the answers to A and B are 0.5, and the answers to C, D, and E are
          0.25 (0.5 X 0.5 = 0.25).


                                   STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.6

          In the following table, match each item in the first column to the corresponding item
          in the second column.

      Project Variable                Value
      A. Level of staff               1. Highest in the beginning and end of the project and lowest
                                         when the project is being executed
      B. Risk                         2. Highest in the beginning and decreases as the project progresses
      C. Ability to influence the    3. Low in the beginning, maximum when the project is being
         characteristics of the         executed
         project product without
         significantly impacting the
         project cost
      D. Cost                         4. Uniform throughout the project


          Answers:
                A.   3
                B.   2
                C.   2
                D.   3
                                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth       505




Chapter 2
                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.1

    Q1. From the organization's perspective, what is the core difference between
    enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets?
    Q2. In the following table, match each item in the first column to items in the second
    column.

Factor and Asset Categories      Factor or Asset Examples
Internal factor                  A. Company's email system
                                 B. Check list
External factor                  C. City laws where company is
Processes and procedures         D. Configuration management system
                                 E. An approved external provider
Knowledge databases              F. Commercial risk database
                                 G. Interest rate
                                 H. Configuration repository from past projects of the
                                    company.


    Q1 Answer: Enterprise environmental factors are about how the performing
    organization does its business, whereas organizational process assets are about how
    the organization runs its projects.
    Explanation: Enterprise environmental factors are the factors of the overall
    environment in which the organization is operating and doing its business.
    Organizational process assets are the process-related assets, and the projects are
    made of processes; therefore, the organizational process assets speak more to how
    the organization performs its projects.
    Q2 Answer: Internal factor: A, E, D; External factor: C, F, G; Processes and procedures:
    B; Knowledge databases: H
    Explanation: Note that a configuration management system (D) is software used in
    the company, so it's an internal factor, and the configuration repository from past
    projects of the company (H) belongs to company's knowledge databases.
506   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.2

        You have been offered a Project B that will earn you a profit of $100,000 in three
        months. You already have an offer of a Project A that will earn you a profit of $70,000
        in three months. You can only do one project during these three months, and the
        project requesters are unable to move the project durations.
        Q1. What is the opportunity cost of Project A?
        Q2. What is the opportunity cost of Project B?
        Q3. Just based on the opportunity cost, which project will you select?
        Q4. Describe what can change your decision based just on the opportunity cost.
        Answers:
        A1. $100,000, because this is the opportunity that you are missing when you take on
        Project A.
        A2. $70,000, because this is the opportunity that you are missing when you take on
        Project B.
        A3. Project B will be selected because it has a smaller opportunity cost.
        A4. Opportunity cost is only one of several criteria that are used to select projects.
        It may be that some other criteria, such as a scoring model, will produce different
        results. You have to see which method is more relevant for your case.




      Chapter 3
                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.1

        Q1. True or false: It is the responsibility of the project manager to develop the project
        charter.
        Q2. True or false: A project charter is a contract between the performing entity and the
        entity for which it's being performed.
        Q3. Which process project document interfaces the project with the organization's
        strategy?
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth       507



Answers:
A1. False. The project manager officially does not even exist when the Develop
Project Charter process is started. That said, it's quite possible that a potential project
manager may be asked to put together the project charter, or a specific project
manager assignment may be part of a bid or a proposal.
A2. False. Project charter is not a contract--e.g.; no money is involved.
A3. Project charter



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.2

Q1. The performance of a project is measured against which planning element?
Q2. Can you name four baselines?
Answers:
A1. Performance baseline
A2. Scope baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline, and performance baseline



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.3

Q1. Many processes in the monitoring and controlling process group generate change
requests. Name the process in this process group that is used to approve or reject the
change requests.
Q2. Name the processes and other sources that can generate the change requests.
Answers:
A1. Perform Integrated Change Control
A2. Direct and Manage Project Work process, Monitor and Control Project Work
process, other processes in the monitor and control process group, and directly from
stakeholders.
508   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.4

        Q1. Name the processes used to generate:
           a.   Lessons learned register
           b.   Lessons learned
        Q2. For what do we need data analysis during the Close Project process?
        Answers:
        A1a. Manage Project Knowledge
        A1b. Manage Project Knowledge, Close Project or Phase
        A2. Data-analysis techniques could be used to analyze the documents, prepare final
        report, and learn lessons.



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.5

        Q1. What is the first process you perform in managing a project?
        Q2. What do you need before you can begin initiating your project?
        Answers:
        A1. Develop Project Charter
        A2. The input to the Develop Project Charter process: business case, project benefit
        plan, and necessary agreements



      Chapter 4
                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.1

        Among the following attributes, identify which are part of product scope and which are
        part of the project scope, according to PMBOK.
           A.   Develop software modules to support website.
           B.   The user can only access this website after logging in.
           C.   The drug should not have more than two side effects.
                                                                 CAPM(R) in Depth     509



    D.   The drug must be developed within one year.
    E.   The drug must be tested in-house before it goes to the Food and
         Drug Administration.

Answers:
Project scope: A, D, E
Product scope: B, C




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.2

Make lists of enterprise environment factors and organizational process assets that
can influence the Collect Requirements process.
Answers:
Enterprise environment factors:
Internal: Culture, infrastructure, personnel administration
External: Marking condition, legal restrictions
Organizational process assets: Policies and procedures, organizational and industry
standards, knowledge database




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.3

Assuming that the online learning system in Figure 4-2 is managed by a company
with its own teachers:
    Q1. Name internal actors
    Q2. Name external actors
Answers:
    A1. Internal actors: teachers and administration
    A2. External actors: students and payment system
510   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.4

         In the following table, match each item in the first column with an appropriate item in
         the second column:

      A. The software product must run on both Microsoft     1. Project deliverable
         Windows and Apple Macintosh.
      B. An online education website                         2. Project constraint
      C. The drug must be developed within six months.       3. Product requirement
      D. The software module must not have more than         4. Project management requirement
         10 bugs.
      E. Project manager must have a PMP certification.      5. Product acceptance criteria


         Answers:
             A.   3
             B.   1
             C.   2
             D.   5
             E.   4



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.5
             Q1. What is the difference between management control point and
                 control account?
             Q2. What is the difference between control account and code of
                 account?

         Answers:
             A1. A management control point is a control account.
             A2. A code of account is a unique identifier of a work package, and
                 a control account contains one or more work packages--i.e.,
                 codes of account--in it.
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth   511




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.6
   Q1. List some of the organizational process assets that will influence
       the Control Scope process.
   Q2. Why do you need a lessons learned register in the input of the
       Control Scope process?

Answers:
   A1.
   1.   Policies, procedures, and guidelines related to controlling scope
        and changes
   2.   Templates for work performance information
   3.   Knowledge database of monitoring, controlling, and reporting
        methods used for previous projects
   A2. Lessons learned can be recorded and subsequently applied as
       the project progresses, and to record the lessons learned from
       the overall project.



                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.7
   Q1. The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are used
       to validate scope. Where are they in Table 4-7?
   Q2. The Verify Scope process belongs to which process group?
   Q3. From Table 4-7, you know that project documents requirement
       documentation, requirement traceability matrix, and lessons
       learned register are updated during the Validate Scope process.
       Using your knowledge about these documents, what do you think
       they are updated with in the process?
   Q4. Which process will be performed first: quality control or validate
       scope?

Answers:
   A1. The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are part
       of scope baseline listed in Table 4-7.
   A2. The Verify Scope process belongs to the monitoring and
       controlling process group.
512   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


           A3. Document updated:
           1.   Requirement documentation with validation status such as
                validated, not validated, requirement waved, and this feature is
                even than required.
           2.   Requirement traceability matrix with validation status and
                procedures or methods used in validation.
           3.   Lessons learned register with lessons learned, such as
                mistakes made and how to avoid them, and which validation
                methods worked well and which did not. These lessons may be
                applied the next time the process is run.
           A4. The deliverables must be verified using the Control Quality
               process before they can be processed through the Validate Scope
               process. So, quality control is usually performed before validate
               scope, but they can be performed simultaneously as well.




      Chapter 5
                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.1
           Q1. Using your knowledge of enterprise environmental factors and
               the plan schedule management process, make a list of EEFs that
               would influence this process.
           Q2. Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the
               plan schedule management process, make a list of OPAs that
               would influence this process.
        Answers:
           A1. EEFs: Organizational structure and culture; available resources
               and skills; commercial database--e.g.; standard estimate data;
               scheduling software tools; and organization's standards or
               guidelines for tailing the standard schedule-related processes.
           A2. OPAs: Schedule-related organizational policies, procedures,
               forms and templates, monitoring and reporting tools, and lessons
               learned database from previous projects.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth       513




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.2

Q1. What is the most common logical relationship used in schedule network diagrams?
Q2. What is the least common logical relationship used in schedule network diagrams?
Q3. Make a list of EEFs and OPAs that could influence the process of scheduling
activities.
Answers:
A1. Finish to start; i.e., the successor activity cannot be started until the predecessor
activity has already been completed.
A2. Start to finish; i.e., the successor activity cannot be completed until the predecessor
activity has already been initiated.
A3.
EEFs: Government and industry standards, organization's work authorization system,
project management information system (PMIS)
OPAs: Related program and portfolio plans; activity-related organizational policies,
procedures, and templates, etc.; and lessons learned database from previous projects




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.3
      Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of estimating
          activity durations.
      Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of estimating
          activity durations.
Answers:
      A1. EEFs: Examples of enterprise environmental factors are some
          databases that contain the reference data relevant to the activity
          duration--for instance, how long it takes for a specific government
          agency to respond to a request. Published commercial information
          and metrics to measure productivity can also be helpful in duration
          estimates. The location of team members may also matter; e.g.;
          due to different local conditions or systems.

      A2. OPAs: Organizational process assets that may influence this
          process include estimating policies; those that are useful in
          estimating activity duration include information from previous
          projects and a calendar of working days and non-working days.
514   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.4

        In the program evaluation and review technique (PERT), the most-likely scenario is
        given a weight of 4 as compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and
        optimistic scenarios. The pessimistic estimate for an activity is 20 days, the optimistic
        estimate is 10 days, and the most-likely estimate is 15 days. Calculate the expected
        estimate using the PERT technique.
        Answer:
        te = (ntm+to+tp)/(n+2)
          = (4X15+10+20)/(4+2)
          = 90/6 = 15 days




                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.5
            Q1. Describe how assumptions and constraints--e.g.; in the project
                scope statement--can affect the schedule and what you can do
                about it.
            Q2. List EEFs and OPAs that can influence the process of schedule
                development.
        Answers:
        A1. The assumptions and constraints in the project scope statement can affect the
        project schedule and therefore must be considered in developing the schedule. The
        following two types of time- and hence schedule-related constraints should get
        special attention.
            *     Hard deadlines on start and finish dates. Some activities
                  might have constraints on their start or finish dates. For example,
                  there might be a situation in which an activity cannot be started
                  before a certain date, or must be finished before a certain date,
                  or both. Where do these date constraints come from? They can
                  come from various sources, such as a date in the contract, a date
                  determined by the market window, delivery of material from an
                  external vendor, and the like.
            *     Time constraints on deliverables. These constraints can come
                  from the customer, the sponsor, or any other stakeholder in terms
                  of deadlines for certain major deliverables or milestones. Other
                  projects inside or outside your organization might be depending
                  on these constraints. So, once scheduled, these deadlines are
                  constraints and can only be changed through the approval process.
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth       515



   Both assumptions and constraints lead to schedule risk that can be mitigated by
   applying a contingency reserve in the schedule.
   A2.
   EEFs: Communication channel, e.g.; e-mails and video conferences; scheduling
   schedule software; and government and industry standards
   OPAs: Organizational scheduling methodology or any other schedule-related policy
   and procedure, project calendars, schedule-related information from previous
   projects, and a calendar of working days and non-working days.




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.6

   Lora Nirvana is the project manager for the Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB)
   project. Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item
   in the second column.

Output of the Develop Schedule Process        Description
A. Schedule data                              1.A bar chart that includes all the
                                                activities of the project and also includes
                                                milestones. Lora points out this bar chart
                                                to the project sponsor to show where
                                                they are in the execution of the project.
B. Project document updates                   2.A bar chart hanging on the calendar that
                                                has never changed once it was approved.
                                                Lora compares the current bar chart to
                                                this bar chart to show the progress.
C. Schedule                                   3.On a bar chart, Lora points to the dates
                                                when she will have the DNA sample
                                                isolated and purified, when she will get
                                                the DNA sample run through the genetic
                                                analyzer, when she will receive the results
                                                from the analyzer, and when the results
                                                will be published on the Internet.
D. Schedule baseline                          4.After realizing that their chosen vendor
                                                has a track record of sending the DNA
                                                analysis kits late, Lora writes something
                                                into the risk register.
516   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answers:
           A.   3
           B.   4
           C.   1
           D.   2



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.7
           Q1. Use your knowledge about the lessons learned register to figure
               out why we need it as input to the control schedule process.
           Q2. Knowing the schedule control process, make a list of
               organizational process assets that will influence this process.
        Answers:
           A1. We need the lessons learned register to record the lessons learned
               and subsequently apply them through the project lifetime.
           A2. Schedule control-related organizational policies, procedures,
               and guidelines; tools; monitoring and reporting methods; and the
               lessons learned from the historical database, such as:
                *   The causes of schedule variance
                *   The reasons for choosing the corrective actions that were
                    taken
                *   The effectiveness of the corrective actions



      Chapter 6
                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.1

        Use your knowledge of the Plan Resource Management process to answer to following
        questions:
        Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the Plan Resource Management process.
        Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the Plan Resource Management process.
        Q3. How can the assumptions log and risk register project documents be updated as
        a result of this process?
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth      517



Answers:
The assumptions and constraints in the project scope statement can affect the project
schedule and therefore must be considered in developing the schedule. The following
two types of time- and hence schedule-related constraints should get special
attentions.
Q1. Organizational culture and structure, team and physical resources available within
organization, locations of available resources and facilities, and market conditions;
e.g.; job market to hire the talent and physical resources
Q2. Organizational human and physical resources, policies and procedures, safety
and security policies, template that can be used for resource management planning,
and lessons learned and other historical information regarding resource management
planning.
Q3. Assumptions log will be updated with changed and new assumptions regarding
team and physical resources; e.g.; locations, availability, and requirements. Risk
register can be updated with known risks about team and physical resources.




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.2

Use your knowledge of the Acquire Resources process to answer the following
questions:
   Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the process of acquiring
       resources.
   Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the process of acquiring
       resources.
   Q3. How are the documents listed for update in the output column of
       Table 6-6 updated?
Answers:
   A1. Organizational culture and structure; market conditions, e.g.;
       job market to hire the talent and physical resources; and
       organization's existing physical and human resources with
       following information:
        *    Geographical locations
        *    Availability. It is important to know whether and when the
             candidate is available before you attempt to obtain that
             member.
        *    Competency. Does the candidate have the skills needed to
             complete the schedule activities?
518   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


               *    Experience. Has the candidate performed similar work well
                    in the past?
               *    Interests. What is the candidate's interest level in this project
                    and in the work that will be assigned to him or her?
               *    Cost. What is the cost attached to each candidate in terms
                    of pay? This is even more important if the member is a
                    contractor.
           A2. Organizational policies and procedures about acquiring, selecting,
               and assigning human and physical resources; templates and
               forms; and lessons learned and other historical information.

           A3. Document                      Update Reasons
               Resource management plan Record your experience of obtaining
                                        and selecting resources: which technique
                                        works the best, etc.
               Cost baseline                 In actually acquiring and assigning
                                             resources, cost and hence cost baseline
                                             may change.
               Project schedule              May change due to conditions like an or
                                             some activities took longer to finish, or
                                             the resource availability, etc.
               Resource requirements         May change due to change in resource
                                             requirements, need for new or different
                                             resources, etc.
               Resource breakdown            Obtained and assigned resources need
               structure (RBS)               to go into RBS.
               Stakeholder register          During this process, new stakeholders
                                             will be joining, and information about
                                             some old stakeholders may change.
               Risk register                 New resources, new assignments bring
                                             new risks with them.
               Lessons learned register      Record your experience of obtaining
                                             and selecting resources: which technique
                                             works the best, etc.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth   519




                            STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.3

    Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a conflict-resolution
    strategy. Match each comment with the corresponding strategy in the second column.

Comment                                           Conflict-Resolution Technique
A.Let's have a face-to-face meeting and hear 1. Avoidance/withdrawal
  out both parties.
B.Both of you have to meet halfway; you           2. Competition/forcing
  can't get everything all the time.
C.I'm the one who is running the show             3. Compromising/smoothing
  here, and I have made the decision.
D.OK, I see your point now. I was thinking        4. Accommodation
  more at personal level, but your view
  is more compatible with the project's
  objectives. I guess for that reason I can
  live with your approach.
E. Y
    ou guys are not even listening to my          5. Collaboration
   argument. I feel I'm wasting my time. So,
   I'm not going to discuss it with you any
   longer.
F. L et's sit down, talk it out, and design the   6. Confronting/problem solving
    best solution that is good for all parties.



    Answers:
       A. 6
        B.    3
        C.    2
        D.    4
        E.    1
        F.    5
520   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.4

          Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a management
          theory in the second column. Match each comment with the corresponding theory in
          the second column.

      Scenario                                                        Motivation Theory
      A. The management is real nice to the employees and there 1. Maslow's Hierarchy of
         are lots of perks. But I'm more concerned about my        Needs Theory
         career path once I join this company.
      B. Engineering manager Bob has a habit that employees           2. Herzberg's Motivation-
         don't like. Every time he passes by a cubicle of an             Hygiene Theory
         employee, he peeps at the computer screen over the
         shoulders of the employee to see what the employee is
         really doing on the computer.
      C. Rachel Janowicz quit her project management job with      3. McClelland's Achievement
         the Gugu Gaga company immediately after winning the          Motivation Theory
         California super lotto. She said, "Well, my money problem
         is solved. Now I will do what I always wanted to do. "
      D. I'm not going to attend this seminar. Basically, I'll be     4. McGregor's X-Y Theory
         listening to their pitches all day long. What are the odds
         that I'll win the door prize?
      E. Kushal did not really like the assignment. But he did it 5. Expectancy Theory
         anyway because he did not want to let his manager down.



          Answers:
              A.   2
              B.   4
              C.   1
              D.   5
              E.   3
                                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth       521




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.5

 Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the Control Resources
 process, answer the following questions:
     Q1. Make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.
     Q2. How should the assumptions log and risk register be updated as
         a result of the Control Resources process?
 Answers:
     A1. OPAs: Organizational policies and procedures related to
         controlling resources and resources assignment, and escalation
         of the issues; lessons learned repository database from previous
         projects.
     A2. Assumptions log. Updated with changed or new assumptions about
         physical resources; e.g.; how costly, efficient, and effective are.
          Risk register. Updated with disappeared risk, changed risk levels,
          and new risks regarding the physical resource quality, price,
          availability, usage, etc.




Chapter 7
                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.1

 Problem: An activity cost estimate goes like this: It will take 20 hours of a programmer's
 time to write this program. The average rate to hire a programmer is $50 per hour.
 Therefore, the cost of writing this program, assuming that everything else needed to
 write the program, such as a computer, is in place, is 20 x $50 = $1,000.
 What kind of estimation technique is at work here?
 Answer: Parametric estimation
522   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.2

        The pessimistic cost estimate for an activity is $5,000, the optimistic estimate is
        $3,000, and the most-likely estimate is $4,000. Calculate the expected estimate by
        using the PERT technique, where the most-likely scenario is given a weight of 4 as
        compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios.
        Answer:
        Ce = (nCm + Co + Cp) / (n + 2)
          = (4 X 4000 + 3000 + 5000) / (4 + 2)
          = 24,000 / 6 = 4,000
        Expected cost estimate = $4,000



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.3

        In our running example, calculate the ETC at the present CPI.
        Answer:
                 BAC - EV $600,000 - $150,000
         ETC =           =                    = $375.000
                   CPI           1.2
        Note: CPI was calculated as 1.2 in our running example, earlier in Chapter 7.




                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.4

        Prove the validity of the following equation:
        EAC = AC + BAC - EV
        Answer:
        The definition of EAC:
        EAC = AC + ETC (1)
        The definition of ETC:
        ETC = BAC - EV (2)
        Substitute the value of ETC from Equation (2) into Equation (1) to obtain:
        EAC = AC + BAC - EV
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth    523




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.5

 In our running example, calculate the EAC at the present CPI.
 Answer:

                  BAC - EV              $600,000 - $150,000
    EAC = AC +             = $125.000 +                     = $500.000
                    CPI                        1.2


                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.6

 In our running example, calculate the EAC at the present CPI and SPI.
 Answer:

                  BAC - EV              $600,000 - $150,000
    EAC = AC +             = $125.000 +                     = $6225.000
                  CPI  SPI                   1.2 * 0.75

 Note: SPI is calculated to be 0.75 in our running example from earlier in Chapter 7.




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.7

 Q. Name three processes that convert the work performance data into work
 performance measurements.
 Answer:
 A. Control Scope, Control Schedule, and Control Cost



Chapter 8
                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.1

 Knowing the Identify Stakeholder process, answer the following:
    Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the Identify Stakeholders
        process.
    Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the Identify Stakeholders
        process.
524   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answers:
           A1. Examples of enterprise environmental factors that help identify
               stakeholders include governmental and industry standards,
               geographical distribution of facilities and resources, external local
               culture and trends, organizational cultures, and organizational
               structure. It's important to understand the organization's culture
               and structure in order to identify some stakeholders and their
               possible impact on the project, because different people will have
               different levels of authority and influence under different cultures
               and structures, as discussed in Chapter 2.
           A2. The stakeholder register templates and the stakeholder registers
               from previous projects can be useful to create the stakeholder
               registers for the project at hand. Another example of the
               organizational process assets helpful in identifying stakeholders
               is the lessons learned from previous projects. For instance,
               perhaps you learned from a previous project how you ignored a
               negative stakeholder, which caused great damage to the project.


                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.2

        Knowing the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
           Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the Manage Stakeholder
               Engagement process.
           Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the Manage Stakeholder
               Engagement process.

        Answers:
           A1. Include geographical distribution of facilities and resources;
               communication channels; external local culture and trends;
               organizational cultures, structure, political environment, and
               personnel policy.
           A2. Include the organizational policies and procedures about medial,
               ethics, security, risk, communications, change management, etc.
               For effective, efficient stakeholder engagement management,
               it's important to learn from experience. Therefore, the lessons
               learned database and historical information are especially useful.
                                                                  CAPM(R) in Depth      525




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.3

True or False: A stakeholder is proposing something that is not within the planned
scope of the project. The appropriate response to this proposal is to oppose it.
Answer: False. A project manager is not a de facto opponent to change; instead, you
should be an agent for change. Your response should be to evaluate the change for its
effects on the project and then put it through the approval process, where it may be
either rejected or selected.




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.4

Knowing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
   Q1. How will the stakeholder register and risk register be updated as
       a result of this process?
   Q2. How will the stakeholder engagement plan, communications
       management plan, and resource management plan be updated
       as a result of this process?

Answers:
   A1. The stakeholder register will be updated with any change in
       stakeholder information such as assessment or classification;
       and the risk register will be updated with changed risk status as
       a result of change request implementation.
   A2. The stakeholders' engagement plan may be updated with
       changes in engagement strategy, and accordingly the
       communications management plan will be updated with change
       in communication strategies, and the resource management
       plan with change in team members' responsibilities regarding
       the stakeholder engagement.
526   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


      Chapter 9
                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.1

        Saira Bano is the project manager for the Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project.
        Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item in the
        second column.

        Term               Action
        A. Message         1. While developing the schedule, Saira realized that there was
                              a risk involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts into a
                              note that she wrote on her computer.
        B. Medium          2. She sent the note to the project sponsor.
        C. Encode          3. She used e-mail to send the message.
        D. Noise           4. The sponsor received the message.
        E. Receiver        5. The sponsor could not understand some of the acronyms
                              and terms in the e-mail message, such as variable number of
                              tandem repeats (VNTR), central dogma of molecular biology.
        F. Feedback        6. The sponsor responded to Saira, expressing his concern that
                              he could not exactly understand her concerns.



        Answers:
           A. 2
           B.      3
           C.      1
           D.      5
           E.      4
           F.      6
                                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth       527




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.2

Knowing the Plan Communication Management process, answer the following:
    Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
    Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
    Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of
        Figure 9-2 will be updated.

Answers:
As you are planning to communicate with project stakeholders, the EEFs and OPAs
that influence this process are very similar to those that influence the Plan Stakeholder
Engagement process.
    A1. Examples of enterprise environmental factors that will influence
        this process include geographical distribution of facilities and
        resources; communication channels and tools; external local
        culture and trends; organizational cultures, structure, political
        environment, personnel policy, and risk threshold.
    A2. Examples of organizational process assets include the
        organizational policies and procedures about medial, ethics,
        security, risk, communications, change data management, etc.;
        as well as guidelines to develop, store, retrieve, and distribute
        information. For effective, efficient stakeholder communication,
        it's important to learn from experience. Therefore, the lessons
        learned database and historical information are especially useful.
    A3. The components of the project management plan can be updated
        with communication planning-related changes, such as the
        communication management plan and stakeholder engagement
        plan. Communication activities may result in changes in project
        schedule, and changes in communication planning may result
        in the need to make changes in stakeholder register; e.g.;
        requirements of a stakeholder have changed.
528   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.3
             Q1. Knowing the Manage Communication process, how do you think
                 documents listed for update in Table 9-3 would be updated?
             Q2. Why do you need the project stakeholder engagement plan for
                 performing the manage communication process?

         Answers:
             A1. Communications management plan would be updated due
                 to change in communication approach, and stakeholder
                 engagement plan due to changes in communication strategies
                 or requirements. Accommodating communication activities may
                 change the project schedule. Arising communication issues and
                 risks will generate the need to update issues log and risk register.
                  You will also be updating the lessons learned register with
                  lessons learned from performing this process to subsequently
                  use it to perform this process more effectively and efficiently.
             A2. Because the project stakeholder engagement plan describes
                 how to use stakeholder communication strategies to engage the
                 stakeholder with the project.



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.4

         In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
         second column in the context of its role in communication management.

      Item                                   Role
      A. Work performance data               1. Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
      B. Work performance information        2. Output of Monitor Communication
      C. Work performance reports            3. Output of Monitor and Control Project Work
      D. Project communications              4. Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
                                             5. Input to Monitor Communication
                                             6. Input to Manage Communication
                                             7. Output of Manage Communication
                                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth      529



 Answers:
    A.   4, 5
    B.   1, 2
    C.   3, 6
    D.   5, 7



Chapter 10
                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.1

 You are trying out a Monte Carlo simulation program that estimates the value of a
 parameter by using some random variables. You know through the data that the exact
 value should be 40. You ran the program three times, and it gave you three values: 50,
 51, and 52. Based on these values, answer the following questions:
    Q1. How precise is the program in making the estimates?
    Q2. How accurate are the estimates?
    Q3. Are the values generated by the program more accurate or more
        precise?

 Answers:
    A1. The program is quite precise because the values 50, 51, and 52
        are very close to each other.
                              Average value = 51
                % uncertainty = [(52-50)/51] X 100% = 3.9%
    A2. The estimates are far away from the true value, and therefore
        accuracy is not very good.
         Average % deviation = [(51-40)/40] X 100% = 27.5%
    A3. Comparing the errors in Parts A and B, the results are more
        precise and less accurate.
530   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.2

        Knowing the Plan Quality Management process, answer the following:
           Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
           Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
           Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of
               Figure 10-2 will be updated.

        Answers:
        As you are planning to communicate with project stakeholders, the EEF and OPA that
        influence this process are very similar to those that influences the plan stakeholder
        engagement process.
           A1. Examples of enterprise environmental factors that will influence
               this process include organizational structure; government
               agencies' regulations; rules, guidelines, and standards of the
               project's application area; geographical distribution of facilities
               and resources; inside and outside culture; market conditions;
               working and operational conditions of project and its deliverables.
           A2. Organizational process assets include the organizational quality
               management system including policies, procedures, guidelines;
               quality templates including traceability matrix and check sheets;
               and quality-related lessons learned from historical database.
           A3. Risk management plan may need to be updated because quality
               management approach might cause changes in approach to
               risk management. The addition of quality requirements to WBS
               dictionary will change project scope baseline, and addition of
               quality requirements will also update require traceability matrix.
                As usual, lessons learned register is updated with lessons learned,
                in this case lessons related to quality planning, to be used in
                the next process run. New risks discovered will update the risk
                register. Stakeholder register is updated with new information
                found during this process about new and existing stakeholders.
                                                                   CAPM(R) in Depth   531




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.3

Name the processes that will use quality reports as input.
Answer: Monitor and Control Project Work, Close Project or Phase, Validate Scope,
Manage Communications, Control Procurements




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.4

Knowing the Manage Quality process, answer the following:
   Q1. List the organizational process assets that can influence this
       process.
   Q2. Which component or components of the project management
       plan, out of the ones listed in the output column of Table 10-3,
       will need to be modified as a result of quality activities?
   Q3. Which component or components of the project management
       plan, out of the ones listed in the output column of Table 10-3,
       will need to be modified as a result of actual results from project
       execution?

Answers:
   A1. Organizational process assets include the organizational quality
       management system, including policies, procedures, guidelines;
       quality templates including traceability matrix and check sheets;
       results from previous audits; and quality-related lessons learned
       from historical database.
   A2. Scope baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline
   A3. Approach to managing quality in quality management plan



                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.5
   Q1. Which quality process generates quality control measurements?
   Q2. Which quality process uses quality control measurements?
   Q3. Which quality process generates quality metrics?
   Q4. Which quality process uses quality metrics?
532   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


          Answers:
              A1. Control Quality
              A2. Manage Quality
              A3. Plan Quality
              A4. Manage Quality and Control Quality



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.6

          Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
          column.

      Data presentation tool           A Use
      A. Flowchart                     1. To identify the most important area of causes of defects
      B. Tally sheets                  2. To find the relationship between two variables, and find
                                          potential causes of defects
      C. Scatter diagram               3. To anticipate what quality problems might be and where
                                          they might occur
      D. Histogram                     4. To monitor whether the variance of a specified variable
                                          is within the acceptable limits.
      E. Affinity diagrams             5. To find frequency of defects
      F. Control chart                 6. To explore all the potential causes of a problem, not just
                                          the obvious ones
      G. Cause and effect diagram      7. To display the relative importance of different variables,
                                          e.g.; is causes



          Answers:
              A:     3
              B:     5
              C:     2
              D:     7
              E:     1
              F:     4
              G:     6
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth    533




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.7

    Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
    column. An item in first column may match with more than one items in second
    column and vice versa.

Item                                          Appears In
A. Quality metrics                            1. Input to plan quality management
B. Quality control measurements               2. Input to plan quality
C. Quality report                             3. Input to control quality
D. Test and evaluation documents              4. Output of plan quality management
E. Approved change requests                   5. Output of manage quality
F. Work performance data                      6. Output of control quality
G. Deliverables                               7. Input to monitor and control project work
H.Verified deliverables                       8. Output of perform integrated change
I. Work performance information                  control
J. Change requests                            9. Output of direct and manage project work
                                              10. Monitor and control project work


    Answers:
        A:   2, 3, 4
        B:   2, 6
        C:   5, 10
        D:   3, 5
        E:   3, 8
        F:   3, 9
        G:   3
        H:   6
        I:   6, 7
        J:   5, 6
534   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


      Chapter 11
                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.1

         Problem: Knowing the Identify Risks process, make lists of some EEFs and OPAs that
         can influence this process.
         Answers:
         EEFs: The environmental factors internal or external to the performing organization that
         can influence the project must be considered in the risk identification process. This
         might include academic and industry studies, published information, benchmarking,
         and commercial databases.
         OPAs: This might include risk-related information from previous projects (the
         knowledge base) including lessons learned, process controls, and risk-related
         templates and checklists.




                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.2

         Problem: Perform an EMV analysis of the decision tree presented in Figure 11-3 to
         make a decision about which option to take.
         Answer:

      Option      Initial Cost    Risk Cost     Probability      EMV for Risk Cost      Total Cost
      Update      $50,000         $200,000      40%              0.40 X $200,000 =      $50,000 +
                                                                 $80,000                $80,000 =
                                                                                        $130,000
      Build from $70,000          $200,000      10%              0.10 X $200,000 =      $70,000 +
      scratch                                                    $20,000                $20,000 =
                                                                                        $90,000


         So, building from scratch is a better option because total cost is less.
                                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth   535




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.3

    You are the project manager of a movie project. The first column lists some actions
    you are taking to deal with risks. Match each item in the first column to one item in
    the second column of this table.

Action                                                              Risk Response Type
A.One of the scenes is to be shot in a country that has       1. Avoid
  enormous bureaucracy and red tape. They possibly can create
  roadblocks and make it difficult for you. There is nothing
  much you can do about it.
B. T
    he jungle where you are going to shoot a few scenes is       2. Accept
   a wetland and very hot and humid, and the probability of
   damage happening to the equipment is very high. So, you have
   decided to buy insurance to protect you against this possible
   damage.
C. Y
    ou have learned that during certain parts of the year, the      3. Exploit
   locals hunt in the jungle in large numbers. So, you have
   decided not to do the shoot during that part of the year.
    lthough the movie does not depend on it, it will add a lot of 4. Share
D. A
   marketing value to the movie if your cameras could capture
   an endangered species of bird that lives in the jungle.You are
   choosing the time of year for shooting and taking some other
   actions to increase the probability that the birds will show up.
E. T
    he movie has something to do with Thanksgiving Day.You          5. Mitigate
   have allotted some extra resources to ensure that the movie
   is completed in a timely manner for a release on Thanksgiving
   Day.
F. Y
    ou have learned that there could be mosquitoes in the area      6. Enhance
   where you are going to shoot. So, you have planned to take
   plenty of mosquito repellant and other products to prevent
   mosquito bites.
G. Y
    ou know of another movie team that's going to shoot some        7. Transfer
   scenes in the same jungle at a different time of year.You have
   signed a contract with them to share or trade shots of the
   endangered bird species.
536   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answers:
           A.   2
           B.   7
           C.   1
           D.   6
           E.   3
           F.   5
           G.   4



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.4

        Q1. Why do you end up updating the assumptions log and lessons learned register
        during the Monitor Risks process?
        Q2. The work performance information, an output item of the Control Risks process,
        is an input to which process?
        Q3. Which other processes generate work performance information?
        Answers:
        A1. Like any other process where you update these two items, during this process too
        new assumptions and constraints may appear and old assumptions and constraints
        may be modified and disappear altogether, giving rise to the need to update the
        assumptions log. The lessons learned register is updated with lessons learned so that
        those lessons can be applied in subsequent runs of the process.
        A2. Monitor and Control Project Work
        A3. Monitor and control processes in all knowledge areas except project integration
        management.
                                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth       537




Chapter 12
                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.1

    Rajinder, the project manager, is now working on procurement planning for a portion
    of the project. She is looking at all the following options for procuring different pieces.
    Match each consideration in the first column with the corresponding contract type in
    the second column of the following table.

Consideration                                    Contract Type
A. Rajinder will pay $3,000 for the use of   1. Fixed price (FP)
   the facility and $5,000 per month for the
   employees working on the procured piece
   for the duration of work. However, there
   is a cap of $50,000 for the maximum cost.
B. Rajinder will pay for the cost of labor and   2. Time and material (T&M)
   a lump sum of $5,000.
C. Rajinder will pay $50,000 to maintain the     3. Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
   website for the project for two years.
D. She will provide $10,000 for developing a     4. Cost plus percentage of cost (CPIF)
   software program and an extra $1,000 if
   fewer than 10 bugs are discovered in the
   program in the first year of its use.



    Answers:
        A.   2
        B.   3
        C.   1
        D.   4
538   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.2

         In the following table, match each item in first column to one or more items in the
         second column.

      Document                             Include or discuss
      A. Procurement management plan       1. Request for information (ROI)
      B. Procurement strategy              2. Delivery methods
      C. Statement of work (SOW)           3. Request for quotation (ROQ)
      D. Bid documents                     4. Integrating procurement with project work
                                           5. Performance data
                                           6. Request for proposal (ROP)
                                           7. Stakeholders' procurement responsibilities
                                           8. Procurement phase management
                                           9. Key procurement activities
                                           10. Contract payment types
                                           11. Performance period
                                           12. Work location


         Answers:
             A:   4, 7, 9
             B:   2, 8, 10
             C:   5, 11, 12
             D:   1, 3, 6



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.3

         Q. True or False: The main goals of the Conduct Procurements process are select the
         sellers, award procurement contracts to them, and obtain the procurement item.
         Answer. False. The main goals of the Conduct Procurements process are to select the
         sellers and award procurement contracts to them. The procurement item is obtained
         in the Control Procurement process.
                                                                  APPENDIX


                                                                           B

Answers and
Explanations for
Chapter Review
Questions
Chapter 1
       1. Answer: D
            D is the correct answer because the defining
            characteristics of a project are that it must be
            temporary (with a start and a finish date) and it must
            produce a unique (new) product.
            A and B are incorrect because it's possible to have a
            project that will involve only one person, and there
            could be a project without an individual called the
            project manager. The only two defining characteristics
            of a project are that it is temporary and unique.

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2
540   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               C is incorrect because an operation can have a plan
               and a budget, too.

           2. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because building a library is
               temporary--that is, it will have a start and a finish
               date, and it will be a new library.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because running a donut
               shop, keeping a network up and running, and running a
               warehouse are all ongoing operations.
           3. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because the names of the
               five process groups are initiating, planning, executing,
               monitoring and controlling, and closing.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because there are no
               process groups with the names of starting, organizing
               and preparing, or implementing.
           4. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because team management
               is not a knowledge area itself; this task is part of the
               knowledge area called resource management.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because these are three of
               ten project management knowledge areas.
           5. Answer: A
               A is the correct and the best answer because the
               project plan is developed starting from the concept
               and going through the project management plan.
               B and C are incorrect because B includes the project
               lifecycle and C is the lifecycle. Progressive elaboration
               does not include the lifecycle of the project; its goal is
               to plan the project. Because the project planning can
               develop (or change) throughout the project lifecycle,
               progressive elaboration can continue through the
               project lifecycle, but does not include the work of the
               lifecycle.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   541



 6. Answer: A
    A is the correct answer because:
    The probability that OTF will deliver = 3/4
    The probability that ST will deliver = 1 - 2/3 = 1/3
    The probability that both will deliver = 3/4 X 1/3 = 1/4
    = 0.25
 7. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because it's a false statement.
    Operations are ongoing and do not have a planned
    closure or end as a project does.
    A, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
    true statements about both projects and operations.
 8. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because it sounds like a group
    of interrelated projects, which would nicely fit into a
    program.
    A is an incorrect answer because a project usually has
    only one project manager.
    C is incorrect because the undertaking is temporary
    and has a set of unique products.
    D is incorrect because a portfolio may contain both
    projects and programs, and this conversation is being
    held at the program level and not at the portfolio level.
 9. Answer: A

    A is the correct answer because adding parental guide
    notices is a legal requirement.
    B is incorrect because adding these notices is primarily
    a legal requirement.
    C and D are incorrect because work has nothing to
    do with product and technology.

10. Answer: A, B, C
    A, B, and C are correct because they list valid project
    management areas.
    D is incorrect because project time management is
    not a valid project management area.
542   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          11. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because no processes have
               been performed in each project.
          12. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because every output is either
               a terminal output or becomes an input to another
               process.
          13. Answer: A
               A, and not others, is the correct answer because
               procurements are conducted using the Conduct
               Procurement process, which belongs to executing
               process group.

      Chapter 2
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the project-oriented
               organization provides the greatest authority, high-to-
               almost full, for the project manager.
               A and C are incorrect because the authority of
               the project manager is none-to-low in a functional
               organization and low-to-high in a matrix organization.
               D is incorrect because the authority of the project
               manager is low-to-moderate in a virtual organization.
           2. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the authority of
               the project manager is none-to-low in a functional
               organization.
               B and C are incorrect because the authority of the
               project manager is high-to-full in a project-oriented
               organization and low-to-high in a matrix organization.
               D is incorrect because the authority of the project
               manager is low-to-moderate in a virtual organization.

           3. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because technical project
               management skills, leadership skills, and strategic and
               business management skills constitute the PMI talent
               triangle.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   543



   A, B, and D are incorrect answers because the "IT
   part of project management skills" is not the same
   as technical project management skills; strategic
   and "business management skills" are more than
   just the knowledge of the business strategy of the
   organization; and knowledge of the IT part of the
   company's business is not the same as having strategic
   and business management skills.
4. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because it belongs to technical
   project management skills and not to strategic and
   business management skills.
5. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because the PMO provides
   high-to-almost full project resource availability for the
   project manager.
   B is incorrect because the hybrid structure doesn't
   provide high-to-almost full project resource availability
   for the project manager.
   C and D are incorrect because the multidivisional and
   organic structures only provide none-to-little project
   resource availability for the project manager.
6. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because a project manager
   is responsible for achieving the project objectives
   regardless of the structure of the organization.
   A, B, and C are incorrect because the authority of
   project managers may vary over structures, but the
   responsibility for meeting the project objectives stays
   with the project manager.
7. Answer: C

   C is the correct answer because environmental
   factors may have positive or negative impacts on the
   project; for example, they may expand or constrain
   project options.
   A and B are incorrect because environmental factors
   may have positive or negative impacts.
544   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               D is incorrect because environmental factors are
               hardly ever neutral--certainly, not all of them. You
               must be aware of them and try to use them for the
               success of the project.

           8. Answer: B, C, D

               B, C, and D are all included in technical project
               management skills.
               A is wrong because technical project management
               means IT-related only.

           9. Answer: A, D
               A and D are correct because the code of conduct of
               the performing organization is an internal factor, and
               so is the geographically distributed virtual team.
               B is incorrect because the code of conduct in a
               country, or city in this case, is an external factor.
               C is incorrect because standardized cost estimate
               data is an external factor; just because it's on or being
               viewed on the company's computer system does not
               change this fact.
          10. Answer: B and C
               The two project management business documents
               are: 1) project business case, and 2) project benefit
               management plan. The summary of need analysis is
               included in the project business case, and the project
               charter is a project management document, but it's
               not called a business document.
          11. Answer: C

               The project charter is the only document that is
               issued to authorize the project. The business case
               document is only used to authorize the project
               management activities to continue until the project is
               finally authorized or disapproved.

          12. Answer: C

               According to PMBOK, the project sponsor authorizes
               the project.
                                                       CAPM(R) in Depth   545




Chapter 3
   1. Answer: A

      A is correct because the management of the performing
      organization or sponsor issues the project charter.
      B is incorrect because issuing a project charter is the
      responsibility of the performing organization, and a
      stakeholder does not even have to be a member of
      the performing organization.
      C is incorrect because issuing a project charter is the
      responsibility of the performing organization, and a
      customer does not even have to be a member of the
      performing organization.
      D is incorrect because the charter authorizes the
      project manager and not vice versa.

   2. Answer: B
      B is the correct answer because the project charter is
      created by the Develop Project Charter process, the
      only integration management process in the initiation
      process group.
      A and C are incorrect because the business case and
      project benefit management plan are inputs to the
      Develop Project Charter process.
      D is incorrect because there is no standard document
      called preliminary project scope statement.
   3. Answer: B
      B is the correct answer because the project charter
      names the project manager and provides the project
      manager with the authority to use organizational
      resources to run the project.
      A is incorrect because the sponsor is not authorized
      by the project charter; the opposite might be true.
      C and D are incorrect because these tasks are
      performed in the Identify Stakeholders process.
546   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           4. Answer: D

               D is the correct answer because the project schedule
               is developed during planning. However, some milestone
               schedule may be included in the project charter.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these items may
               be included in the project charter.

           5. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because a hard deadline
               imposed on a project is an example of a constraint.
               A constraint is a restriction (or a limitation) that can
               affect the performance of the project.
               A is incorrect because an assumption is a factor that
               you believe to be true; it is not a condition, such as a
               hard deadline.
               C is incorrect because a hard deadline tells very little
               about the actual schedule.
               D is incorrect because a constraint is not a risk, but it
               can possibly cause a risk.
           6. Answer: B
               B is correct because assumptions represent
               uncertainty and hence risk. Assumptions must be
               validated and analyzed as part of risk management at
               various stages of the project.
               A is incorrect because assumptions by definition
               represent uncertainty, and as a project manager, it
               is your responsibility to validate the assumptions at
               various stages of the project.
               C is incorrect because it is not the correct definition
               of assumption.
               D is incorrect because you can start the project with
               the assumptions. All you have to do is validate them at
               various stages of the project and analyze them as part
               of risk management.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   547



7. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because it's not true. This
    process is performed throughout the project.
    A, B, and C are incorrect because these are true
    statements.
8. Answer: A
    A is the correct answer because it's true.
    B is an incorrect answer because the Direct and
    Manage Project Work process only processes the
    approved change requests.
    C is an incorrect answer because the Monitor and
    Control Project Work process generates and does
    not process the change requests.
    D is an incorrect answer because there is no standard
    process called the Process Change Requests process.
9. Answer: A and D
    A and D are the correct answers because both the
    Manage Project Knowledge and Close Project or
    Phase processes generate the lessons learned output.
    B and C are incorrect because these processes do
    not produce the lessons learned output.
10. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because deliverables are an
   output of directing and managing project work, but
   not accepted deliverables; they still need to go through
   other processes to get accepted.
   B, C, and D are incorrect answers because the issues
   log, work performance data, and change requests are
   generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work
   process.
11. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because changes can happen
   and need to be processed throughout the lifecycle of
   a project.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because change requests
   can be requested by processes spread across the
   process groups.
548   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          12. Answer: A

               A is the correct answer because the recommendations
               for corrective and preventive actions and change
               requests must be processed through the Perform
               Integrated Change Control process for approval.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because changes and
               recommendations are approved through the Perform
               Integrated Change Control process.

          13. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because approved change
               requests are implemented through the Direct and
               Manage Project Work process.
               A is incorrect because project management is
               performed through processes.
               C is incorrect because the Perform Integrated Change
               Control process is used to process the change
               requests, and not to implement them.
               D is incorrect because the Monitor and Control
               Project Work process generates the change requests
               and does not implement them.
          14. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because performance reports
               are input into the Perform Integrated Change Control
               process.
               A and C are incorrect because the Monitor and
               Control Project Work process generates performance
               reports and does not need them, and performance
               reports are not input into the Close Project process.
               D is incorrect because there is no standard process
               with this name.
          15. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because no project, small or
               large or even a cancelled one, should skip the closing
               stage.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because no project should
               skip the closing stage. Each project must go through a
               proper closure.
                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth   549



  16. Answer: C
      C is the correct answer because it is the project
      sponsor who signs the final closure documents and
      can send the project to closure at any stage of the
      project.
      A is incorrect because the project manager is
      responsible for managing all the activities needed to
      close the project, but the closure must be authorized
      by the sponsor.
      B and D are incorrect because neither the customer
      nor the functional manager can authorize the project
      closure according to the standard.
  17. Answer: C
      C is the correct answer because the project
      deliverables must be accepted by running them through
      the Validate Scope process before they can become an
      input to the Close Project or Phase process.
      A, B, and D are incorrect because the project
      management plan is a valid input to the Close Project
      or Phase process.

Chapter 4
   1. Answer: D
      D is the correct answer because work packages don't
      have to appear in the order in which the work will be
      performed. This sequencing will be done later.
      A, B, and C are incorrect answers because these are
      the characteristics of the WBS.
   2. Answer: D
      D is correct because the project charter is created
      in the initiation stage and is an input item to creating
      the requirements documentation and the scope
      statement.
      A is incorrect because the project charter is an input
      item to creating the project scope statement.
550   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               B is incorrect because the project scope statement is
               an input item to creating the WBS.
               C is incorrect because the project charter is an input
               to creating the requirements documentation.
           3. Answer: A
               A is correct because the Create WBS process is used
               to create the WBS.
               B and C are incorrect because there are no standard
               processes named Project Work process or Develop
               WBS.
               D is incorrect because project initiating is a process
               group that includes two processes to develop the
               project charter and to identify stakeholders.

           4. Answer: B
               B is correct because the Define Scope process is used
               to create the project scope statement.
               A is incorrect because the Create WBS process is
               used to create the WBS.
               C is incorrect because there is no such standard
               process named Create Project Scope.
               D is incorrect because project initiating is a process
               group that includes two processes to develop the
               project charter and to identify stakeholders.
           5. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the Plan Scope
               Management process also generates the requirement
               management plan.
               A, B, and D are incorrect because all these are true
               statements about the project scope management
               plan, the other output of the plan scope management
               process.
           6. Answer: A
               A is correct because the components in the lowest
               level of the WBS hierarchy are called work packages.
               B is incorrect because a control account might consist
               of more than one work package.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   551



    C is incorrect because if a phase is represented in the
    WBS, it will be represented at a much higher level.
    D is incorrect because a milestone might consist of
    more than one work package.
7. Answer: A, B, C, D
    A, B, C, and D are correct because all of these are
    included in the project scope statement.
8. Answer: D
    D is correct because the scope statement, the WBS
    document, and the WBS dictionary combined make
    the scope baseline for the project.
    A is incorrect because the WBS dictionary is missing
    from the list.
    B is incorrect because you must include the WBS
    document and the WBS dictionary in the scope
    baseline.
    C is incorrect because you must include the scope
    statement and the WBS dictionary in the scope
    baseline along with the WBS document.
9. Answer: D
    D is correct because you, the project manager, create
    the WBS with help from the project team.
    A is incorrect because the project manager creates
    the WBS with help from the team.
    B and C are incorrect because neither the customer
    nor the upper management of the performing
    organization creates the WBS.
10. Answer: B
    B is correct because the WBS is not part of the
    project scope statement; it is an output of the Create
    WBS process, to which the scope statement is an
    input item.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because all these items are
    parts of the project scope statement.
552   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          11. Answer: C
               B is the correct answer because the requirement
               management plan and the scope management plan are
               the output of the Plan Scope Management process.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because they are not true
               statements.
          12. Answer: B

               B is the correct answer because job shadowing is
               another name for the observations technique for
               collecting product requirements, which is a part of the
               Collect Requirements process.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because job shadowing is
               not a standard tool or technique for these processes.

          13. Answer: A, B, C, D
               A, B, C, and D are correct because requirements
               documentation is an input to the Define Scope
               process that generates the project scope statement,
               the Create WBS process that generates the WBS,
               and the Control Scope process that generates work-
               performing information.
          14. Answer: A, B
               A is a correct answer because the project charter is an
               input to collecting requirements, and the requirement
               documentation, an output of collection requirements,
               is an input to creating the WBS.
               B is correct because the scope and quality depend
               on requirements, and verified deliverables, an output
               of Control Quality, is an input to validating the scope.
               C is incorrect because requirements are an input to
               defining scope.
               D is incorrect because verified deliverables, an output
               of Control Quality, is an input to validating the scope.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   553



  15. Answer: B
      B is the correct answer because the control account
      is the node in the WBS that is used as a control
      management point where scope, schedule, and cost
      are integrated for the purpose of monitoring and
      controlling the performance; e.g.; comparing with
      earned value.
      A is incorrect because the code of account is the
      number system used to uniquely identify each work
      package.
      C and D are incorrect because there are no standard
      terms called management account and performance
      node to refer to any node in the WBS.
  16. Answer: C
      C is the correct answer because the correct action
      here is to find the source of the change requests and
      process the request through the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process.
      A is incorrect because you are taking action without
      doing your homework: investigation.
      B is incorrect because you should not let anyone
      apply the changes without the changes' having been
      approved.
      D is incorrect because the correct course of action
      here is to find out the source of the change request
      and ensure that the request goes through the approval
      process.


Chapter 5
   1. Answer: C
      C is the correct answer because the precedence
      diagramming method is the most commonly used
      network diagramming method that can be used in the
      activity sequencing process to represent any of the
      four kinds of dependency logical relationships.
      A and B are incorrect because CPM and simulations
      are used in the schedule development process.
554   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               D is incorrect because the arrow diagramming method
               is not a popular method and is not even included in
               the standard.
           2. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because crashing is used to
               compress the schedule by adding more resources to
               the project.
               A and D are incorrect because the network
               diagramming method and the sequencing method do
               not need crashing.
               C is incorrect because crashing does not reduce
               cost. It may very well increase cost when you commit
               additional resources.
           3. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because there is no room for
               float times on the critical path.
               B and C are incorrect because the critical path
               controls the finish date only for a given start date and
               vice versa.
               D is incorrect because the critical path is the longest
               sequence in time, not the shortest.
           4. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because an activity has an
               external dependency when it relies on factors outside
               the project.
               A is incorrect because Activity Y has a mandatory
               dependency on Activity X when Y legally or inherently
               depends on X. It's possible to track down the tourist
               even after the season.
               C is incorrect because there is no such dependency
               called internal.
               D is incorrect because we don't have an internal
               dependency here.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   555



5. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because finish-to-start
   dependency means that the successor (B) activity
   cannot start until the predecessor (A) activity is
   finished.
   A is incorrect because the start-to-finish relationship
   means that the successor activity cannot finish until
   the predecessor activity is started.
   C is incorrect because we do not have enough
   information to say that this dependency is mandatory.
   D is incorrect because although there is a dependency
   between two activities, that does not mean they are
   on the critical path.
6. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because each activity on the
   critical path has a zero float time, and therefore if an
   activity is delayed, it will delay the entire project.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because these are incorrect
   statements about the activities on the critical path.
7. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the analogous
   estimating technique estimates the duration of an
   activity based on the duration of a similar activity in a
   previous project.
   A is incorrect because parametric estimating uses
   parameters such as the productivity rate of the
   resource assigned to the activity.
   B is incorrect because the individual in this example
   used the analogous method and not expert judgment,
   even though he happened to be an expert--we don't
   know in which field.
   D is incorrect because the Delphi technique is not for
   the activity duration estimating technique.
556   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           8. Answer: C

               C is correct because the team member is offering a
               valid reason for the change, and it does not affect the
               finish date of the project. However, you must change
               the schedule to reflect the new duration estimate.
               B is incorrect because you must change the schedule
               to reflect the new duration estimate that you accepted.
               A is incorrect because you do not need to consult
               with the functional manager in making this decision
               because the team member is offering a valid reason
               for the change and it does not affect the finish date of
               the project.
               D is incorrect because this change does not qualify to
               be processed through the Integrated Change Control
               process.

           9. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because float time is the
               positive difference between the allowed late start date
               and the early start date of a schedule activity, without
               changing the schedule finish date.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because these are not valid
               terms used to describe delaying an activity without
               changing the schedule finish date.

          10. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because by doing some
               activities in parallel (fast tracking) you might be able
               to compress the schedule without adding cost.
               A is incorrect because crashing usually results in
               increased cost because it involves adding extra
               resources.
               C is incorrect because the project sponsor is
               sponsoring (paying for) the project. So, asking for a
               new sponsor does not make sense; it can only trigger
               the sponsor to ask for a new project manager.
               D is incorrect because you do not want to bypass the
               sponsor on budgetary matters, because the budget
               will need the sponsor's approval.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   557



11. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because it has the longest
    sequence: 8 + 6 + 8 = 22.
    A is incorrect because this path is only 20 units long.
    B is incorrect because there is no such path as Start-
    I-G-E-Finish in this network diagram.
    D is incorrect because this path is only 21 units long,
    which is less than 22.
12. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer because the float time for G
    is zero since it is on the critical path.
    A, B, and C are incorrect because G is on the critical
    path and must have a float time of zero.
13. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because if you consider all
    the paths in the network diagram, the path Start-I-G-
    H-Finish adds up to 22, which is longer than any other
    path in the diagram.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because the length of a path
    is not measured by the number of nodes in it.
14. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because in the three-point
    method, in this case, using the weighted average is:
    (9 + 18 + 4 x 12)1/6 = 12.5.
    A is incorrect because a weight of 4 is assigned to the
    most-likely scenario as compared to the weight of 1
    for each of the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios.
    C and D are incorrect because the duration estimate
    should be the weighted average of the three points.
15. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because the activity duration
    is calculated after an activity has been defined.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because the WBS, project
    scope statement, and WBS dictionary (as parts of the
    scope baseline) are valid input items to the Define
    Activities process.
558   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          16. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because work performance
               data is an input to this process, and not an output.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these items
               could be parts of the output of the Schedule Control
               process.
          17. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the project charter
               is an input to only one schedule management process,
               and that is Plan Schedule Management.
               A, B, and D are incorrect answers because the project
               charter is an input to only one schedule management
               process, and that is Plan Schedule Management.

      Chapter 6
           1. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because a chart that displays
               the resource assignments for each activity is an
               example of a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM).
               A is incorrect because a project organization chart
               represents the relationships between the different
               roles in the project, and that is not what management
               wants.
               B is incorrect because the WBS contains work
               packages, not activities and resource requirements.
               C is incorrect because management wants the
               resource requirements for each activity, not just a list
               of roles and responsibilities.
           2. Answer: C

               C is the correct answer because resource requirement
               is not the output of the plan resource management
               process.
               A, B, and D are incorrect because all these items are
               the output of the resource planning process.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   559



3. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the team charter is
   an output of the resource plan resources process.
   A, B, and D are incorrect because these are false
   statements about the team charter document.
4. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because collaboration offers
   a win-win resolution. Remember that a variation of
   collaboration is also called confronting/problem solving.
   If that was one of the options instead of collaboration,
   then that would be the answer.
   A is incorrect because avoidance ignores the problem
   rather than solving it.
   B is incorrect because in compromising, both parties
   give up something and might look at the resolution as
   a lose-lose proposition.
   C is incorrect because accommodation offers a win-
   lose resolution; one party gives up something to
   accommodate the interests of the other party.
5. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because you are forcing your
   way on the other party.
   A and B are incorrect because you are neither
   ignoring the problem nor compromising.
   C is incorrect because you are not accommodating
   the other side.
6. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because change in budget has
   very little to do directly with team development.
   A and B are incorrect answers because the project
   kickoff meeting is an indirect method to start team
   development, and effective resolution of a conflict
   does contribute to team building.
   C is also incorrect because during times when the
   team is in a low-morale mode, you should be able to
   lift the team morale and thereby contribute to team
   development.
560   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           7. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because staff assignments are
               an output of the Acquire Project Team process.
               A is incorrect because the resource management plan
               contains roles and responsibilities and not all the staff
               assignments.
               B is incorrect because staff assignments are an input
               to the Develop Project Team process.
               D is incorrect because there is no standard process
               named Make Staff Assignments.
           8. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because a virtual team is one
               of the options, depending on the project, when you
               are acquiring the team.
               A, B, and D are incorrect answers because virtual
               teams are a tool in acquiring the team.
           9. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the term soft skills
               refers to interpersonal skills.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because these skills are not
               referred to as soft skills.
          10. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the Survey technique
               is a data-gathering technique used by experts to reach
               consensus on a topic. However, in acquiring a team,
               you want to use all the influence and negotiations at
               your disposal to get the best team.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because these are valid
               techniques to be used for acquiring the team
          11. Answer: B

               B is the correct answer because Theory X managers
               think that employees dislike their work and will try to
               avoid it.
               A is incorrect because there is no standard
               management theory called Theory Alpha.
                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   561



    C is incorrect because Theory Y managers trust their
    employees.
    D is incorrect because McClelland's theory states
    that the need for achievement, affiliation, and power
    motivates employees.
12. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because Theory Y managers
    trust their employees.
    A is incorrect because there is no standard
    management theory called Theory Alpha.
    B is incorrect because Theory X managers think that
    employees dislike their work and will try to avoid it.
    D is incorrect because McClelland's theory states
    that the need for achievement, affiliation, and power
    motivates employees. C is the more appropriate
    answer in this case.
13. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer because McClelland's theory
    states that the need for achievement, affiliation, and
    power motivates employees.
    A is incorrect because there is no standard
    management theory called Theory Alpha.
    B is incorrect because Theory X managers think that
    employees dislike their work and will try to avoid it.
    C is incorrect because Theory Y managers trust their
    employees. D is the more appropriate answer in this
    case.
14. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because Control Resources
    is used to synchronize planned, allotted, and used
    resources.
    A and D are incorrect answers because the Control
    Resources process is used to synchronize planned,
    allotted, and used resources.
    C is incorrect because there is no standard process
    named Manage Resources.
562   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


      Chapter 7
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because you need resources
               figured out before you can estimate costs.
               A and C are incorrect because you cannot estimate
               costs until you have a resource plan to figure out
               resources, and you cannot determine budget until you
               have cost estimates.
               D is incorrect because you need resources figured
               out before you can plan for costs management.
           2. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer, and the other answers are
               incorrect, because the activity source needs to be
               known before you can estimate the activity duration
               to schedule; and resources and schedule need to be
               known for estimating costs and determining budget.
           3. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the contingency
               reserve is applied both to activity durations (time) and
               cost estimates.
               B, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
               true statements about the contingency reserve.
           4. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the cost baseline is
               an output of the Determine Budget process.
               B is incorrect because there is no standard process
               with this name.
               C is incorrect because the Estimate Costs process is
               used to estimate the costs, and these estimates need
               to be aggregated to determine the budget.
               D is incorrect because cost baseline is an input to the
               Control Cost process.
           5. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the formula for
               earned value is: EV = BAC X (work completed/total
               work required), which means
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   563



   EV = $600,000 X (5 miles / 15 miles) = $200,000
   A is incorrect because $160,000 is the actual cost
   (AC) and not the earned value (EV).
   C is incorrect because earned value is proportional to
   the fraction of work performed and not the fraction
   of time passed.
   D is incorrect because $600,000 is the budget at
   completion (BAC), not the EV.
6. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the formula for
   planned value is: PV = BAC X (time passed / total
   schedule time), which means PV = $600,000 X (3
   weeks / 12 weeks) = $150,000
   A is incorrect because $160,000 is the actual cost
   (AC) and not the planned value (EV).
   B is incorrect because planned value is proportional
   to the fraction of time passed, not the fraction of
   work performed.
   D is incorrect because $600,000 is the budget at
   completion (BAC), not the PV.
7. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because the formula for cost
   variance is: CV = EV - AC,
   which means
   CV = $200,000 - $160,000 = $40,000
   B is incorrect because CV is equal to EV - AC, not
   EV - PV.
   C is incorrect because it calculates the total cost
   for 12 weeks based on AC for three weeks and then
   subtracts it from BAC, which is the wrong method to
   calculate CV.
   D is incorrect because it calculates the total cost for 15
   miles based on AC for five miles and then subtracts it
   from BAC, which is the wrong method to calculate CV.
564   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           8. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the formula for
               schedule variance is: SV = EV - PV, which means SV =
               $200,000 - $150,000 = $50,000
               A is incorrect because SV is equal to EV - PV, not
               EV - AC.
               C and D are incorrect because SV is measured in
               units of cost, not in units of time.

           9. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because a CPI value greater
               than one means the cost performance of the project
               is better than planned, and an SPI value of greater than
               one means the schedule performance of the project is
               better than planned.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because a CPI value greater
               than one means the cost performance of the project
               is better than planned, and an SPI value of greater than
               one means the schedule performance of the project is
               better than planned.

          10. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer and B is incorrect because
               the integrated performance measurement baseline
               refers to schedule baseline, scope baseline, and cost
               baseline.
               A and C are incorrect because there is no time
               baseline.
          11. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer and the others are wrong
               because cost, scope, and schedule are tightly bound
               and thus affect each other.
          12. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because controlling scope,
               schedule, and cost generates work performance
               information.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   565



      A is incorrect because the Monitor and Control Project
      Work process is used to generate performance reports
      and uses work performance information as input.
      C is incorrect because there is no standard process
      with name Develop Project Work Performance
      Report.
      D is incorrect because the Direct and Manage Project
      Work process does not generate work performance
      information; it generates work performance data
      instead.
  13. Answer: A

      10% accuracy leads to an uncertainty of $500 x 10 /
      100 = $50
      Therefore, Range = $450 - $550

  14. Answer: D
      D is the correct answer and the others are not
      because the project charter, schedule management
      plan, and risk management plan are listed as input to
      the Plan Cost Management process in PMBOK and
      the quality management plan is not.


Chapter 8
   1. Answer: B
      B is correct, and others are incorrect, because
      stakeholder cube is the right model name in this case.
   2. Answer: C
      C is correct because influence is coming from a peer
      whose project competes for resources.
      A is incorrect because the project manager's peers
      are not from management.
      B and D are incorrect because Cosmo is neither the
      end user or supplier for project Teach the Congress,
      nor is he the team member or temporary worker
      from project Teach the Congress.
566   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           3. Answer: C
               C is correct because this is what the stakeholder
               engagement plan is for.
               A and B are incorrect because these are not
               documents, but tools and techniques.
               D is incorrect because the stakeholder register
               contains information about the stakeholders and not
               the management strategies about them.
           4. Answer: A
               A is correct, and the others are not, because the
               stakeholder register document is the only one of
               the listed items that is not generated during the Plan
               Stakeholder Engagement process; it's generated during
               the Identify Stakeholder process instead.

           5. Answer: D
               D is correct because managing and controlling
               stakeholder engagement in the core of stakeholder
               management.
               A and C are incorrect because you can neither
               manage nor control stakeholders at large; you can
               only engage them.
               B is incorrect because managing stakeholder
               expectations is a part of this knowledge area, not the
               whole single focus.

           6. Answer: A
               A is correct, and the others are not, because project
               business documents are input to only the Identify
               Stakeholders process from the list, and Monitor
               Stakeholder Engagement is not even a standard
               process.

           7. Answer: B
               B is correct, and the others are not, because the
               communications management plan is the only item
               out of the list that is input to all the processes of
               stakeholder management
                                                         CAPM(R) in Depth   567



   8. Answer: A
      A is correct because work performance information,
      not performance reports, is an output of monitoring
      stakeholder engagement.
      B, C, and D are incorrect because they all can be
      outputs of monitoring stakeholder engagement.
   9. Answer: B
      B is correct because project communications is an
      input to the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process.
      A and C are incorrect because project communication
      is not used in these processes as a standard document.
      D is incorrect because there is no standard process
      named Distribute Information.

  10. Answer: D
      D, and not the others, is correct because the salience
      model is used as a data presentation tool in the Identify
      Stakeholders process and is not used as a standard
      tool in any other listed processes.


Chapter 9
   1. Answer: E
      All of these are communication skills that include
      listening. Without listening actively, you wouldn't be
      able to respond effectively.

   2. Answer: D
      D, and not A or B, is the best answer because both
      basic and more complex interactive communication
      models have the feature of delivering messages and
      ensuring that they are understood.
      A is incorrect because the basic sender/receiver
      communication model does not have the feature of
      ensuring the message is understood.
568   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           3. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because by trying to
               understand the phrases and terms, you are trying to
               decode the message, and those phrases and terms are
               acting as noise.
               B and C are incorrect because this is a message sent
               by the team member and is not a response.
               D is incorrect because we don't know in which
               language the message is written.
           4. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because stakeholder
               management strategies are in the stakeholder
               engagement plan, an input to communication planning.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these items
               are part of the communication management plan, an
               output of communication planning.
           5. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because work performance
               information is an output of the Monitor Communication
               Management process.
               B, C, and D are incorrect answers because all these
               items are part of the project communications, an
               output of the Manage Communication process.
           6. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the issues log is not
               an input to the Plan Communications Management
               process, which determines the "how-tos" of
               communication.
               A is an incorrect answer because the issues log is
               used in planning stakeholder engagement to learn
               about the stakeholders issues.
               C and D are incorrect because the issues log is
               used in the Manage Communication and Monitor
               Communication     processes    to   communicate
               information about issues to the stakeholders and
               monitor their communications.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   569



7. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer, and the others are not,
    because communication, in singular, refers to the act
    of communicating, such as sending an e-mail message,
    while communications, in plural, refers to the artifacts
    of communication, such as meeting minutes and
    reports.
8. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because project
    communications are an output of the Manage
    Communication process, and not an input.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because their items are input
    to the Manage Communication process; stakeholder
    engagement plan is so because it explains how to use
    appropriate stakeholder communication strategies to
    engage the stakeholders.
9. Answer: B

    B is correct because the process of Manage
    Communication significantly adds to the organizational
    process assets in the form of project reports,
    status reports, project presentations, stakeholder
    notifications, and other communication artifacts and
    records.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because these items will not
    certainly be modified.

10. Answer: D

    D is the correct answer because the Manage
    Communication process is used to distribute reports
    and other information to stakeholders.
    A, B, and C are incorrect because none of them is the
    standard name for any project management process.

11. Answer: C

    C is the correct answer because work performance
    data is the output of the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process.
570   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               A and D are incorrect because neither of these
               processes generates work performance data.
               B is incorrect because no standard project management
               process is called Execute Project.

          12. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because processes in the
               monitoring and controlling process group, other than
               those in integration management, generate work
               performance information.
               A is incorrect because work performance information
               is an input to the Monitor and Control Project Work
               process that it uses to create performance reports.
               B and C are incorrect because neither Manage
               Communication nor Direct and Manage Project
               Work generate work performance information.
               Direct and Manage Project Work does generate work
               performance data.
          13. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer and A and B are not
               because the Monitor Communication process is
               performed according to both the communication plan
               and the stakeholder engagement plan, and not the
               communication plan alone or stakeholder engagement
               plan alone.
               A is an incorrect answer because there is no
               standard project management plan called stakeholder
               management plan.

      Chapter 10
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because benchmarking is a
               quality planning technique that compares practices,
               products, or services of a project with those of
               some reference projects for the purpose of learning,
               improving, and creating the basis for measuring
               performance.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   571



   A is incorrect because you can always brainstorm,
   but it does not have to compare the results of similar
   activities.
   C is incorrect because although it is a quality planning
   technique, it involves striking a balance between cost
   and benefit (which are not similar).
   D is incorrect because quality metrics are not quality
   planning techniques; these are output items of the
   quality planning process.
2. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because matrix diagrams are
   not used to explore the effects of defects; the tool for
   that would be cause and effect diagrams.
   A, B, and D are incorrect because all three are true
   statements about matrix diagrams.
3. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because quality metrics are
   not used to find the key quality metrics important
   for project success; the tool for that would be matrix
   diagrams.
   A, B, and C are incorrect because all three are true
   statements about quality metrics.
4. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer, and the others are not,
   because work performance data is not the input
   to the Manage Quality process are the others are.
   The work performance data is input to the Control
   Quality process.
5. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because the Manage Quality
   process incorporates the organization's quality
   policies and procedures into quality activities.
   A is incorrect because quality control is the process
   to verify project deliverables.
572   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               C is incorrect because Plan Quality is the process to
               identify quality requirements and standards and how
               to determine they are satisfied.
               D is incorrect because there is not a standard quality
               process called Quality Assurance.
           6. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the quality audit is a
               technique for performing the Manage Quality process.
               B and C are incorrect because the quality audit is a
               technique for performing quality assurance, whereas
               quality planning is about determining which quality
               standards are relevant to the project and how to
               satisfy them. Controlling quality is about verifying
               project deliverables.
               D is incorrect because there is no such quality
               management process as Quality Inspection.
           7. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because quality audits is a
               technique in the Manage Quality process.
               A and B are incorrect because auditing is a tool used
               in Manage Quality.
               C is incorrect because there is no standard process
               called Perform Quality Assurance.
           8. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer, and the others are not,
               because the Ishikawa diagram is a tool used in both
               the Quality Control and Manage Quality processes to
               explore all the potential causes of a problem.

           9. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because a control chart is
               used to plot the results to determine whether they
               are within the acceptable limits.
               B is incorrect because a cause and effect diagram, also
               called an Ishikawa diagram or a fishbone diagram, is
               used to explore all the possible causes of a problem.
                                                     CAPM(R) in Depth   573



    C is incorrect because inspections examine whether
    an activity, component, product, service, or result
    conforms to specific requirements.
    D is incorrect because a scatter diagram is used to
    find the relationship between two variables, such as
    cause and effect.
10. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because a cause and effect
    diagram can be used to identify the potential effects
    of defects; start fixing the defects with the worst and
    most unacceptable effects.
    A is incorrect because a control chart is used to plot
    the results to determine whether they are within
    acceptable limits.
    C is incorrect because inspection is used to determine
    if a product conforms to a standard.
    D is incorrect because a scatter diagram is used to
    find the relationship between two variables, such as
    cause and effect, or two causes.
11. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because by using statistical
    sampling, you will pick a few samples of the code
    at random and get them reviewed. The results will
    represent the quality of the whole code, statistically
    speaking.
    A is incorrect because this is not an unreasonable
    demand.
    C is incorrect because testing tools cannot serve the
    purpose of a code review, and the customer wants the
    code review.
    D is incorrect because you have limited resources.
12. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because quality control
    measurements are an output of controlling quality.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because all these items are
    included in the input to quality control.
574   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          13. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because change control
               tools are a technique listed to be used in the Perform
               Integrated Change Control process.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all of these are tools
               and techniques for performing the Quality Control
               process. Remember, cause and effect diagrams are also
               called Ishikawa diagrams and fishbone diagrams.
          14. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because flowcharts are not
               used in figuring out the frequency of defects from
               different attributes of a product during inspection; the
               tool for that would be the check sheets.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all three are true
               statements about the flowcharts.
          15. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because there is no standard
               process named Perform Quality Assurance.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because all three are true
               statements about the mind-mapping technique.
          16. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer.
               B is incorrect because Shewhart defined the plan-do-
               check-act cycle of quality management, and Deming
               modified it.
               C and D are incorrect because Crosby and Juan have
               made contributions to the knowledge base of quality
               management, but they did not define the plan-do-
               check- act cycle.

      Chapter 11
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because a risk can have a
               negative or a positive effect on a project.
               A, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
               true statements about project risks.
                                                      CAPM(R) in Depth   575



2. Answer: A
   A is correct because the risk register is the output of
   the risk identification process, but it is not used as an
   input because it does not exist before this process.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because the risk register
   is an input item to perform qualitative risk analysis,
   perform quantitative risk analysis, plan risk responses,
   implement risk responses, and monitor risks.
3. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because there is no standard
   technique called Delphi used in the Identify Risks
   process according to the PMBOK Edition 6.
   A, C, and D are incorrect answers because
   brainstorming is the data-gathering technique, and
   SWOT analysis and root-cause analysis are the data-
   analysis techniques, used for identifying risks.
4. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because, depending upon the
   experience of the team, risks can be moved directly
   after the identification process to the quantitative
   analysis process without performing qualitative
   analysis.
   B, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
   true statements.
5. Answer: B
   B is correct because building redundancy into a
   system is an example of mitigating the risk.
   A is incorrect because the risk can still happen because
   you have not changed the plan, such as moving the
   server center to some other city.
   C is incorrect because accepting a risk means no
   proactive action taken; this is not the case here.
   D is incorrect because you have not transferred the
   risk to a third party.
576   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           6. Answer: D
               D is correct because the risk has been transferred to
               a third party.
               A is incorrect because the risk can still happen because
               you have not changed the plan, such as eliminating the
               need for that part of the system.
               B is incorrect because mitigating the risk does not
               involve transferring the risk to a third party.
               C is incorrect because accepting a risk means taking
               no proactive action.
           7. Answer: C
               C is correct because the numerical analysis of a risk is
               called quantitative risk analysis.
               A is incorrect because assigning numbers does not
               necessarily mean you are performing a Monte Carlo
               simulation, although it is one of the tools used to
               perform quantitative analysis.
               B is incorrect because qualitative analysis does not
               involve numerical analysis, such as EMV calculations.
               D is incorrect because risk response planning will be
               based on the results of risk analysis.
           8. Answer: D
               D is correct because the probability of the risk is 50
               percent, and the probability of the positive impact is
               40 percent, so the total probability for the positive
               impact to happen is 0.5 X 0.4 = 0.2.
               EMV = Probability X Value of the outcome = 0.2 X
               $200,000 = $40,000
               A, B, and C are incorrect because they show wrong
               values for EMV.
           9. Answer: A
               A is correct because the probability of the risk is 50
               percent, and the probability of the positive impact is
               40 percent, so the total probability for the positive
               impact to happen is 0.5 X 0.4 = 0.2.
               EMV = Probability X Value of the outcome = 0.2 X
               $200,000 = $40,000
                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth   577



    Similarly, EMV for threat = 0.3 X $50,000 = -$15,000
    Therefore, EMV for the risk = $40,000 - $15,000 =
    $25,000
    B, C, and D are incorrect because they show wrong
    values for EMV.
10. Answer: D
    D is correct because secondary risks are those risks
    that arise as a result of risk responses.
    A is incorrect because a residual risk is a risk that
    remains after a response has been performed.
    B is incorrect because, depending upon the nature of
    the secondary risk, it may have any priority.
    C is incorrect because the risk response will depend
    upon the analysis results of the risk.
11. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer because there is no such
    standard risk response named risk rejection.
    A, B, and C are all incorrect answers because these
    are valid risk responses.
12. Answer: A
    A is correct because SWOT is a risk-identification
    technique that identifies risks by examining the
    strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
    (SWOT) of a given project.
    B is incorrect because this is a wrong statement about
    SWOT.
    C and D are incorrect because SWOT is a technique
    used in risk identification, not in risk response planning
    or in quantitative risk analysis.
13. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because you need to perform
    quantitative risk analysis to create a list of risks
    prioritized based on the total effect of each risk on
    the overall project objectives.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because these are the
    possible output items from qualitative risk analysis.
578   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          14. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because the decision about a
               risk-related contractual agreement can be an output
               of risk response planning, not the quantitative risk
               analysis.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these are the
               possible output items from the quantitative risk
               analysis.
          15. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because risk-related
               recommendations for corrective actions are the
               output of the risk monitoring and controlling process.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because the outputs of these
               processes do not include recommended corrective
               actions.
          16. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the recommendations
               for corrective and preventive actions and change
               requests must be processed through the Integrated
               Change Control process for approval.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because changes and
               recommendations are approved through the
               Integrated Change Control process.
          17. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because there is no
               document called the risk response management plan.
               The risk response-related activities are inserted into
               appropriate project and plan documents.
               A, B, and D are incorrect answers because they all
               are true statements.
          18. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because work performance
               information is an output of the Monitor Risks process,
               not its input.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because these items are
               included in the input of Monitor Risks.
                                                        CAPM(R) in Depth   579




Chapter 12
   1. Answer: D
      D is the correct answer because the cost overrun in
      the firm fixed price (FFP) contract is borne by the
      seller.
      A is incorrect because in cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)
      the cost overrun is shared by the buyer and seller.
      B is incorrect because in time and materials (T&M),
      the increased cost due to the increased quantity of
      resources, such as work hours by a contractor, is
      borne by the buyer.
      C is incorrect because in a cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
      contract, the cost overrun is paid by the buyer, as the
      seller is reimbursed for all allowable costs.
   2. Answer: A
      A is the correct answer because it uses the rates for
      labor, and materials costs are fixed.
      B, C, and D are incorrect because the given scenario
      does not match the definitions of these contract types.
   3. Answer: B
      B is the correct answer because SOW is an output of
      planning procurements.
      A, C, and D are incorrect answers because all of these
      are true statements.
   4. Answer: C
      C is the correct answer because the cost overrun
      is paid by the buyer in cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
      contracts.
      A is incorrect because the firm fixed price presents
      risk to both buyer and seller because the fixed price
      might turn out to be above or below the actual cost.
      B and D are incorrect because the fee in these cases
      does not rise with the increase of the actual cost.
580   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           5. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because in this scenario the
               hourly rate sounds like a good option.
               B and C are incorrect because the reimbursable cost
               does not make sense in this case, and you don't have
               to add a fee to the cost.
               D is incorrect because you cannot correctly estimate
               the total price because you do not know how many
               programs are required.
           6. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because make-or-buy analysis
               is a technique used in the procurement planning
               process called Plan Procurements.
               A is incorrect because make-or-buy decisions are
               already made in the Conduct Procurements process.
               B is incorrect because there is no standard process
               called Administer Procurement.
               D is incorrect because Control Procurements is not
               the process in which make-or-buy decisions are made.
           7. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because seller proposal is a
               response to the bidding documents.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all of these are
               bidding documents.
           8. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the amount of work
               and hence the cost cannot be determined at this point.
               According to CPFF, all costs are reimbursed to the
               seller, and a fixed fee as a percentage of the original
               estimate is also paid.
               A is incorrect because the amount of work and hence
               the cost cannot be determined at this point.
               B is incorrect because a time and materials contract
               is used in a situation where both cost reimbursement
               and fixed-price features need to be applied. This is not
               the case here.
               D is incorrect because there is no such contract type
               as cost plus time.
                                                    CAPM(R) in Depth   581



9. Answer: A
    A is the correct answer and the others are
    wrong because Control Procurements uses work
    performance data generated by the Direct and
    Manage Project Work process, which itself generates
    change requests that would be processed through the
    Perform Integrated Change Control process.
10. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because the deliverables
    accepted through procurement closure must go
    through project closure for handing them over to the
    customer or the sponsor.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because all these activities
    are part of the Control Procurement process.
11. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because procurement contracts
    are closed to end the Control Procurements process.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because all these items are
    the output of the Close Project process.
12. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because the deliverables must
    go through the Validate Scope process before going
    through the Close Project process, and before the
    scope can be validated, they must be verified through
    the Control Quality process.
    A is incorrect because the deliverables must be
    verified through the quality control process before
    their scope can be validated.
    C and D are incorrect because the Control
    Procurement process must be performed before you
    have all the accepted products go through the Close
    Project or Phase process.
13. Answer: A
    A, and not B or C, is the correct answer because
    sellers send proposals in response to buyers looking
    for sellers during the Conduct Procurement process.
    D is incorrect because there is no standard process
    called Close Procurement that is closed in the Control
    Procurement process.
                                                                  Glossary


                                                                           G

Glossary
360-degree survey. A form of feedback from all around the entity being
evaluated. It is not emphasized in the PMBOK 6th Edition, but it is a concept
worth knowing.
activity. A component of project work.
activity definition. Define Activity is the process of identifying the specific
activities that need to be scheduled and performed to produce the project
deliverables.
activity duration. The time measured in calendar units between the start
and finish of a schedule activity.
activity duration estimating. The process of estimating the time in work
periods individually for each schedule activity required for activity completion.
A work period is a measurement of time when the work is in progress; it is
measured in hours, days, or months depending upon the size of the activity.
activity resource estimating. The process of estimating the types and
amounts of resources that will be required to perform each schedule activity.
activity sequencing. The process of identifying and documenting the
dependencies among schedule activities; which activities precede which.
actual cost (AC). The total cost actually incurred in performing the work
for a project or a project activity until a specific point on the timescale.
affinity diagrams. A technique used to classify a large set of ideas into
different groups for the purpose of reviewing or analyzing them.
alternatives analysis. A technique used to evaluate and rank the available
options to perform project work.

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2
584   Glossary


      analogous estimating. A technique used to estimate the duration or cost
      of an activity or project based on the duration of a similar activity in a previous
      project or the project itself.
      assumption. A factor that you consider to be true without any proof or
      verification. Assumptions can appear in both the input and the output of
      various processes in some form.
      assumption log. A project document that records and tracks all the project
      assumptions and constraints throughout the project.
      assumptions analysis. A technique used to examine the validity of
      an assumption and thereby identify the risk resulting from the inaccuracy,
      inconsistency, or incompleteness of each assumption.
      asynchronous communication. A communication in which the two
      communicating entities do not have to be present at each end of the
      communication line at the same time. E-mail is an example of asynchronous
      communication because when the sender of the e-mail pushes the Send
      button, the intended recipient of the e-mail message does not have to be
      logged on to the e-mail server.
      baseline. A reference plan for project elements, such as schedule, scope,
      and cost, against which the actual project progress can be compared with to
      measure performance deviations. The reference plan can be the original or
      the modified plan.
      benchmarking. Comparing practices, products, or services of a project with
      those of some reference projects for the purposes of learning, improvement,
      and creating a basis for measuring performance.
      bid documents. All the documents used to get information from the sellers,
      such as quotations and proposals.
      bottom-up estimation. A technique to estimate the cost and duration of
      a project or its parts by summing the estimates of components subordinate
      to it in the WBS.
      brainstorming. A creative technique generally used in a group environment
      to gather ideas as candidates for a solution to a problem or an issue without
      any immediate evaluation of these ideas. The evaluation and analysis of these
      ideas happen later.
      budget. The approved aggregation of cost estimates for a project or a part
      of it with a timeline assigned to it.
      budget at completion (BAC). The total budgets authorized for performing
      the project work.
      cause and effect diagram. A diagram used to explore all the potential
      causes (inputs) that result in a single effect (output), such as a problem or a
      defect. It may help to find the root cause of a problem.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth      585



change control board. A formal group of stakeholders with the authority
to process change requests, which includes reviewing, approving, rejecting, or
delaying change requests.
change control system. A collection of formal documented procedures
that specifies how the project deliverables and documents will be changed,
controlled, and approved.
change request. A request for deviating from the project plan or related
policies or procedures, such as modifying scope, schedule, or cost. Change
requests may include recommendations for corrective and preventive actions.
claim. An assertion, demand, or request made by a buyer against the seller
or vice versa for consideration or compensation under the terms of a legal
contract.
close project or phase. A process used to finalize all activities across all of
the process groups to formally close the project or a phase of it.
code of accounts. A numbering system used to uniquely identify each
component of a WBS.
communication management plan. A document that describes the
communication needs and expectations of the project and how these needs
and expectations will be met.
Communication requirement analysis. A technique used to determine
the information needs of the project stakeholders by using methods such as
workshops, interviews, and from the lessons learned database from similar
projects.
confidence level. A statistical term that refers to the certainty attached to
an estimate and is often represented in percentage form, such as a 95 percent
confidence level.
configuration management. Refers to controlling the characteristics of
a product, a service, or a result of a project. It includes documenting the
features of a product or a service, controlling and documenting changes to
the features, and providing support for auditing the products for conformance
to requirements.
constraint. A restriction (or a limitation) that can affect the performance of
the project.
contingency. A future event or condition that is possible but cannot be
predicted with certainty. In this case, an action will be contingent upon the
condition--that is, the action will be executed only if the condition happens.
contingency reserve. Funds or time reserved in addition to the calculated
estimates to deal with contingencies, such as uncertainties in the duration
used in the schedule and the cost used in the budget.
586   Glossary


      context diagrams. Visual display of how different aspects of a system and
      different kinds of uses interact with each other.
      contract. A mutually binding agreement between a buyer and a seller that
      obligates the seller to provide the specified product, service, or result and
      obligates the buyer to make the payment for it.
      control. To analyze the performance of the project and make and implement
      recommendations for corrective actions or other changes to bring the project
      back on track.
      control account. A node in the WBS that acts as a management control
      point where scope, schedule, and actual cost are integrated and compared to
      the earned value to measure project performance.
      control chart. A chart or diagram used to monitor whether the variance of
      a specified variable is within the acceptable limits dictated by quality control.
      COQ. Cost of quality; the total cost of quality-related efforts throughout the
      product lifecycle.
      corrective actions. Actions recommended for execution in the future in
      order to bring project performance back in line with the project management
      plan.
      cost baseline. The planned budget for the project over a time period, used as
      a basis against which to monitor, control, and measure the cost performance
      of the project. The cost performance is measured by comparing the actual
      cost to the planned cost over a time period.
      cost performance index (CPI). A measure of the cost efficiency of a
      project calculated by dividing earned value (EV) by actual cost (AC).
      cost variance (CV). A measure of cost performance obtained by subtracting
      actual value (AC) from earned value (EV). A positive result indicates good
      performance, whereas a negative result indicates bad performance.
      CPFF. Cost plus fixed fee; a contract type.
      CPIF. Cost plus incentive fee; a contract type.
      CPPC. Cost plus percentage of cost; a contract type.
      crashing. A project schedule compression technique used to decrease the
      project duration with minimal additional cost. A number of alternatives are
      analyzed, including the assignment of additional resources.
      critical path. The longest path (sequence of activities) in a project schedule
      network diagram. Because it is the longest path, it determines the duration of
      the project.
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       587



critical path method (CPM). A schedule network analysis technique used
to identify the minimum project duration and schedule's flexibility and the
critical path of the project schedule network diagram.
decision tree analysis. A technique that uses a decision tree diagram to
choose from different available options to take; each option may be represented
by a branch of the tree. EMV analysis is done along each branch, which helps
one make a decision about which option to choose.
decode. To convert the received message from the media back into useful
ideas and thoughts.
decomposition. A planning technique to subdivide the project scope,
including deliverables, into smaller and smaller, manageable tasks called work
packages.
defect. An imperfection or deficiency that keeps a component from meeting
its requirements or specifications. A defect is caused by an error (problem)
and can be repaired by fixing the error.
deliverable. A unique and verifiable product, a capability to provide a service,
or a result that must be produced to complete a project or a process or
phase of the project.
develop team. A process of improving the team competence at individual
member level and at team level, and to improve the overall team environment
in order to improve the project performance.
distribute information. The process of making information available to
stakeholders according to the project management plan.
earned value (EV) or budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP).
The value of the actually performed work expressed in terms of the approved
budget for a project or a project activity for a given time period.
earned value management (EVM) or earned value technique (EVT).
A management methodology and technique to measure project progress by
comparing integrated measures of scope, schedule, and cost with the planned
performance baseline.
emotional intelligence. The ability to detect, perceive, access, and manage
the emotions of self, other peoples, and different group of peoples.
encode. To convert thoughts and ideas into a message that could be
transmitted through the media.
enterprise environmental factors. Factors internal or external to the
performing organization that can influence the project's success, such as the
organization's culture, infrastructure, existing skill set, market conditions, and
project management software. These are input to both the project charter
and the preliminary project scope statement.
588   Glossary


      estimate at completion (EAC) at budgeted rate. The estimate from
      the current point in time of how much it will cost to complete the entire
      project or an entire project activity for which the BAC is given. The value of
      EAC is obtained by adding the value of ETC at the budgeted rate to AC.
      estimate at completion (EAC) at current CPI. The estimate from the
      current point in time of how much it will cost to complete the entire project
      or an entire project activity for which the BAC is given. The value of EAC is
      obtained by adding the value of ETC at the current CPI to AC.
      estimate to complete (ETC) at budgeted rate. The expected cost,
      estimated by assuming future performance will be at the budgeted rate, to
      complete the remaining work for the project or for a project activity.
      estimate to complete (ETC) at present CPI. The expected cost,
      estimated by assuming the future performance will be at the current CPI, to
      complete the remaining work for the project or for a project activity.
      expected monetary value (EMV) analysis. A statistical technique used
      to calculate the expected outcome when there are multiple possible outcome
      values with probabilities assigned to them.
      experiment design. A statistical method that can be used to identify the
      factors that can influence a set of specific variables of a product or a process
      under development or in production.
      fast tracking. A project schedule compression technique used to decrease
      the project duration by performing project phases or some schedule activities
      within a phase simultaneously when they would normally be performed in
      sequence.
      float time. The positive difference between the late start date and the early
      start date of a schedule activity without delaying the schedule.
      flowchart. A diagram that depicts the inputs, actions, and outputs of one or
      more processes in a system.
      FP. Fixed price; a contract type.
      Gantt Chart. A bar chart used to display project schedule with X-axis
      representing time and Y-axis representing activities drawn as horizontal bars;
      each bar starting from start date and stopping at end date of the activity.
      histogram. A bar chart that shows a distribution of variables.
      incentive fee. A set of financial motives for seller relation to cost, schedule,
      and performance; such as a bonus.
      initiating process group. A process group that contains two processes:
      develop project charter and identify project stakeholders.
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       589



inspection. A technique to examine whether a work project or result
conforms to specific standards.
issue. An item or a matter that is under discussion or dispute and for
which there are most likely opposing views and disagreements among the
stakeholders.
issue log. A tool such as a document to manage issues; includes opening,
modifying, tracking, documenting, and resolving the issues.
knowledge area. A knowledge area in project management is defined by its
knowledge requirements related to managing a specific aspect of a project, such
as cost, by using a set of processes. PMI recognizes a total of ten knowledge
areas, such as cost management and resource management.
lag. A technique to modify a dependency relationship by delaying the successor
activity. For example, a lag of five days in a finish-to-start relationship means
the successor activity cannot start until five days after the predecessor activity
has ended.
lead. A technique to modify a dependency relationship by accelerating
the successor activity. For example, a lead of five days in a finish-to-start
relationship means the successor activity can start up to five days before the
finish date of the predecessor activity.
logical relationship. A dependency between two project schedule activities
or between a schedule activity and a schedule milestone.
manage project knowledge. A process of creating new knowledge by
using the existing knowledge to meet the project objectives.
management reserve (MS). The part of project budget or schedule time
not included in the performance measurement baseline and reserved to deal
with unseen missed work within the project scope.
managing stakeholder engagement. A process used for communicating
and working with stakeholders to stay on the same page as them regarding
the project requirements by addressing their needs and issues as they arise
and appropriately involve them in the project.
methodology. A system of procedures and techniques practiced in a discipline
to accomplish a task. For example, risk management methodology is used in
the discipline of project management to determine how risk management
processes will be performed, etc.
milestone. A significant point (or event) in the life of a project, such as the
delivery of a project outcome.
mind mapping. A technique to put all the ideas from multiple brainstorming
session into a single map to expose the similarities and differences among
them; this will also help to create new ideas.
590   Glossary


      mitigation. The process of taking action to reduce or prevent the impact of
      a disaster that is expected to occur.
      model. A set of rules to describe how something works, which takes input
      and makes predictions as output.
      monitor. To collect project performance data, convert the data to
      performance measurements and this performance information.
      monitor risks. To track identified risks, identify new risks, monitor residual
      risks, implement risk response plans, and evaluate risk management processes.
      Monte Carlo simulation. An analysis technique that randomly generates
      values for uncertain elements (that is, variables) and takes them as input to a
      model to generate output to represent various project output scenarios.
      organization. A group of individuals organized to work for some purpose
      or mission.
      organizational process assets. The processes and process-related assets
      of the organizations participating in the project that can be used to perform the
      project successfully, such as processes, plans, templates, guidelines, knowledge
      base, and policies and procedures.
      parametric estimating. A quantitative technique used to calculate the cost
      or activity duration using historical data and appropriate project parameters.
      performance measurement baseline (PMB). An approved integrated
      plan consisting of scope, schedule, and cost baselines used to make performance
      measurements by comparing the actual project result against this baseline.
      performance report. A document or a presentation that presents the
      project progress in terms of status and some parameters, such as earned
      value management parameters, based on the analysis of work performance
      information/data.
      performing organization. The organization that is performing the project.
      planning component. A WBS component at the bottom level of a branch
      of the WBS hierarchy for which some planning can be performed.
      planning package. A WBS component that is below the control account
      and has a well-defined work content but does not yet have a detailed schedule.
      portfolio. A set of projects, programs, subsidiary portfolio, and operations
      managed in a coordinated fashion to obtain business objectives in the strategic
      plan of the organization.
      portfolio management. The centralized management of one or more
      portfolios, which includes identifying, authorizing, prioritizing, managing, and
      controlling projects.
                                                              CAPM(R) in Depth       591



precedence diagramming method (PDM). A technique used to construct
a project schedule network diagram in which a node (a box) represents an
activity and an arrow represents the dependency relationship.
preventive actions. Directions to perform an activity that will reduce the
probability of negative consequences associated with project risks. These
preventive actions are recommended by the QA process during process
analysis.
process. A set of interrelated activities performed toward obtaining a
specified set of products, results, or services. Processes have one or more
input items that are converted into one or more output items.
process analysis. A technique used to identify the needed improvements in
a process by examining the constraints, invaluable activities, inefficiencies, and
other problems.
procurement. Refers to obtaining (purchasing or renting) products, services,
or results from outside the project team to complete the project.
procurements. Purchases and acquisitions that are needed to complete the
project but that cannot be produced by the in-house project team.
procurement audit. A structured review of the procurement contracts
and process for completeness, accuracy, and effectiveness with the purpose of
identifying successes and failures from the planning.
procurement management. The execution of a set of processes used
to obtain products, services, or results from outside the project team to
complete the project.
procurement management plan. A document that describes how
procurements will be managed.
product scope. Features and functions that characterize a product, service,
or result to be delivered by the project.
program. A set of related projects, subsidiary programs, and related
activities managed in a coordinated fashion to improve overall efficiency and
effectiveness that may not be obtained by managing the projects individually.
program management. The centralized coordinated management of a
specific program to achieve its strategic goals, objectives, and benefits.
program management office (PMO). An entity in an organization that
is responsible for providing centralized coordinated support to the program
managers managing programs and unrelated projects.
progressive elaboration. A technique used to continuously improve a plan
by working out more details and providing better accuracy as more-detailed
and -specific information becomes available as the project progresses.
592   Glossary


      project business documents. Refers to two documents: business case and
      benefit management plan.
      project calendar. A calendar of working days or shifts used to establish
      when a schedule activity can be performed. A calendar typically specifies
      holidays and weekends when a schedule activity cannot be performed.
      project charter. A document containing the high-level information of the
      project issued by the project initiator, such as the sponsor, that formally
      authorizes the project, names the project manager, and authorizes the project
      manager to use the organization's resources for the project.
      project interfaces. The formal and informal boundaries and relationships
      among team members, departments, organizations, or functions. An example
      might be how the development department and the QA department interact
      with each other while working on the same project.
      project management information system (PMIS). An information
      system that consists of tools used to store, integrate, and retrieve information,
      such as the outputs of the project management processes. This can be used to
      support all stages of the project from initiating to closing.
      project management plan. An approved document that describes how
      the project will be executed, monitored and controlled, and closed.
      project performance. Measure of actual project progress against planned
      progress.
      project/product transition. Handing over of the project output to the
      appropriate party.
      project schedule. A schedule that consists of planned dates for performing
      schedule activities and meeting schedule milestones.
      project schedule network diagram. A schematic display of logical
      relationships among the project schedule activities. The time flow in these
      diagrams is from left to right.
      project scope. The work that must be performed (and only that work)
      to deliver products, services, or results with specified features that were
      promised by the project. The project scope draws boundaries around the
      project--what is included and what is not.
      project scope creep. Changes applied to the project scope without going
      through the approval process, such as the integrated change control process.
      qualitative risk analysis. A process used to prioritize risks by estimating
      the probability of their occurrence and their impact on the project.
      quality. The degree to which a set of characteristics of project deliverables
      and objectives fulfills the project requirements.
                                                            CAPM(R) in Depth       593



quality audit. A structured and independent review to determine whether
project activities comply with the policies, processes, and procedures of the
project and the performing organization.
quality control. Monitoring the results of executing the quality management
activities to assure the project outputs are complete and accurate as planned
and recommending necessary changes and actions to conform with the quality
plans.
quality management plan. A management plan that describes how the
project management team will implement the quality policy of the performing
organization for the specific project.
quality metrics. An operational criterion that defines in specific terms what
something (such as a characteristic or a feature) is and how the quality control
process measures it.
quality planning. The process of identifying the quality standards relevant
to the project at hand and determining how to satisfy these standards.
quality policy. The policy stating high-level direction of an organization with
respect to quality, and applied to actions in project quality management.
quantitative risk analysis. A process used to perform numerical analysis
to estimate the effect of each identified risk on the overall project objectives
and deliverables, and prioritize the risks accordingly.
RAM. Responsibility assignment matrix; a matrix used to specify the
relationships between schedule activities, roles to perform those activities,
and team members assigned to the roles.
requirement. A condition, characteristic, or capability that a specific
outcome of the project must have.
residual risk. A risk that remains after the risk response has been performed.
resource breakdown structure (RBS). A hierarchical structure of
resource types required to complete the schedule activities of a project.
risk. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or
negative effect on meeting the project objectives.
risk breakdown structure (RBS). A hierarchical structure that breaks
down the identified risk categories into subcategories. In developing this
structure, you will end up identifying various areas and causes of potential
risks.
risk identification. A process used to identify the risks for a given project
and record their characteristics in a document called the risk register.
594   Glossary


      risk management plan. A document that describes how risk management
      will be structured and performed for the project at hand. It becomes part of
      the project management plan.
      risk management planning. A process used to determine how to approach,
      plan, and execute risk management activities for a given project. This process
      produces the risk management plan.
      risk register. A document that contains the detailed information on each
      identified risk.
      risk trigger. An alert that indicates a risk event has occurred or is about to
      occur.
      role. A defined function that contains a set of responsibilities to be performed
      by a team member, such as a programmer or a tester.
      rolling wave planning. A case of progressive elaboration in which the work
      to be performed now and in the nea future is planned in detail, while the
      work to be performed.
      scatter diagram. A diagram used to show the pattern of the relationship
      between two variables--an independent variable and another variable that
      depends on the independent variable.
      schedule activity. A scheduled task (component of work) performed during
      the lifecycle of a project.
      schedule baseline. A specific version of the project schedule developed
      from the schedule network analysis and the schedule model data. This is the
      approved version of the schedule, with a start date and an end date, and it is
      used as the basis against which the project schedule performance is measured.
      schedule compression. A technique used to shorten the schedule without
      changing the scope.
      schedule development. The process of creating the project schedule by
      analyzing schedule activity sequences, schedule activity durations, resource
      requirements, and schedule constraints.
      schedule milestone. A significant event in the project schedule, such as the
      completion of a major deliverable.
      schedule network analysis. A technique used to generate a project
      schedule by identifying the early and late start and finish dates for the project.
      schedule performance index (SPI). A measure of the schedule efficiency
      of a project calculated by dividing earned value (EV) by planned value (PV).
      schedule Variance. A schedule performance variable measured by subtracting
      the planned values (PV) from the earned value (EV).
                                                           CAPM(R) in Depth       595



schedule revision. An update to the project schedule that includes changing
the project start date, end date, or both.
scope baseline. The approved project scope, which includes the project
scope statement, the WBS, and the corresponding WBS dictionary.
scope definition. The process used to develop the detailed project scope
statement.
scope planning. The process of developing the project scope management
plan.
secondary risk. A risk that arises as a result of implementing a risk response.
simulation. Any analytical method used to imitate a real-life system.
stakeholder register. A document that identifies the project stakeholders
and the relevant information about them.
statistical sampling. Randomly selecting a part of the population for study.
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis.
An analysis technique used to examine a given project from the perspectives
of its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats of the project or the
organization.
subprojects. Parts of the main project that are independent enough that
each can be performed by separate project teams.
synchronous communication. Communication in which both the sender
and the receiver have to be present at the same time, such as face-to-face
project meetings and teleconferencing.
T&M. Time and material; a contract type.
variance. A measurable deviation in the value of a project variable, such as
cost, from a known baseline or expected value.
variance analysis. A technique used to assess the magnitude of variation
in the value of a variable (such as actual cost from the baseline or expected
value), determine the cause of the variance, and decide whether corrective
action is required.
verify scope. The process of formally accepting the completed project
deliverables.
virtual team. A team of members working on the same project with
few or no face-to-face meetings. Various technologies, such as e-mail, video
conferencing, and the World Wide Web, are used to facilitate communication
among team members.
war room. A conference room used for project team meetings.
596   Glossary


      work breakdown structure (WBS). A deliverable-oriented hierarchical
      structure that displays the decomposition of deliverables into work that must
      be performed to accomplish the project objectives and create the project
      deliverables.
      work package. A deliverable or a task at the lowest level of each branch of
      the WBS, for which the duration and cost, etc, can be managed.
      workaround. A response to a negative risk that has occurred. A workaround
      is based on a quick solution and is not planned in advance of the risk-
      occurrence event.
                                                                               I
Index
A                                              Benefit management plan, 76

Achievement motivation theory, 264-265, 520    Bidding documents, 481-482

Acquire resources process                      Bottom-up estimation, 195, 237, 288
   decision-making techniques, 241             Brainstorming, 390, 427
   EEFs, 517-518                               Budget at completion (BAC), 297-298,
   input, 239                                            301, 304
   negotiations, 242
                                               Budgeted cost for the work scheduled
   OPAs, 517-518
                                                        (BCWS), 299
   output, 239
   pre-assignments, 241                        Budgeted cost of work performed
   steps, 239-240                                       (BCWP), 298
   tools and techniques, 239                   Business case, 74-75
   virtual teams, 242-243
Activities, 174                                C
Activity attributes, 235                       CAPM exam objectives, 3-4
Actual cost of work performed (ACWP), 298      Cash flow (CF), 78
Advertising, 488                               Cause and effect diagram, 406
Agile release planning, 205                    Change control board (CCB), 102, 111
Alternative dispute resolution (ADR), 494      Charter, 18, 47
Analogous cost estimation, 288                 Checklist methods, 427
Analogous estimation, 193, 236                 Claim administration, 494
Assumption and constraint analysis, 428        Close Project process, 120-124
Asynchronous communication, 355                Collect requirements process
Authorization, 79                                 context diagram, 146
                                                  data-gathering techniques, 143-144
Avoid, transfer, and mitigate (ATM), 449-451
                                                  data-presentation and-analysis
                                                         techniques, 144-145
B                                                 decision-making techniques, 146
Baseline, 37                                      documents, 142
Benchmarking, 389                                 EEFs and OPAs, 143
                                                  enterprise environment factors, 509
Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR), 77                      interpersonal and team skills, 147
(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, CAPM(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3664-2
598   Index


      Collect requirements process (cont.)              monitoring, 294
         organizational environment factors, 509        organizational process assets, 296
         prototype, 145                                 project costs, 294
         requirement document, 147-148               Control quality process
         stakeholder engagement plan, 142               output, 409
         tools and techniques, 143                      tools and techniques
      Communication management, 25, 28, 67,                  data analysis, 404
               345, 528                                      data gathering, 403
        information sources                                  data presentation, 404-405, 407
            performance reporting, 361                       inspection, 408
            presentation, 361                                testing and product evaluation, 408
            quality and risk reports, 361               verification, 401-402
            work performance reports, 361            Control resources process
        mechanism and dimension, 366-367                assumptions log, 521
        output                                          input, 266
            organizational process assets, 367          OPAs, 521
            project communications, 367                 output, 266
            project document update, 368                risk register, 521
        planning, 333, 527-528                          steps, 266-268
        process, 360                                    tools and techniques, 266
        role in, 528-529
                                                     Control schedule process
        tools and techniques
                                                        change requests and updates, 212
            communication skills, 363
                                                        forecasts, 211-212
            interpersonal and team skills, 363-364
                                                        information getting, 210
            PMIS, 362
                                                        iteration burndown graphs, 211
            sender-receiver models, 365-366
                                                        work performance information, 210
      Communication methods, 355, 356                Cost-benefit analysis, 390, 452
      Communication planning                         Cost management, 28
        documents updates, 359                          big picture, 280-281
        output, 358-359                                 choice of processes, 283
        process, 349                                    cost measurements, 284
        tools and techniques                            input, tools and techniques, and
            communication requirements                         output, 282
              analysis, 350-351                         performance measurement, 284
            communication technology                    PERT technique, 522
              determination, 352                        process groups, 281
            models and methods                          resources, 280
              determination, 353-354                    scope, schedule, and cost, 306-308
      Conduct Procurements process, 538                 steps, 282
      Conflict management, 256-258, 260                 WBS usage, 284

      Contingency reserve analysis, 289              Cost of quality, 390

      Contingent response, 452                       Cost performance
                                                        ACWP, 298
      Contract negotiations, 489                        BAC, 297-298
      Control Costs process                             CPI, 299
         core of, 295                                   CV, 298
         input, tools and techniques, and               EV/BCWP, 298
                output, 294-295                         total cost, 297
                                                                                 Index    599



Cost performance index (CPI), 299                functions, 101
Cost plus award fee (CPAF), 476-477              issue log, 104
                                                 organizational process assets, 102-103
Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF), 476-477
                                                 project documents, 101
Cost plus incentive fee (CPIF), 476-477          project management plan, 101
Cost plus percentage of cost (CPPC), 477         technical and organizational
Cost variance (CV), 298                                 interfaces, 100
                                                 tools and techniques, 103
Critical path method, 199-202                    updates, 106
                                                 work performance data, 104
D                                            Discounted cash flow (DCF), 78
Data-analysis techniques, 428                Discretionary dependencies, 187
Data-gathering techniques, 322, 427          Disputed claims, 494
Data-presentation technique, 228, 324-325    Document analysis, 396
Decision-making techniques, 241, 390
Decision-tree analysis, 443
                                             E
Delivery methods, 481
                                             Earned value (EV), 298
Determine Budget process
   analogous and parametric estimates, 292   Earned value management (EVM), 296-297
   cost aggregation, 292                     Earned value technique (EVT), 296-297
   financing, 293                            Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs),
   funding period, 293                                 125, 182, 512-513, 515
   input, tools and techniques, and             definition, 46, 48
          output, 291-292                       Plan Procurement Management, 474
   reserve analysis, 293                        resource requirements, 236-237
Develop Team process                            risk management plan, 421-422
   change requests, 252                         types, 50
   co-location, 246                          Estimate Activity Durations process
   communication methods, 246                    activity and resource information
   document updates, 252                              activity list and activity
   general management skills, 247                       attributes, 192
   individual and team assessments, 251               project scope baseline, 192
   input, 245                                         RBS, 192
   interpersonal skills, 247                          resource calendar and team
   output, 245                                          assignments, 192
   recognition and rewards, 251                       resource requirements, 192
   team-building activities, 248-251             output, 196
   team performance assessment, 252              tools and techniques
   tools and techniques, 245                          alternative analysis and
   training, 250                                        decision-making, 195
   Tuckman model, 249-250                             analogous estimating, 193
   virtual team, 246                                  bottom-up, 195
Direct and Manage Project Execution                   expert judgment and meetings,
         process                                        195-196
   change requests, 102, 104-106                      parametric estimating, 194
   deliverables, 104                                  reserve analysis, 195
   enterprise environmental factors, 102              three-point estimate, 194
600   Index


      Estimate Activity Resources process             Forecasting
          activity attributes, 235                       EAC, 302-303
          alternative analysis, 237                      ETC, 302
          analogous estimation, 236                      TCPI, 304
          bottom-up estimating, 237                   Functional organization
          cost information, 236                          attributes, 57
          EEFs, 236                                      CEO, 56
          identification, quantity, and needed, 235      structure of, 57
          input, 234-235
          organizational process assets, 236
          output, 234-235
                                                      H
          parametric estimating, 237                  Herzberg's motivation-hygiene theory, 263,
          project management software, 237                     265, 520
          published estimating data, 237              Human resources, 28
          RBS, 238                                      data presentation techniques, 228
          resource calendars, 236                       hierarchical charts, 228
          resource requirements, 238                    organizational theories, 231
          risk information, 236                         RAM, 229-230
          techniques, 234-235                           text-oriented chart, 230
          tools, 234-235                              Hybrid organizations, 59-60
      Estimate at completion (EAC)
          budgeted rate, 302-303                      I
          CPI, 303
          SPI, 523                                    Identification process
                                                          data-analysis techniques, 428
      Estimate Costs process, see Project cost            data-gathering techniques, 427-428
               estimation                                 definition, 419
      Estimate to complete (ETC)                          input, 426
          budgeted rate, 302                              output, 426
          CPI, 302, 522-523                               risk register, 429-430
      Executing process group, 19                         risk report, 430
                                                          tasks, 425
      Expectancy theory, 264-265, 520
                                                          tools and techniques, 426-427
      Expected monetary value (EMV)
                                                      Implement Risk Responses
               analysis, 442
                                                         definition, 420
      Expert judgment, 80-81                             input, 455-456
      External dependencies, 187                         output, 456
                                                         steps, 456-457
                                                         tools and techniques, 456
      F, G                                            Influencing skills, 72
      Firm fixed price (FFP), 475                     Integration management, 28
      Fixed price (FP), 477                               Close Project or Phase, 88
      Fixed-price Incentive Fee (FPIF), 475               Develop Project Charter process, 88
                                                          Develop Project Management Plan
      Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment
                                                                process, 88-89
                (FPEPA), 475
                                                          EEFs and OPAs, 125
      Flowcharts, 391                                     expert judgment and meetings, 125
      Forcing, 258                                        interactions and data flow, 89-90
                                                                                    Index   601



    major outputs, 89                            performance information, 254
    Monitor and Control Project Work, 88         tools and techniques, 253
    Perform Integrated Change Control, 88     Mandatory dependencies, 186
    project document, 125
                                              Market research analysis, 478
    project management plan, 98-100
                                              Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory, 262,
Interactive communication, 355
                                                       265, 520
Internal dependencies, 187
                                              Matrix diagrams, 391
Internal return rate (IRR), 78
                                              Matrix organization, 58-59
Interpersonal and team skills, 357
                                              McClelland's achievement motivation
Interviewing, 427, 440                                 theory, 264-265, 520
Iteration burndown chart technique, 211       McGregor's X-Y theory, 264-265, 520
Iterative process, 321                        Memorandums of understanding
                                                     (MOUs), 92
J                                             Mind mapping, 391
Job shadowing, 143                            Monitor and Control Project Work
                                                assumptions log, 108
K                                               basis of estimates, 108
                                                change log, 108
Knowledge areas
                                                change requests, 110
   action, 28
                                                cost forecasts, 108
   communication management, 25
                                                decision-making techniques, 109
   vs. process groups, 502
                                                expert judgment and data analysis, 109
Knowledge database repository, 52               issue log, 108
                                                lessons learned register, 108
L                                               milestone list, 108
                                                project document update, 110
Leadership skills, 70-71
                                                project schedule forecasts, 108
Logical data model, 391                         quality reports, 108
                                                risk report, 108
M                                               tasks, 107
                                                work performance reports, 110
Make-or-buy decision analysis, 478, 480-481
                                              Monitor Communication process
Management documents, 47                        analyze communication, 370-371
Manage Project Knowledge process, 116-119       change requests, 371
Manage Team process                             project execution data and results, 370
   assessment, 254                              update documents, 372
   change requests, 260-261                     work performance information, 371
   conflict management, 256-258, 260          Monitor Risks process
   decision making, 256                         audits, 460
   emotional intelligence, 256                  change requests, 461
   influencing, 256                             definition, 420
   input, 253                                   documents, 460
   means to facilitate team                     input, 458
          management, 255                       output, 458
   organizational process asset, 261            reserve analysis, 460
   output, 253                                  review meetings, 460
602   Index


      Monitor Risks process (cont.)                Organizational structures
        risk report, 459                              centralized, 55
        risk results, 459                             functional, 56-57
        steps, 458                                    hybrid, 59-60
        technical performance analysis, 459           matrix, 58-59
        tools and techniques, 458                     multi-divisional, 61
        work performance report, 459                  non-project friendly, 55
      Monte Carlo simulation models, 442              organic, 61
                                                      project-oriented, 57-58
      Motivation-hygiene theory, 263, 265, 520
                                                      virtual, 61
      Multi-divisional organizations, 61
                                                   Organizational theories, 231


      N                                            P
      Negotiation skills, 72                       Parametric estimation, 194, 237, 288

      Net present value (NPV), 77                  Payback period (PBP), 78

      Non-project friendly organizations, 55       Performance measurement analysis,
                                                             cost control
      Numerical scale, 424                             cost performance, 297-299
                                                       EVT/EVM, 296-297
                                                       forecasting (see Forecasting)
      O                                                performance variables, 304-305
      One-way communication, 356                       schedule performance, 299-301
      Online learning system, 509-510                  variance, 296
      Operations, 6, 8-9, 501                      Performing organization, 5
      Opportunity cost, 80                         Perform Integrated Change Control process
                                                       change control tools, 115
      Organic organizations, 61
                                                       change requests, 113-114
      Organizational breakdown structure               data-analysis and decision-making
               (OBS), 228                                    techniques, 115
      Organizational culture                           enterprise environmental factors, 114
         management style, 54                          expert judgment and meetings, 115
         policies, 54                                  organizational process assets, 114
         project management style, 54                  output, 115-116
         project policies and procedures, 55           performance report, 113
         project selection, 54                         process changes, 111-112
         team performance assessments, 55              project documents, 113
         values, 54                                    project management plan, 113
         vision, 54                                    stakeholders, 111
         work environment, 54                      Physical resource assignments, 267
      Organizational process assets (OPAs), 125,   Planned value (PV), 299
                182, 329, 474, 512-513, 515
                                                   Planning process group, 18
         categories, 51
         definition, 46, 48                        Planning project communication,
         EEFs, 505                                           see Communication planning
         knowledge database repository, 52-53      Planning quality management
         processes, procedures, and                    deliverables and quality
                policies, 51-52                              requirements, 388
                                                                                Index   603



    determine quality standards, 388       Process groups, 5
    get background and reference, 388         executing, 19-20
    get stakeholder information, 389          flow of, 17
    output, 392                               and knowledge areas, 502
    process, 387                              monitoring and controlling, 507
    quality assumption and risk               planning, 18
           information, 389                Procurement items, 470
    tools and techniques
                                           Procurement management, 28
        data analysis, 390
                                              bidding documents, 481-482
        data-gathering techniques, 389
                                              business aspects, 480
        data presentation, 391
                                              buyer, 470
Planning schedule management, 178             conducting
Plan Procurement Management process                advertising, 488
    benefit management, 473                        agreements, 490
    contracts, 484                                 bidder conferences, 488
    cost-reimbursable contracts, 475-476           changes and updates, 490
    definition, 471                                definition, 471
    EEFs, 474                                      input, 486-487
    fixed-price contracts, 474-475                 obtain agreement, 487
    input, 472                                     output, 487
    management and coordination, 484               proposals, 489
    OPAs, 474                                      seek sellers, 487
    output, 472                                    selected sellers, 490
    quality management, 473                        select sellers, 487
    requirements of, 473                           tools and techniques, 487
    risks, 474                                contract type, 537
    scope management, 473                     controlling
    stakeholders, 474                              audits, 494
    T&M contracts, 476                             change requests, 494
    tasks, 485                                     close procurements, 495
    tools and techniques, 472                      definition, 471
Plan Risk Responses process, see Risk              documents, 493
          response plan                            input, 491-492
                                                   output, 492
Portfolio, 30-33                                   sellers' data, 493
Precedence diagramming method                      tools and techniques, 492
         (PDM), 187-188                            work performance
Present value (PV), 77                                information, 494
                                              definition, 470
Probability
                                              delivery methods, 481
   algebraic equations, 35
                                              independent cost estimate, 483
   defined, 34
                                              make-or-buy decision analysis, 478,
   distributions, 440
                                                      480-481
   expected value, 35
                                              market research analysis, 478
   random variable, 34
                                              phase management, 481
   standard deviation, 35
                                              planning (see Plan Procurement
   theory of, 34
                                                      Management process)
   variance, 35
                                              process groups and outputs, 471
Problem solving skills, 73, 258               seller, 470
604   Index


      Procurement management, 28 (cont.)                resources, 284
         source-selection analysis, 478-479             scope baseline, 285
         technical aspects, 480                         updates, 291
      Program evaluation and review technique       Project-friendly organizations, 55
               (PERT), 195, 514                     Project management
      Program manager's responsibilities, 29-30         baseline, 37
      Progressive elaboration, 13-14                    defined, 12
                                                        knowledge area, 5
      Project authorization, 79
                                                        life cycle, 5
      Project charter                                   operation, 6, 8-9
          agreements, 92                                organization, 5
          assumptions log, 95                           organization categories, 10
          contract, 507                                 origins of, 10-11
          enterprise environmental factors, 92          performing organization, 5
          input, tools, techniques and output, 91       phase, 4
          organizational process assets, 93             portfolio, 30-31, 33
          tools and techniques, 93-94                   process, 5
      Project communication management                        defined, 14
          manage communication, 346                           groups (see Process groups)
          monitor communication, 346                          parts, 15
          plan communication, 346                       program, 29-32
          processes, 347                                quarter, 504
          translators, 345                              stages of project lifecycle, 37-38
      Project cost estimation                           stakeholder, 5
          activity, 290                                 tailoring, 5
          documentation, 291                            temporary, 6
          information sources                           unique product, 7
               enterprise environmental                 variable and value, 36, 504
                 factors, 287                       Project management information system
               lessons learned register, 287                 (PMIS), 103, 189, 205, 290
               methods, units and precision         Project Management Institute (PMI), 12
                 level, 287
                                                    Project management office (PMO), 52, 55,
               organizational process assets, 287
                                                             58, 61-63
               project schedule, 286
               quality management plan, 286         Project-oriented organization's, 57-58
               resource requirements, 286           Project schedule management,
               risk register, 286                             see Schedule management
          input, tools and techniques, and          Project schedule network
                 output, 285                                  diagrams, 187, 200
          methods
                                                    Pull communication, 356
               alternative analysis, 290
               analogous estimation, 288            Push communication, 356
               bottom-up estimation, 288
               contingency reserve analysis, 289    Q
               cost of quality, 290                 Qualitative risk analysis
               decision making, 290                    categories, 435
               parametric estimation, 288              data quality, 433
               PMIS, 290                               definition, 419
               three-point estimates, 290              goal, 432
                                                                                 Index      605



   hierarchical charts, 435                     Monte Carlo technique, 442
   input, 431                                   output, 437-438
   output, 431                                  priority, 445
   probability and impact matrix, 433-434       probability distribution, 440
   risk register, 436                           project success, 444
   risk report, 437                             recommendations, 445
   tools and techniques, 431                    sensitivity analysis, 441-442
Quality management, 28, 227                     steps, 438-439
   continuous improvement, 385                  tools and techniques, 437-438
   control (see Control quality process)        trends, 445
   customer satisfaction, 385
   data presentation tool, 532              R
   EEF and OPA, 530
                                            Raw data, 14, 15
   get quality control measurements, 395
   get quality metrics, 395                 Reconcile, 258
   get quality-related risk sources, 395    Relative scale, 424
   grade and quality, 384                   Reserve analysis, 195, 460
   input, 531
   item, 533                                Resource breakdown structure (RBS), 192,
   management responsibility, 386                    229, 238
   Monte Carlo simulation, 529              Resource calendars, 236
   organizational process assets, 531       Resource leveling, 202
   output
                                            Resource management
        change requests, 399
                                               activity resources, 224
        quality reports, 399
                                               authority, 232
        test and evaluation, 399
                                               competency, 232
   planning (see Planning quality
                                               conflict-resolution strategy, 519
          management)
                                               control resources, 224
   precision and accuracy, 385
                                               core information, 227
   prevention and inspection, 385
                                               definition, 222
   processes, 383-384, 394
                                               Develop Team, 224
   reports and tests, 395
                                               EEFs, 517
   tools and techniques
                                               Estimate Activity Resources process, 223
        audit, 397-398
                                               identifying and acquiring resources, 231
        data gathering and data
                                               OPAs, 516-517
          analysis, 396-397
                                               planning process, 224-227
        data-presentation, 397
                                               project organizational chart, 232
        decision-making, 397
                                               project team, 224
        Design for X (DfX), 398
                                               quality management plan, 227
Quality metrics, 393                           recognition and rewards, 233
Quantitative risk analysis                     responsibilities, 232
   decision-tree analysis, 443                 roles, 231
   definition, 419                             team charter, 233-234
   effect, 445                                 team plan, 233
   EMV analysis, 442                        Resource optimization, 202
   goals, 437
                                            Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM), 229
   influence diagram, 444
   input, 437-438                           Return on Investment (ROI), 77
   interviewing, 440, 444                   Risk breakdown structure (RBS), 423, 427, 429
606   Index


      Risk management, 28                                  tools and techniques, 446-447
          actions, 535                                 Root-cause analysis, 396, 428
          characteristics, 418
          EEFs and OPAs, 534
          identification process (see Identification
                                                       S
                 process)                              Salience model, 325
          Implementing Risk Responses (see             Schedule compression, 204
                 Implement Risk Responses)             Schedule control process, 516
          Monitor Risks (see Monitor Risks process)
          negative impact, 418                         Schedule development process
          planning                                        activity relationship-related
              categories, 423                                    information, 198
              definition, 419                             global information, 198
              EEFs, 421-422                               output
              identification, 423                              change request, 206
              impact, 424                                      project calendars, 206
              input, 421                                       project schedule, 205-206
              methodology, 422                                 schedule baseline, 206
              output, 421                                      schedule data, 206
              probability-impact matrix, 425              risk-related information, 198
              reporting and tracking, 425                 tools and techniques
              stakeholders, 422, 423                           agile release planning, 205
              strategy, 422                                    crashing, 204
              tools and techniques, 421                        critical path method, 199-202
          Plan Risk Response process (see Risk                 fast tracking, 204
                 response plan)                                leads and lags, applying, 204
          process group, 420                                   resource leveling, 202
          qualitative analysis (see Qualitative risk           resource optimization, 202
                 analysis)                                     resource smoothing, 202
          quantitative analysis (see Quantitative              schedule compression, 204
                 risk analysis)                                schedule network analysis, 199
                                                               simulations, 203
      Risk register, 425, 429-430, 448, 454                    "what if" scenario analysis, 203
      Risk report, 430                                 Schedule management
      Risk response plan                                  activity duration (see Estimate Activity
          change requests, 455                                   Durations process)
          contingent response, 452                        controlling schedule (see Control
          data analysis, 453-454                                 schedule process)
          decision-making analysis, 453-454               deadlines, 514
          definition, 420                                 defining activities
          goals, 446                                           activity attributes, 183
          input, 446-447                                       activity list, 183
          negative risks, 449                                  EEFs and OPAs, 182
          output, 446-447                                      milestone list, 184
          positive risks, 449                                  project scope baseline, 181
          risk register, 454                              development process (see Schedule
          SEE, 451                                               development process)
          steps, 447-448                                  plan, 180
          threat strategies, 449-451                      processes, 176-177
                                                                                 Index   607



    sequencing activities (see Sequence     Source-selection analysis, 478-479
          activities process)               Stakeholder management
    time constraints, 514                       business case document, 322
Schedule network analysis, 199, 513             data analysis, 323
Schedule performance                            data-gathering techniques, 322
   PV/BCWS, 299                                 data-presentation, 324-325
   SPI, 300-301                                 EEFs, 523-524
   SV, 300                                      input, 321
                                                interactions, 319
Schedule performance index (SPI), 210,
                                                Manage Stakeholder Engagement
         300-301
                                                    EEFs, 524
Schedule variance (SV), 210, 300                    input, 332
Scope management, 28                                OPAs, 524
   control point and control account, 510           output, 332-333
   Control Scope process, 159-162, 511              three-pronged task, 331, 333
   Define Project process, 151                      tools and technique, 332
   definition, 137                              Monitor Stakeholder Engagement,
   development approach, 139-140                       334-337, 525-526
   document updation, 153                       negative, 319
   elements, 151-152                            OPAs, 523-524
   functions, 137                               outputs, 318, 321
   high-level information, 138                  Plan Stakeholder Engagement
   input to scope definition, 149-150               assessment matrix, 330
   output of, 151                                   data analysis, 329
   PMBOK, 508-509                                   data presentation, 330
   process groups, 139                              information project level, 328
   project plan development, 136                    inputs, 327
   purposes, 153                                    main sources, 328
   requirement management plan, 140                 outputs, 327
   tools and techniques, 150                        secondary sources, 328
   validation, 162-165                              support information, 328
Scope, schedule, and cost, 306-308                  tools and techniques, 327
                                                positive, 319
Sensitivity analysis, 441-442                   process groups, 318
Sequence activities process                     procurement documents, 322
   schedule network diagrams, 185-186           project charter, 322
   tools and techniques                         register, 326
       dependency determination, 186-187        tools and techniques, 321
       leads and lags, 189
                                            Stakeholders
       PDM, 187-188
                                                business partners, 64
       PMIS, 189
                                                customer/user, 64
Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB), 355,       definition, 49, 62
         515, 526                               functional manager, 64
Sequencing, 184                                 influencing, 65, 72
Service-level agreements (SLA), 92              leadership skills, 70-71
                                                manager, 66-67
Share, exploit, enhance (SEE), 451              negative, 62-63
Smoothing, 258                                  negotiation skills, 72
608   Index


      Stakeholders (cont.)                         Time and Material (T&M)
          operational management, 64                        Contracts, 476-477
          PMO, 63                                  Time management, 28
          portfolio manager, 63
                                                   To-Complete Performance Index
          portfolio review board, 63
                                                           (TCPI), 304
          positive, 62
          problem solving, 73                      Tuckman model, 249-250
          program manager, 63
          project team, 63                         U
          sellers, 64                              Unmanaged project, 4
          sponsor, 65
          strategic and business management
                 skills, 69-70                     V
          technical project management skill, 68   Virtual organizations, 61
      Statement of Work (SOW), 483                 Virtual teams, 242-243, 246
      Strategic and business management
                skills, 69-70                      W, X,Y, Z
      Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and    "What if" scenario analysis, 203
                threats (SWOT), 428                Withdrawal strategy, 258
      Synchronous communication, 356               Work breakdown structure (WBS), 136,
                                                            284-285, 292
      T                                              decomposition, 155-157
      Technical performance analysis, 459            input, tools, techniques and output,
                                                            154-155
      Technical project management skill, 68         organizational process assets, 155
      Telecommuting, 242                             output of, 157
      Temporary effort, 4, 6                         scope baseline, 157-159, 511
      Term of Reference (TOR), 483                 Work packages, 155, 174
      Three-point estimates, 290                   Work performance information, 371, 494
