                             PMP Question Bank

All rights reserved, and questions in this book are copyrighted to PM Study Circle 2018.
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means
without the express permission from the author.

https://PMStudyCircle.com
fahad@pmstudycircle.com

PMP, PMBOK Guide, and PMI are registered trademarks of Project Management
Institute (PMI), USA.

Copyright (c) 2018 by PM Study Circle.

Version: 4.5
                        Table of Content

Introduction

Practice Questions: Set-I

Practice Questions: Set-II

Answers Sheet: Set-I

Answers Sheet: Set-II
                                    Introduction

This PMP Exam Sample Questions eBook has been designed to assist you in your studies
and pass the PMP exam. It contains 400 PMP exam sample questions based on the sixth
edition of the PMBOK Guide.

While writing this eBook, I have made every effort to include questions from all chapters
of the PMBOK Guide, and each of the 49 processes. I can assure you that if you attempt
all the questions given in this eBook and refer the PMBOK Guide (whenever there is a
reference to it); you will be in a much better position to pass the exam.

Answers are given at the end of the book and explained in detail with corresponding
reference to the PMBOK Guide, where applicable. These explanations will cover many
important topics for your PMP exam preparation.

It is my hope that you will find this book useful for your studies.

I welcome your comments and feedback on this book. You can send me an email if you
need any assistance or clarification; I'll always be available for you.

Please keep in mind that there is no guarantee that you will pass the exam by studying
this book. However, this book will certainly help you bridge the knowledge gaps and
elevate your level in the subject.

Thank you.

Regards,
M Fahad Usmani (PMP, PMI-RMP)
fahad@pmstudycircle.com
                          Practice Questions: Set-I
Question: 1
Change management systems deal with changes in project processes, baselines, etc.
Configuration management systems deal with the changes in product characteristics.
Which of the following statements is true regarding change management and
configuration management systems?

(a) The configuration management system is a subset of the change management
system
(b) The change management system is a subset of the configuration management
system
(c) The configuration management system and the change management system are not
related to each other
(d) None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 2
You have been developing a next generation electric engine for high-speed electric
trains. The project is 25% completed, you have spent 21% of your budget and you are
slightly behind the schedule. The client is worried and asks you to provide him with the
progress and forecasting report as soon as possible. So, you start collecting information
such as the start and finish dates of scheduled activities, number of change requests,
number of defects, actual costs, actual durations, etc. These are examples of:

(a)   Work performance measurements
(b)   Work performance data
(c)   Work performance information
(d)   Parameters

Go to the Answer

Question: 3
You have been hired by ABC Inc. and appointed as a project manager for their new
project. The project charter has been signed and currently you are busy with preparing a
detailed description of your project and the product. The description is in detail, the
final requirements are identified, the product boundaries are defined, and you have
outlined what is included and what is excluded. Once you complete this process, which
of the following documents will you not update next?

(a) Issue log
(b) Stakeholder register
(c) Requirements documentations
(d) Requirement traceability matrix

Go to the Answer

Question: 4
You have been given a project to construct a small dam. Currently, you are visiting
your project stakeholders and asking about their needs and expectations. You also have
had many workshops and brainstorming sessions with them. Which process is this?

(a)   Identify stakeholders
(b)   Collect requirements
(c)   Define scope
(d)   Control scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 5
You are working on a project to set up a call center for your client. The duration of the
project is two years. One year has passed, however, only 40% of the work has been
completed against the schedule, which says that by now 50% of the work should have
been completed. To date, you have spent 60% of the budget. What is the cost
performance index of the project?

(a)   1.25
(b)   1.5
(c)   0.8
(d)   0.67

Go to the Answer

Question: 6
You are in the middle of your project and working on a deliverable which is 90%
completed. It is time for the yearly audit. A team of auditors are about to come and
verify if you are following the process as defined or not. However, as the deliverable is
about to be completed, you check it and measure all dimensions to find any possible
dimensional defects. What process is this?

(a)   Control quality
(b)   Manage quality
(c)   Plan quality management
(d)   Control scope
Go to the Answer

Question: 7
You are attending a monthly status meeting with your stakeholders. During the
discussion with an influential stakeholder, he asks you about a particular deliverable,
He would like to know why it is taking so long to deliver and who is responsible for it.
To answer his query, you refer a document and call Tom, who was responsible for this
deliverable. What document is this?

(a)   Scope statement
(b)   Stakeholder register
(c)   RACI chart
(d)   Issue log

Go to the Answer

Question: 8
Your project is going full steam and to prepare a monthly report you collect some data
and give it to John who is your team member. You ask him to provide you with work
performance information. He analyzes the information, compiles the data, and gives
you the requested information which includes the status of deliverables, the number of
change requests, implementation status for change requests, and forecasted estimates to
complete. Among this information, which does not represent the information you
requested?

(a)   Number of change requests
(b)   Status of deliverables
(c)   Forecasted estimates to complete
(d)   Implementation status for change requests

Go to the Answer

Question: 9
You are a risk manager of a project and the project manager has given you the
responsibility of developing the risk management plan. So, you start collecting the risks
and then you categorize them based on their impact on the project objectives.
Afterward, you analyze them and develop the risk response plan for positive risks and
negative risks. After developing these response plans, what will your next step be?

(a) Develop the risk response plan for neutral risks
(b) Update the project management plan
(c) Assign the risk action owner to each risk
(d) Change the critical path to reflect the risk impact

Go to the Answer

Question: 10
You have signed a contract with the client to provide manpower for 50 USD/hour.
Moreover, you will also be reimbursed for any costs incurred, along with a fixed fee of
25,000 USD. What kind of contract is this?

(a)   FPIF
(b)   T&M
(c)   CPAF
(d)   CPIF

Go to the Answer

Question: 11
You have been given a project to build a park for a local community. Currently you are
developing approaches to involve project stakeholders based on their needs,
expectations, interests, and potential impact on the project. Which of the following is
not an output of this process?

(a)   Communication management plan
(b)   Risk register
(c)   Stakeholder register
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 12
Which of the following are the four basic elements of the PMI code of ethics and
professional conduct?

(a)   Responsibility, respect, fairness, honesty
(b)   Responsibility, accountability, fairness, honesty
(c)   Responsibility, respect, fairness, transparency
(d)   Responsibility, transparency, fairness, honesty

Go to the Answer

Question: 13
In change management, CCB reviews the changes in processes or in the baseline and
then make a decision to either approve or reject it. On the other hand, configuration
control deals with any change in product specification and the processes. Which of the
following activities is not included in the perform integrated change control process?

(a)   Configuration status accounting
(b)   Configuration account checking
(c)   Configuration identification
(d)   Configuration verification and audit

Go to the Answer

Question: 14
During the project execution, some people stole your consumables. You did not identify
this threat earlier, though you were able to manage the situation through a workaround.
This risk did not have much of an impact on your cost baseline but the schedule was
impacted. Management is aware of the issue and to get the complete picture they insist
you provide them the performance report. Which of the following information will you
provide to them?

(a)   Status of deliverables
(b)   Actual cost, actual duration, etc.
(c)   Milestones status
(d)   Memos

Go to the Answer

Question: 15
You have identified your project stakeholders and are now analyzing them with the help
of a salience model in order to manage them effectively. Which of the following
parameters are used in the salience model?

(a)   Power, urgency, legitimacy
(b)   Power, interest, influence
(c)   Power, impact, influence
(d)   Power, influence, legitimacy

Go to the Answer

Question: 16
You have received an urgent call from management and they asked you to find the cost
estimate of a new project. Since time is critical and you have to provide them with the
cost estimate, which technique will you use to calculate the project cost?
(a)   Parametric
(b)   Analogous
(c)   Bottom up
(d)   Symmetric estimate

Go to the Answer

Question: 17
While you are in the execution phase of your project, management informs you that
some ISO certified people are coming to your project to see if you're complying with
standards, policies, and procedure. This act is part of which of the following processes?

(a)   Quality control
(b)   Manage quality
(c)   Verify scope
(d)   Control scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 18
You are working in a matrix organization and managing a project. You are having
trouble working with one deliverable so you ask the functional manager to send you
two team members who are experts in dealing with this type of work. She agrees and
provides you with two of her best employees. They have joined your project and you
have given them their roles and responsibilities. They are also made aware of who will
be responsible or accountable for each deliverable. However, they are still not clear
about their roles and responsibilities. So, to make it clear what document or chart will
you show them?

(a)   RACI chart
(b)   OBS
(c)   RAM
(d)   RBS

Go to the Answer

Question: 19
You met with your team member at a dinner party, where he discussed some issues
regarding the project stakeholders. What kind of communication was this?

(a) Para-lingual
(b) Verbal
(c) Formal verbal
(d) Informal verbal

Go to the Answer

Question: 20
You have identified a risk that your work might be affected due to an equipment
malfunction. Which of the following risk response strategies will you use to contain this
risk?

(a)   Exploit
(b)   Enhance
(c)   Mitigate
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 21
Your company has signed up to build a high-tech machine in collaboration with ABC
Corp in Japan. ABC Corp will provide the expert, technical know-how and any spare
parts you may need. This is a very high-tech machine, the exact description of work is
not yet clear, and you are building it for the first time. In this scenario what kind of
contract will you select?

(a)   FPIF
(b)   CPAF
(c)   T&M
(d)   FFP

Go to the Answer

Question: 22
You have been appointed project manager of a project. The project charter is signed and
you have started working on it. As the project is big and involves many stakeholders,
you start identifying your project's stakeholders. The number of identified stakeholders
is huge and you are worried about how you will manage such a large number of
stakeholders effectively. Fortunately, the PMBOK Guide provides you with many
strategies to manage stakeholders under all circumstances. In this case, which of the
following models will you not use to develop the stakeholder management strategy?

(a) Salience model
(b) Power / Interest grid
(c) Tornado diagram
(d) Influence / Impact grid

Go to the Answer

Question: 23
You have floated a firm fixed price contract for some work. Since the scope of the work
is not clear, the risk is higher and contractors are hesitant to bid for your contract.
You are very busy and don't have time to monitor the contractor's bill. In this case,
what kind of contract will you select?

(a)   CPIF
(b)   CPAF
(c)   T&M
(d)   FPIF

Go to the Answer

Question: 24
You are on a committee and are in the process of selecting a project. This committee is
asking tough and critical questions from team members. Which of the following project
selection techniques is the committee using here?

(a)   Benefit cost ratio
(b)   Scoring model
(c)   Murder board
(d)   Benefit analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 25
The project charter is the document that authorizes the existence of the project and
contains a great deal of important information. Which of the following options shows
the correct content of a project charter?

(a) Project purpose, high level requirements, assumptions and constraints, summary
budget
(b) High-level risk, summary milestone, project management plan, summary budget
(c) Project objective, stakeholder list, WBS, project approval authority
(d) Name of the sponsor, name of the project manager, schedule baseline, summary
budget

Go to the Answer
Question: 26
You are in the define scope process and defining the detailed scope of the product and
the project. This process helps you define the description of product, service or result
and define boundaries and tells you about requirement inclusion and exclusion. Which
of the following is not an outcome once the process ends?

(a)   Acceptance criteria
(b)   Project exclusions
(c)   Risk register update
(d)   Stakeholder register update

Go to the Answer

Question: 27
What kind of dependency is shown in the given exhibit?




(a) Start to Start (SS)
(b) Finish to Start (FS)
(c) Finish to Finish (FF)
(d) Start to Finish (SF)
Go to the Answer

Question: 28
You are over budget and it seems difficult for you to complete with your current budget
which is 250,000 USD. Considering your current cost performance will be the same as
the future cost performance, you calculate your new budget as 300,000 USD. To date,
you have spent 100,000 USD. What is the earned value?

(a)   150,000 USD
(b)   120,000 USD
(c)   83,000 USD
(d)   100,000 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 29
There are many problems causing trouble for your project. You want to see the sources
that are causing the majority of the problems for your project. Which diagram will you
refer to in order to find this information?
(a)   Flow chart
(b)   Run chart
(c)   Pareto chart
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 30
You are working in a functional organization as a line supervisor. Your job is to inspect
products, fill out the checklist, write your observations, and hand the product over to
your boss before the end of the day. Your boss reviews it and comes with you to inspect
the product himself and then approves the product. What kind of boss is he?

(a)   X
(b)   Y
(c)   Supportive
(d)   Not supportive

Go to the Answer

Question: 31
You have been appointed a project manager for a project which involves more than
3,000 stakeholders. After identifying your project stakeholders, you are in the process
of determining the method to use for transferring information to your stakeholders.
Which of the following factors will not affect your choice of technology?

(a)   Sensitivity of the information
(b)   Project environment
(c)   Ease of use
(d)   Number of stakeholders

Go to the Answer

Question: 32
In your project you identified a risk; there is a chance you may lose a critical employee.
You have identified an employee from another project to bring into your project if your
team member leaves you. However, this employee is known for his bad behavior and
creating trouble for other employees. In a monthly risk review, a stakeholder asks you
what your strategy will be if this new team member creates a problem for you. You
assured him that you are aware of it and you also have a plan for it. What kind of risk is
the stakeholder discussing with you?
(a)   Residual risk
(b)   Secondary risk
(c)   Uncertainty
(d)   Primary risk

Go to the Answer

Question: 33
You have signed a contract to construct a cross-country gas pipeline. The duration of
the project is 5 years. Although the scope is well defined and the duration is long, the
seller is insisting you reimburse any costs which may increase due to the time factor.
What kind of contract will you select in this case?

(a)   CPIF
(b)   CPAF
(c)   FP-EPA
(d)   FPIF

Go to the Answer

Question: 34
You have been given a big project to complete. This is an important project for your
company, therefore management does not want any delay in completion. As soon as the
project charter is signed, you start identifying and categorizing stakeholders using
various data representation tools. Which of the following tools will you not use here?

(a)   Brain writing
(b)   Stakeholder cube
(c)   Direction of influence
(d)   Salience model

Go to the Answer

Question: 35
You are driving to a meeting and you are late. If you drive over the speed limit and run
a few signals, you can reach the meeting on time as nobody is there to watch or catch
you. Which of the following should you do?

(a)   Since no one is watching, you can break the rule
(b)   You will never break the rule whatever happens
(c)   You will cross the speed limit but will not break the signals
(d)   You will not cross the speed limit but will break the signals
Go to the Answer

Question: 36
A project manager has some authority to manage the budget; however, he does not have
any full-time employees under him. In what type of organization is he working?

(a)   Strong matrix
(b)   Weak matrix
(c)   Balanced matrix
(d)   Projectized

Go to the Answer

Question: 37
You have completed your project to construct a railway bridge. The project is in the
closing phase and you are now archiving various documents such as the stakeholder
register, risk register, project calendar, etc. All these documents are part of:

(a)   Project closure documents
(b)   Historical information
(c)   Project files
(d)   Enterprise environmental factors

Go to the Answer

Question: 38
The client has given you a project to build a research center for him. You have met with
all stakeholders, noted down their requirements, and you are now deciding which
requirements should be included in the project and which should not. What process is
this?

(a)   Identify stakeholders
(b)   Collect requirements
(c)   Define scope
(d)   Define requirements

Go to the Answer

Question: 39
You are constructing a school building and due to some unforeseen incidents, your
project is delayed. To bring the project on schedule, you are thinking about running
several activities in parallel which were earlier planned to run sequentially. So, you
started reviewing activities such as excavation of foundation, building walls, carpentry
work, electrical work, and plumbing work, etc. After the review, you decide to run the
carpentry, electrical, and plumbing works together. Excavating the foundation for the
construction of a wall is an example of which of the following?

(a)   Mandatory dependency
(b)   Discretionary dependency
(c)   External dependency
(d)   Internal dependency

Go to the Answer

Question: 40
Assuming your past performance will be the same as the future performance, you have
calculated the EAC as 250,000 USD. Your previous budget was 200,000 USD and you
have earned 50,000 USD to date. What is the money spent to date?

(a)   40,000 USD
(b)   50,000 USD
(c)   90,000 USD
(d)   62,500 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 41
Which of the following control charts will you use to monitor discrete data for a
product to be considered a pass or fail?

(a)   p-chart
(b)   np-chart
(c)   u-chart
(d)   c-chart

Go to the Answer

Question: 42
Your project consists of 150 team members and most of them are from the local area.
One day you hear that two team members are fighting with each other because of a
parking place. You call both team members, listen to them, and decide that whoever
arrives first will park their vehicle in that space. Both members agree and the issue is
resolved. In a project, which one of the following is the least source of conflict?

(a) Schedule
(b) Resources
(c) Working Style
(d) Personnel Reason

Go to the Answer

Question: 43
Your team has 10 members, including you. Two new members are added to it. How
many have the lines of communication increased?

(a)   111
(b)   66
(c)   45
(d)   21

Go to the Answer

Question: 44
During the project execution, some equipment breaks down. This risk was not
identified earlier. So, to manage the situation you contacted several equipment holding
companies and rented new equipment until your equipment is repaired. This is an
example of:

(a)   Defect repair
(b)   Risk mitigation
(c)   Workaround
(d)   Corrective action

Go to the Answer

Question: 45
During a project management process, you are reviewing proposals from many bidders
using some predetermined criteria. Based on this review, you prepare a final list of
bidders and then select a bidder from this list. What project management process is
this?

(a)   Plan procurement
(b)   Conduct procurement
(c)   Control procurement
(d)   Define scope

Go to the Answer
Question: 46
You have recently joined an ongoing project and you just had a meeting with the
project sponsor and other important members. Since you are new to the project, how
will you know their views about the project?

(a)   You will ask team members about it
(b)   You will arrange a party and invite them
(c)   You will try to meet them again
(d)   You will look into the Stakeholder Register

Go to the Answer

Question: 47
You're working in a third world country with a high level of political volatility. Your
team member told you that you will have to pay some bribes to get faster approval.
What will your next step be?

(a)   You will pay the bribe
(b)   You will negotiate it
(c)   You will inform management
(d)   You will never pay the bribe

Go to the Answer

Question: 48
You are managing four projects in your organization. Two projects are of a similar
type, but the other two are entirely different. What is your role in the organization?

(a)   Portfolio manager
(b)   Program manager
(c)   Project manager
(d)   Program coordinator

Go to the Answer

Question: 49
You have been assigned as a project manager for a project which was terminated a few
years earlier due to some government regulations. Now you reviewing this document to
start again. This document is an example of:

(a) Enterprise environment factor
(b) Organizational process assets
(c) Stakeholder analysis
(d) Control scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 50
To collect the requirements for your project you have decided to use a few techniques
including group creativity techniques. Which of the following is not an example of
group creativity techniques?

(a)   Brainstorming
(b)   Nominal group technique
(c)   Interview
(d)   Affinity diagram

Go to the Answer

Question: 51
Which of the following helps you to use existing knowledge and contribute to
organizational learning?

(a)   OPA
(b)   EEF
(c)   Lessons learned
(d)   Manage project knowledge

Go to the Answer

Question: 52
You have been given a multi-year project to build a refinery. This is a very large and
complex project, and you now need to estimate the cost for this project. What basic
assumption will you need to make while estimating the cost for this project?

(a) If you get the project budget in phases
(b) You will be given all costs and resources at the beginning of the project
(c) Whether the estimate will be limited to direct costs or if it will include the indirect
costs as well
(d) If the project schedule is fixed or based on events

Go to the Answer

Question: 53
To reduce the cost of inventory, you are using a very famous Japanese methodology
which emphasizes reducing the cost of inventory to a minimum level. In this
methodology, how much inventory are you allowed to keep in stock?

(a)   25% of inventory
(b)   50% of inventory
(c)   10% of inventory
(d)   No inventory

Go to the Answer

Question: 54
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs is represented in a hierarchical pyramid with five levels.
The four lower levels are considered physiological needs, and the top level is
considered growth needs. The lower level needs must be satisfied before higher-order
needs can influence behavior. Which of the following represents the third level in
Maslow's Hierarchical pyramid?

(a)   Social
(b)   Esteem
(c)   Self-actualization
(d)   Safety

Go to the Answer

Question: 55
You prepared a Minutes of Meeting, got it signed by your boss, and sent it to all
attendees. This communication is an example of which of the following?

(a)   Formal written
(b)   Informal written
(c)   Formal verbal
(d)   Informal verbal

Go to the Answer

Question: 56
You had contracted a Fixed Price Incentive Fee contract with the seller with the
following parameters:

Target cost: 500,000 USD
Target profit: 50,000 USD
Target price: 550,000 USD
Ceiling price: 600,000 USD
Share ratio: 80/20

The contractor has completed the work for 400,000 USD. How much actual profit will
you give to the seller?

(a)   20,000 USD
(b)   50,000 USD
(c)   30,000 USD
(d)   70,000 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 57
Project success is all about managing stakeholders efficiently and fulfilling their
requirements. To keep them satisfied you will have to compare the current engagement
level of all stakeholders with the planned stakeholder engagement throughout the
project life cycle. As per the PMBOK Guide Sixth Edition, which option is not an
engagement level of stakeholder classification?

(a)   Resistant
(b)   Neutral
(c)   Aggressive
(d)   Supportive

Go to the Answer

Question: 58
"We report unethical or illegal conduct to appropriate management and, if necessary, to
those affected by the conduct."

The above statement belongs to:

(a)   Responsibility: mandatory standards
(b)   Responsibility: aspirational standards
(c)   Fairness: aspirational standards
(d)   Fairness: mandatory standards

Go to the Answer

Question: 59
The client has requested a change in a deliverable which you have processed through a
change request and it is approved. Now, you are in the process of implementing this
change into the project. In which of the following processes do you implement the
approved change?

(a)   Monitor and control project work
(b)   Direct and manage project work
(c)   Perform integrated change control
(d)   Control scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 60
You are reviewing an old project file where you find a document which contains the
project description, important requirements, milestones, and project budget. What
document is it?

(a)   Scope statement
(b)   Project charter
(c)   Scope baseline
(d)   Procurement document

Go to the Answer

Question: 61
While finalizing the WBS you assign each work package to a control account and
establish a unique identifier for the same work from a code of account. These identifiers
help you find a hierarchical sum of costs, schedule, etc. Which statement is true about
the WBS?

(a)   It contains all project work
(b)   It authorizes the project manager
(c)   It is a hierarchy of project staff
(d)   It is a hierarchical breakdown of project resources

Go to the Answer

Question: 62
You have two activities with Finish to Start sequences. The duration of the first activity
is 10 days, and the duration of the second activity is 8 days. The estimated time
completed for these activities is 18 days. The client asks you complete these activities
within 15 days; you review his request and agree to do so at no extra cost. Now, you
plan to start the second activity three days before the first activity completes so that
both activities can be completed in 15 days. This process is known as:
(a)   Schedule modification
(b)   Fast tracking
(c)   Crashing
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 63
You are managing a multi-year project whose budget is 500,000 USD. The cost
variance is -45,000 USD, the actual cost is 200,000 USD, and the planned value is
140,000 USD. Based on the above data which statement is correct?

(a)   The project is behind schedule
(b)   The project is ahead of schedule
(c)   The earned value is 245,000 USD
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 64
The plan-do-check-act cycle is defined and modified by Shewhart & Deming. It is a
four-step model for carrying out change and improving processes. In these four stages,
which stage involves the evaluation of improvement?

(a)   Do
(b)   Check
(c)   Plan
(d)   Act

Go to the Answer

Question: 65
During the team member acquiring process, you observe that a particular employee
from another department can be used for your project for some work. Therefore, you
ask their functional manager to provide the employee on alternate days. The functional
manager says they can provide you with the particular employee for only two days a
week. Which technique are you using here?

(a)   Acquire project team
(b)   Negotiation
(c)   Pre-assignment
(d)   Develop project team
Go to the Answer

Question: 66
You are discussing an issue with your team member. While you are talking, he is
rubbing his nose, looking around, and slouching. What kind of communication is he
showing by using these activities?

(a)   Para-lingual communication
(b)   Active listening
(c)   Feedback
(d)   Non-verbal communication

Go to the Answer

Question: 67
During the risk analysis process, you find that a specific risk has a remote chance of
happening and if it occurs, it will have very little effect on the project objective. What
will you do with this risk?

(a)   Analyze it further
(b)   Assign it a risk owner
(c)   Keep it in watch list
(d)   You will ignore it

Go to the Answer

Question: 68
In your project, you are going to use a large generator. The rental cost for this generator
is 250 USD per day which is quite high. Since the rental cost is high, and you are going
to use it for a long duration, your team members suggest that you should buy this
generator for 50,000 USD. What is the minimum number of rental days before it
becomes beneficial to buy the generator?

(a)   300
(b)   50
(c)   100
(d)   200

Go to the Answer

Question: 69
In your project, two important stakeholders are having some issues. To keep this issue
from escalating further you intervene and resolve the issue. After the issue is resolved
you asked your team member to record the issue so in the future a lesson can be learned
from it. Where will you note the issues between stakeholders?

(a)   Risk register
(b)   Issue log
(c)   Stakeholder register
(d)   Change log

Go to the Answer

Question: 70
Which chapter of PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct says: "We are truthful
in our communications and in our conduct."

(a)   Chapter 2: Responsibility
(b)   Chapter 3: Respect
(c)   Chapter 4: Fairness
(d)   Chapter 5: Honesty

Go to the Answer

Question: 71
The cost performance baseline is a time phased funding of your project and you
measure, monitor, and compare your project performance against it. In which of the
following forms do you usually represent it?

(a)   P-curve
(b)   Pie curve
(c)   S-curve
(d)   Symmetric curve

Go to the Answer

Question: 72
A state government has passed the resolution that every motorbike driver and passenger
has to wear a helmet. Your company sees an opportunity in this and gives you the
project to build the facility to manufacture the helmets. Who is the user of this project?

(a)   The state government
(b)   A person who will use the helmet
(c)   Assembly line worker
(d)   Project sponsor
Go to the Answer

Question: 73
While working on a deliverable which is 95% complete, two stakeholders come and
enquire about it. They argue with you that this deliverable was not part of the project
and it was not requested by any stakeholders, which you disagree with. Therefore, to
prove your point, which document will you show them?

(a)   Requirements traceability matrix
(b)   WBS
(c)   Project scope statement
(d)   Product scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 74
You have been given a task to install grass. The area of the lawn is 30 square meters,
and it will take 5 more days for the supplier to deliver the required quantity of grass. At
your best performance, you usually take 10 days to complete the task and in the worst
case, it might take 22 days. However, most of the time you take around 15 days to
complete the task, assuming no unfavorable events happen. What is the standard
deviation for this activity?

(a)   4
(b)   2
(c)   16
(d)   15

Go to the Answer

Question: 75
In any project there are numerous types of cost expenditures involved. Out these costs,
which cost is more difficult to manage for a project manager?

(a)   Cost of materials
(b)   Cost of equipment
(c)   HR cost
(d)   Overhead cost

Go to the Answer

Question: 76
Your company has been acquired by a new organization. The new management is very
particular about quality and they are not happy about the current quality of your
organization's products. So, to improve the quality of the process and product, they
have employed a philosophy to continuously improve all processes and products. This
philosophy is known as:

(a)   Manage quality
(b)   JIT
(c)   KANBAN
(d)   KAIZEN

Go to the Answer

Question: 77
You are a PMP and you have managed numerous projects. You have sound knowledge
of project management tools & techniques and your team members respect your
knowledge and experience. Which of the following powers do you possess?

(a)   Referral power
(b)   Expert power
(c)   Formal power
(d)   Penalty power

Go to the Answer

Question: 78
You were working on a project to develop a high-end product. The budget of the
project was huge and you were able to complete it on time and within the approved
budget. Now, your project is closed and the deliverable is accepted by the client. What
will the next recommended step be for you?

(a)   Start looking for a new project
(b)   Help team members find a new job
(c)   Make sure that client is realizing the benefits of the product
(d)   Throw a party to celebrate the completion of the project

Go to the Answer

Question: 79
After identifying the risks, you analyze them qualitatively and quantitatively to see if
your risk response planning will effectively minimize the project risk or not. If not, you
will tweak your risk response plan so the project risks fall within the stakeholders'
tolerance limits. Which of the following statements is correct about the quantitative risk
analysis process?
(a)   It is performed before qualitative risk analysis
(b)   It is performed on each project
(c)   Performed after qualitative risk analysis, if required
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 80
You have been appointed a project manager for ABC Inc. and are given a project.
While in the planning stage, you find that your organization is lacking the skills and
manpower to complete a part of the work and the scope is also unclear. You decide to
contract this work to a third party. What kind of contract will you select in this case?

(a) Cost reimbursable
(b) Time & material
(c) Fixed fee
(d) PO

Go to the Answer

Question: 81
You are currently in a process whose main benefit is to increase support and minimize
resistance from stakeholders as the project evolves and environment changes. Which is
not a tool and technique of this process?

(a)   Ground rules
(b)   Expert judgment
(c)   Document analysis
(d)   Meetings

Go to the Answer

Question: 82
The client asks you to inflate the budget by at least 10% because there is a chance that
his management will reduce it by 10%. What will your response be in this situation?

(a)   You will increase the budget by 10%
(b)   You will increase the budget by 5%
(c)   You will give the exact budget with the basis for it
(d)   To be on the safe side, you will increase it by 15%

Go to the Answer
Question: 83
You have a few important stakeholders who are not comfortable with each other, and
you require their input on some issues to reach a consensus. Which of the following
tools will you use in the current scenario?

(a)   Decision Tree method
(b)   Facilitated workshop
(c)   Brainstorming
(d)   Delphi technique

Go to the Answer

Question: 84
You join a new company and have been assigned a new project. What will your first
step be before starting to develop the project management plan?

(a)   Review the historical records
(b)   Start collecting the requirements
(c)   Create the communication plan
(d)   Ask for the budget

Go to the Answer

Question: 85
While collecting work performance data, one of your team members has a
misunderstanding about the description of work of several activities, their cost
estimates, and the resources required by them. She comes to you and explains the
situation. To answer her questions, what document will you ask her to refer to?

(a)   Scope baseline
(b)   Cost baseline
(c)   WBS dictionary
(d)   Project schedule

Go to the Answer

Question: 86
You have been given a project to construct a bridge. You have done the planning and
the network diagram is drawn with following paths:

First Path: Start -> A -> B -> C-> End, duration: 31 months.
Second Path: Start ->D -> E ->F -> K->End, duration: 31 months.
Third Path: Start -> D -> B -> C -> End, duration: 26 months.
Fourth Path: Start -> G ->H ->I ->L-> End, duration: 31 months.
Fifth Path: Start -> G -> E ->F -> End, duration: 16 months

With the following information on hand, you can conclude that:

(a)   The project is very risky
(b)   The project is less risky
(c)   You will manage it easily since three paths have the same duration
(d)   You will need to add buffers on some paths

Go to the Answer

Question: 87
You have just been given a project and management wants to know the lump-sum cost
of the project. Therefore, you give them the rough order magnitude estimate. What is
the range of the rough order magnitude estimate at the Initiation phase of the project?

(a)   (-25) to (+75%)
(b)   (-10) to (+10%)
(c)   (-50) to (+50%)
(d)   (-25) to (+25%)

Go to the Answer

Question: 88
Which of the following tools helps you to determine whether the subcontractor's work
is meeting the quality requirements?

(a)   Quality control
(b)   Quality audit
(c)   Inspection of deliverables
(d)   Delphi technique

Go to the Answer

Question: 89
You have noticed that some of your team members are not attending meetings, a few
are always late and are frequently disruptive. Therefore, to remove these issues you set
guidelines and establish clear expectations regarding acceptable behavior by project
team members. Who will be responsible for implementing these rules?

(a) Project manager
(b) Client
(c) Management
(d) All team members

Go to the Answer

Question: 90
Rob and Matt are two important and influential stakeholders of your project and they
are having a conflict. As they are influential, the conflict between them can jeopardize
the success of your project. Therefore, you decide to step in and ask them to meet with
you in private. They come and discuss the conflict and finally the issue is resolved.
What kind of communication is this?

(a)   Formal written
(b)   Formal verbal
(c)   Informal verbal
(d)   Para-lingual

Go to the Answer

Question: 91
You are working on a medium-sized project and management has decided to forego the
perform quantitative risk analysis process. So, after identifying risks, you start the
qualitative risk analysis process and now you are going to prioritize them. Which of the
following techniques are you going to use?

(a)   Probability and impact
(b)   Fishbone diagram
(c)   Scatter diagram
(d)   Sensitive analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 92
You are analyzing a particular task with your team members to determine if the task
should be done by your team, or if it should be contracted out to a contractor. Which
process is this?

(a)   Conduct procurement
(b)   Plan cost management
(c)   Plan human resource
(d)   Plan procurement
Go to the Answer

Question: 93
You are in the process of communicating and working with stakeholders to meet their
needs and expectations and address issues as they occur. Which option is a tool and
technique of this process?

(a)   Interpersonal skills
(b)   Stakeholder analysis
(c)   Analytical technique
(d)   Change request

Go to the Answer

Question: 94
You notice that one of your colleagues has not come to work for two days, and he did
not inform anyone about it. Upon enquiring, he told you that he will cover it by
working overtime. What should you do?

(a)   Nothing because he will cover the time
(b)   Warn him not to do this again
(c)   Report to the project manager
(d)   Start watching him

Go to the Answer

Question: 95
You are working in an organization where the work group arrangement is flexible, team
members work side by side, and you have little authority. What type of organizational
structure is this?

(a)   PMO
(b)   Functional
(c)   Weak Matrix
(d)   Organic

Go to the Answer

Question: 96
As per the PMBOK Guide, the project life cycle is a series of phases that a project
passes through from its initiation to its closure, and these phases are generally
sequential. Which of the following is not a project life cycle phase?
(a)   Starting the project
(b)   Organizing and preparing
(c)   Carrying out the project work
(d)   Monitoring and controlling the work

Go to the Answer

Question: 97
During the collect requirements process, an influential stakeholder requested a feature
which was rejected. During the project execution, you notice that you have an
opportunity to incorporate the requirement of this stakeholder into the product and it
will cost you nothing. By doing so, the stakeholder will be pleased and may help you in
your next assignment. This is an example of:

(a)   Scope creep
(b)   Scope slippage
(c)   Gold plating
(d)   Opportunity

Go to the Answer

Question: 98
You are working in a project to analyze the impact of pollution on human life, and you
have drawn a network diagram for this project. Which type of relationship have you
used in this network diagram?

(a)   Start to Finish
(b)   Start to Start
(c)   Finish to Start
(d)   All of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 99
Due to some issues, your project is behind schedule and over budget, therefore
management is very concerned about the future of your project. To show the exact
picture of your project you calculate the TCPI, and you go to management. What does
this TCPI show the management?

(a) The required cost performance to complete the project within the approved budget
(b) The required schedule performance to complete the project within the approved
time
(c) The new projected cost to complete the project within the approved time
(d) The new projected time to complete the project within the approved budget

Go to the Answer

Question: 100
During the control quality process, you are reviewing a chart which has some lines
above and below the x-axis and a cyclic line between them. What is the purpose of this
chart?

(a)   To gather quality control data
(b)   To find the dependency between the variables
(c)   To find the trend
(d)   To determine if the process is stable

Go to the Answer

Question: 101
Jackson was a very good programmer on your team and your company is very pleased
with his performance. Therefore, the top management promoted him to a manager of
another department. However, in his new role, his performance is below average. This
effect is known as:

(a) Ouchi effect
(b) Halo effect
(c) Theory of uncertain behavior
(d) None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 102
You have joined AVC Corp and are immediately assigned a project. The project charter
is signed, stakeholders have been identified and now you are classifying them according
to the direction of influence. Which of the following is not a way to classify the project
stakeholders under this technique?

(a)   Upward
(b)   Downward
(c)   Inward
(d)   Outward

Go to the Answer
Question: 103
During a meeting, you notice that some members are dominating other members, and a
few members are keeping silent. Which tool ensures a fair contribution from all
members and removes dominance?

(a)   Focus group
(b)   Facilitated workshop
(c)   Brainstorming
(d)   Delphi technique

Go to the Answer

Question: 104
You have received many bids from contractors and are now separating them according
to their experience, technical expertise, and capabilities. After segregating these
responses, you are reviewing them to see if they are capable of doing the job or not.
What process is this?

(a)   Conduct procurement
(b)   Plan procurement management
(c)   Proposal evaluation technique
(d)   Manage quality

Go to the Answer

Question: 105
You suspect that a PMP credential holder has given false information to PMI while
applying for the exam. What should you do?

(a)   Report to PMI
(b)   Do nothing
(c)   Investigate it
(d)   Ask him for more detail

Go to the Answer

Question: 106
In your organization, all PCs are outdated and you have to order new ones, including an
operating system and office suite. You contacted one supplier and he told you that he
can provide you with PCs for 1,000 USD including everything. You agree and are now
ready to procure 500 PCs. What type of contract will you select here?

(a) Fixed price
(b) Purchase order
(c) Cost reimbursable
(d) Cost plus fixed free

Go to the Answer

Question: 107
You receive an urgent change request from the client. You review the request and find
that it might cost a lot if you implement this change request. What will be your next
step?

(a)   Discuss the cost impact with the client
(b)   Implement it straight away
(c)   Since it increases the cost, reject it
(d)   You will not allow any change request

Go to the Answer

Question: 108
You gave the responsibility of collecting requirements from project stakeholders to four
of your team members. After starting the requirements collection process one of your
team members left the job and the requirements could not be compiled properly.
Initially, you did not notice this, however, during a product review, a few stakeholders
told you that some of the features in the products were not requested by them.
Therefore, to verify their comments you review the product requirements and identify
the issue. This is an example of:

(a)   Scope creep
(b)   Scope slippage
(c)   Gold plating
(d)   Opportunity

Go to the Answer

Question: 109
You have been given a research project to develop a new medication to treat an
infection. You are in the process of calculating the duration of the project. As this is a
unique project and the calculation of activity duration is not easy, you ask experts to
come up with several possible duration estimates for each activity so you can find the
average duration. In this scenario, which technique will you use?

(a) EVM
(b) CPM
(c) EMV
(d) PERT

Go to the Answer

Question: 110
You are working in a big organization which manages many projects simultaneously.
They have provided you with a separate floor in their building for administrative
activities. As you are using the company's space, they regularly send you an electricity
bill to pay. The cost of electricity used by your office is an example of which of the
following?

(a)   Direct cost
(b)   Indirect cost
(c)   Budget cost
(d)   Discretionary cost

Go to the Answer

Question: 111
You are observing a chart which has a line drawn between the X and Y axis. The X-
axis shows the time and Y-axis shows the data points. What kind of information can
you find here?

(a)   Pattern and trends in a row of data points
(b)   Standard deviation
(c)   Variance
(d)   All of above

Go to the Answer

Question: 112
Your project team is located in different locations. Your schedule is delayed and you're
facing many issues. Which of the following is the best solution to this problem?

(a)   Give training to team members
(b)   Warn them to improve performance
(c)   Co-locate them
(d)   Review the project management plan

Go to the Answer
Question: 113
You publish some informative notes on the company's web portal and ask stakeholders
to review it. What kind of communication method is this?

(a)   Pull
(b)   Push
(c)   Interactive
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 114
You have developed a risk response plan which says if the trigger occurs, the risk
response owner asks the risk action owner to implement the plan and update him with
the result. What is the trigger condition in risk management?

(a)   A warning sign that an identified risk is about to occur
(b)   A warning sign that an unknown risk is about to occur
(c)   An unknown risk has occurred
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 115
You are reviewing seller-prepared documents and quality audits are conducted during
the seller's execution of the work with an objective to identify performance success and
failure. What process is this?

(a)   Conduct Procurement
(b)   Control Procurement
(c)   Close Procurement
(d)   Verify Scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 116
John is a stakeholder of your project and is known for creating problems. During the
project execution, you noticed that he started creating problems with your project and
you are afraid that if this issue is not solved, it will affect your project. So, to avoid this
situation, which of the following should you do?

(a) Fire him immediately
(b) Inform management
(c) Talk to him privately to find the cause
(d) Humiliate him in front of others

Go to the Answer

Question: 117
Alice is a new team member in your project and she does not have much experience. As
the project is big and involves many governmental departments, you ask Alice to pay
more attention to some standards and regulations. Which of the following statements is
true about the standards and regulations?

(a)   Standards are mandatory, and regulations are optional
(b)   Both are mandatory
(c)   Both are optional
(d)   Standards are guidance, while regulations are mandatory

Go to the Answer

Question: 118
Your project has successfully completed; the deliverable is handed over to the client,
and you are in the close phase or project process. Which of the following activities will
you not perform in the close phase or project process?

(a)   Update lessons learned
(b)   Release the resources
(c)   Acceptance of deliverables
(d)   All of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 119
You are sitting in a group discussion with 13 stakeholders and collecting ideas. Now
you are in the final stage and are selecting the final idea. As there are many ideas, you
decide to vote. After voting you see that a particular idea receives 7 votes, so you go
with that option. What kind of decision making is this?

(a)   Unanimity
(b)   Majority
(c)   Plurality
(d)   Dictatorship

Go to the Answer
Question: 120
You have been given a task to estimate a budget for your project. You are using a
bottom up cost estimation technique to calculate the cost of each activity. Management
told you that the management reserve will be 6% of the cost baseline. Which of the
following represents the budgeted cost of the project?

(a)   Cost Baseline + Management Reserve
(b)   Cost Baseline + Contingency Reserve
(c)   Contingency Reserve + Management Reserve
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 121
Due to an unknown process error, you have been facing problems and the project is
being delayed. To solve the problem, you call for a meeting with experts and discuss
the issue. After the meeting, you discover the error and start working on resolving the
issue. Where will you go to solve the problem?

(a)   Quality control
(b)   Critical path
(c)   Risk identification process
(d)   Manage quality

Go to the Answer

Question: 122
You have a team of 10 members. They started to work together and are learning to trust
each other. In which stage are they working?

(a)   Forming
(b)   Storming
(c)   Performing
(d)   Norming

Go to the Answer

Question: 123
You are having a session with five team members. During the session, you notice that
one team member is reading messages, the second team member is talking with another
team member, the fourth team member is looking at the slides, and the fifth is making
eye contact with you. Which of the following team members is showing sign of active
listening?
(a)   First team member
(b)   Third team member
(c)   Fifth team member
(d)   Second team member

Go to the Answer

Question: 124
During the project execution you run a program for some parameters and draw a bell
curve as shown in the figure below. After analyzing this figure, you come to the
conclusion that:




(a)   The process is too risky
(b)   The process is not too risky
(c)   The data is in sufficient
(d)   The process is under control

Go to the Answer

Question: 125
You are a project manager of a complex project which involves many procurement
contracts with subcontractors. During the execution phase, a subcontractor comes to
you and says that he has completed his part of the work. You reviewed the facts and
provided the subcontractor with a formal written notice that the contract has ended.
What process is this?

(a)   Validate scope
(b)   Verify scope
(c)   Close procurements
(d)   Control procurements

Go to the Answer
Question: 126
Due to an error in the process, a defect is occurring in a deliverable. You identified the
root cause of the problem and made some changes to the process to stop the defect from
occurring. This process is known as:

(a)   Root cause analysis
(b)   Corrective action
(c)   Defect repair
(d)   Preventive action

Go to the Answer

Question: 127
You are working in a large organization and managing a project to construct a road. To
help you in your project, your PMO is providing you with their support and require you
to comply with them. What kind of PMO is this?

(a)   Supportive
(b)   Controlling
(c)   Directive
(d)   Helping

Go to the Answer

Question: 128
During the planning phase, you have created the WBS for the work that you are about
to complete. However, because of a lack of information you are not able to create the
WBS for the rest of the work, so you leave it until you get the correct and detailed
information. This is an example of:

(a)   Progressive elaboration
(b)   Improper collecting requirement process
(c)   Rolling wave planning
(d)   Improper scope statement

Go to the Answer

Question: 129
During the project execution, a stakeholder comes to you and argues against a particular
deliverable. You investigated it and found that this particular deliverable was based on
his requirement. To prove this, what document will you show to him?
(a)   Scope statement
(b)   Requirement traceability matrix
(c)   Statement of work
(d)   Scope management plan

Go to the Answer

Question: 130
You calculated the cost of constructing the walls by multiplying the cost per square foot
with the total area of the wall. This is an example of which of the following?

(a)   Parametric Estimation
(b)   Bottom Up
(c)   Top Down
(d)   Analogous

Go to the Answer

Question: 131
A team of experts come to your project and ask for approved procedures to verify your
team is following these procedures. This is an example of which of the following?

(a)   Quality control
(b)   Manage quality
(c)   Verify scope
(d)   Control scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 132
You are working on a project to build a canal for irrigation purposes. Six months have
passed, and now the team is working as a well-organized unit. Team members are
interdependent, working smoothly, and working effectively. What team formation stage
is this?

(a)   Performing
(b)   Storming
(c)   Norming
(d)   Forming

Go to the Answer
Question: 133
You are in a conference room meeting with bidders and answering their queries. Some
bidders brought their laptops and are busy with them, many of them are busy with
asking you questions. There is also a cleaner who is vacuuming the floor outside your
conference room. Which of the following is an example of noise?

(a)   Questions asked by bidders
(b)   Laptop
(c)   Telephone
(d)   The sound of the vacuum cleaner outside the room

Go to the Answer

Question: 134
You have identified a risk that at a certain point in your project you may need extra
quantities of a consumable which you thought of earlier. The chance of this event
occurring is 20% and if it occurs it will cost you 150 USD. So, you develop a
contingency plan for this risk and assign a risk owner. What kind of risk response
strategy is this?

(a)   Transfer
(b)   Avoid
(c)   Mitigation
(d)   Accept

Go to the Answer

Question: 135
Your project is behind schedule and over budget, and the actual cost is on its way to
being higher than the target cost. You and the client both are worried about the project's
progress and there is a high probability that the point of total assumption will be
crossed. Which of the following assumptions is true about the point of total
assumption?

(a)   Above PTA, you will bear the cost
(b)   Above PTA, the client will bear the cost
(c)   Above PTA, the cost will be equally shared
(d)   Above PTA, the cost will be shared by a set ratio

Go to the Answer

Question: 136
You are over budget and it is impossible to complete the project with the given budget.
Therefore, you raise the change request which management approves. After the change
request is approved, you update the cost baseline and update other project documents.
The document used to register any changes which occur during the project execution is
known as:

(a)   Risk register
(b)   Issue log
(c)   Change log
(d)   RACI matrix

Go to the Answer

Question: 137
In the create WBS process, you sub-divide project deliverables and project work into
smaller and more manageable components. The output of this process is the scope
baseline and project document update. Which of the following truly represents the
scope baseline?

(a)   Scope statement, scope management plan, schedule baseline
(b)   Scope statement, WBS, WBS dictionary
(c)   WBS, WBS dictionary
(d)   Scope statement, WBS, schedule baseline

Go to the Answer

Question: 138
You have one document which hierarchically categorizes labor, equipment, and
materials, etc. This document is known as:

(a)   RBS
(b)   Resource calendar
(c)   RACI matrix
(d)   RAM chart

Go to the Answer

Question: 139
You are in the process of aggregating the estimated costs of individual activities or
work packages to establish an authorized cost baseline. What process is this?

(a) Estimate cost
(b) Determine budget
(c) Plan cost management
(d) Control cost

Go to the Answer

Question: 140
You are having many issues on your project and progress is not good. Because of the
large number of issues, you decide to solve those issues that have the highest numbers
of occurrences and impact on your project. Which tool will you use in this situation?

(a)   Fishbone diagram
(b)   Pareto diagram
(c)   Scatter diagram
(d)   Tornado diagram

Go to the Answer

Question: 141
Julia is a longtime employee of your organization and is given to you for your new
project. She was very good in her previous position but you notice that she is not
performing well with the assignment you have given her. After further investigation,
you learn that she is lacking skills to complete the job assigned to her. What will your
next step be?

(a)   Terminate them
(b)   Monitor them
(c)   Develop a training program for them
(d)   Recruit some new member

Go to the Answer

Question: 142
You are working with a big organization which follows a matrix structure. As the
organization is big, the communication channels are complex and cross functional. You
occasionally communicate with your equivalents in other departments as well. You
have several team members working under you who report to you. After getting their
response you also report to your boss. What kind of communication is this?

(a)   Horizontal communication
(b)   Vertical communication
(c)   Parallel communication
(d)   Triangular communication
Go to the Answer

Question: 143
If you finish your project early, there is a chance that you may get another project, so
you are trying very hard to get your project finished. You use fast tracking, crashing,
overtime, etc. Which strategy is this?

(a)   Exploit
(b)   Enhance
(c)   Accept
(d)   Mitigate

Go to the Answer

Question: 144
You have signed a contract with a contractor which states that you will pay for the
entire contractor's legitimate costs, plus a fee based on the subjective evaluation of his
performance; this will not be subject to an appeal. What kind of contract is this?

(a)   CPIF
(b)   CPFF
(c)   FPIF
(d)   CPAF

Go to the Answer

Question: 145
You are working on a project which is under budget and ahead of schedule. The project
is 85% complete, and the client comes and asks you to terminate the project because he
fears a possible regulation can impact his project. You review the project parameters
and find that you can complete the project before the proposed legislation comes into
existence; moreover, you won't need any extra funding. What will your next steps be?

(a)   Tell the client about your findings and ask him to reconsider his decision
(b)   Initiate the close project process
(c)   Immediately release your team members
(d)   Convince your management to discuss the issue with the client

Go to the Answer

Question: 146
A document provides detailed deliverables, activities, and scheduling information about
components. Other information includes the code of account identifier, assumptions and
constraints, schedule milestones, resources required, and acceptance criteria. This
document can possibly be:

(a)   WBS dictionary
(b)   Scope statement
(c)   WBS
(d)   Statement of work

Go to the Answer

Question: 147
You are in the process of establishing the policies, procedures, and documentation for
planning, developing, managing, executing, and controlling the project schedule. Which
of the following is not a tool and technique of this process?

(a)   Expert judgment
(b)   Decomposition
(c)   Data analysis
(d)   Meeting

Go to the Answer

Question: 148
Your project has a cost overrun and a new budget has been approved. Which formula
will you use to calculate the TCPI?

(a)   (BAC-AC) / (BAC-EV)
(b)   (BAC-AC) / (EAC-EV)
(c)   (BAC-EV) / (BAC-AC)
(d)   (BAC-EV) / (EAC-AC)

Go to the Answer

Question: 149
Cost of quality includes all costs incurred over the lifetime of the product by investing
in the prevention of nonconformance to requirements, appraising the product or service
for conformance to requirements, and failing to meet requirements. Which is not an
example of the cost of non-conformance?

(a)   Rework
(b)   Scrap
(c)   Liabilities
(d)   Destructive testing loss
Go to the Answer

Question: 150
Two team members come to you with a dispute. Since you are very busy, you briefly
listen to one member, agree with him, and support his view. What kind of problem-
solving technique is this?

(a)   Withdraw
(b)   Compromise
(c)   Force
(d)   Problem Solving

Go to the Answer

Question: 151
You are working on a big project and team members are located in different geographic
locations. Your team has encountered some issues while communicating. During phone
calls, some voices get lost and members also face difficulties in understanding the
problems. So, you decide to find a better communication method to discuss issues.
Which of the following is the most effective communication method?

(a)   Intranet site
(b)   Email
(c)   Fax
(d)   Video conferencing

Go to the Answer

Question: 152
Risk tolerance is the degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization or
individual will withstand. It helps the project manager to:

(a)   Rank the risks
(b)   Identify the risks
(c)   Develop the contingency reserve
(d)   Develop the cost baseline

Go to the Answer

Question: 153
The client asks you for some minor changes to the project and you discuss this matter
with your team members. One of your team members told you that he thinks that it will
not affect any other project objective. What will you do now?

(a)   Review the request according to integrated change control process
(b)   Since the team member thinks it will not affect any project objective, implement it
(c)   Ignore it
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 154
You are busy with an important milestone, and after that, you have to deliver a
deliverable to the client. Since the client is known for his difficult behavior,
management is worried whether the client will accept the deliverable. Therefore, they
tell you to check the product acceptance criteria again before calling the client. What
document will you look at to get this information?

(a)   WBS
(b)   WBS dictionary
(c)   Project scope statement
(d)   RACI matrix

Go to the Answer

Question: 155
Based on the table shown below identify the Critical Path (draw the network diagram
considering day 1 as the first day of the project. Answers to questions are based on the
diagram considering day 1 as the first day of the project).
(a)   Path HIJ
(b)   Path ABFG
(c)   Path EFG
(d)   Path ABCD

Go to the Answer

Question: 156
What is the duration of path ABFG?

(a)   30 days
(b)   25 days
(c)   17 days
(d)   35 days

Go to the Answer

Question: 157
What is the Early Start (ES) of activity F?

(a)   31
(b)   16
(c)   15
(d)   6

Go to the Answer
Question: 158
What is the Late Finish (LF) of activity E?

(a)   24
(b)   5
(c)   29
(d)   30

Go to the Answer

Question: 159
You are in the process of defining policies, procedures, and guidance to help you
manage the project costs. In which process you are working?

(a)   Determine budget
(b)   Develop schedule
(c)   Control costs
(d)   Plan cost management

Go to the Answer

Question: 160
You have joined a company which is producing IC chips for mobile phones. The
quality is imperative for the product and so the company is following the Six Sigma
methodology for its operations. In this methodology, what percentage of defective
product is allowed?

(a)   0.0030127
(b)   0.0000034
(c)   99.99966
(d)   99.69873

Go to the Answer

Question: 161
Your project is very complex and due to a scope change, you need a few additional
experts, which you did not think of earlier. You request that your company provide you
with some experts for consultancy work. Although your company has provided you
with those experts, they are located in a different geographical location. In this
situation, how will you get their input?

(a) Ask management to bring them to you
(b) Recruit new members with same skills
(c) Create a virtual team
(d) None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 162
You call your team member and give some instructions. She receives your message and
gives her feedback. What is the role of the team member in this conversion?

(a)   Sender
(b)   Receiver
(c)   Medium
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 163
Suddenly, during the project execution, a generator breaks down, and you don't have
any other generators available. You review your risk management plan to see if you
have any responses to this situation. Unfortunately, you do not find anything relating to
generator failures. Therefore, you call your friend who is, incidentally, an equipment
supplier to provide you with the generator at a reasonable rate. This is an example of:

(a)   Corrective action
(b)   Defect repair
(c)   Workaround
(d)   Manage risk

Go to the Answer

Question: 164
You are working on a project to build a production line to produce round balls. During
the inspection, you observe that some of these balls are not round. You analyze the
problem and find that it can be prevented by making some changes to the procedures.
Therefore, you make changes to the procedure to prevent this problem again. This is an
example of:

(a)   Corrective action
(b)   Preventive action
(c)   Correction
(d)   Defect repair

Go to the Answer
Question: 165
The scope baseline provides a detailed description of project deliverables and their
components that provide a basis for the measurement of changes from that baseline. In
which process is the scope baseline developed?

(a)   Plan scope management
(b)   Create WBS
(c)   Collect requirement
(d)   Define scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 166
During the quality control process, you are reviewing a chart which has many limits
such as upper control limit, lower control limit, upper specification limit, and lower
specification limit. While observing chart, you notice that a parameter of a specimen is
outside of specification limits, so you ask a team member to replace the specimen. How
are the upper and lower control limits defined?

(a)   Based on client's input
(b)   Based on 3 Sigma
(c)   Based on 6 Sigma
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 167
You are developing a quality management plan for your project. During the planning
process, one of your team members tells you that, in the past, the organization has
completed a similar project. You start to review the old project and find that some of its
quality metrics can be used in your project as well. This technique is known as:

(a)   Reviewing organization process assets
(b)   Benchmarking
(c)   Process analysis
(d)   Prototyping

Go to the Answer

Question: 168
According to Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, once your need on a particular level is
filled, you look for the next level requirement. Now your physiological and safety needs
have been met. What will your next requirement be?

(a)   Self-esteem
(b)   Social
(c)   Self-actualization
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 169
You receive an email in French. Since you're unable to read French, you bring in a
translator to translate the message into English. What is the translator doing here?

(a)   Encoding
(b)   Acting as a medium
(c)   Removing noise
(d)   Decoding

Go to the Answer

Question: 170
You are making some changes to the scope and schedule baseline because you have
identified a high-impact risk and management does not want to take a risk. What
process is this?

(a)   Plan scope management
(b)   Plan risk response
(c)   Develop schedule
(d)   Control scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 171
Because of the huge size of your project, you have divided it into several phases. After
completing each phase, you hand it over to the client and then move on to the next
phase. Which process ensures that the previous phase has met all of its requirements so
you can move on to the next phase?

(a)   Close procurement
(b)   Validate scope
(c)   Control scope
(d)   Control quality
Go to the Answer

Question: 172
You are managing a project with a budget of 500,000 USD, and 250,000 USD has been
spent. Upon review, you observe that only 40% of the work has been completed. Your
schedule says that you should have completed 50% of the work. What is the schedule
performance index (SPI)?

(a)   1.25
(b)   0.8
(c)   1
(d)   1.5

Go to the Answer

Question: 173
You are managing a project with a budget of 500,000 USD, and 250,000 USD has been
spent. Upon review, you observe that only 40% of the work has been completed. Your
schedule says that you should have completed 50% of the work. What is estimate at
completion (EAC)?

(a)   625,000 USD
(b)   500,000 USD
(c)   400,000 USD
(d)   375,000 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 174
You are managing a project with a budget of 500,000 USD, and 250,000 USD has been
spent. Upon review, you observe that only 40% of the work has been completed, your
schedule says that you should have completed 50% of the work. What will be estimate
to complete (ETC)?

(a)   625,000 USD
(b)   500,000 USD
(c)   400,000 USD
(d)   375,000 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 175
You and your management are inspecting project deliverables with the client and are
determining if this is as per the stated requirements or not. Which of the following
statement is true about the above process?

(a)   You are in the verify scope process.
(b)   You are in the validate scope process.
(c)   You are in the executing process group.
(d)   You are doing the quality control process.

Go to the Answer

Question: 176
According to Herzberg, hygiene factors are not enough to motivate employees. To
motivate employees, you need other factors, which are called satisfiers. According to
Herzberg, which of the following is a satisfier?

(a)   Salary
(b)   Self-growth
(c)   Working condition
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 177
An issue has arisen which forces you to schedule a meeting with your stakeholders. A
project team member tells you that one of your influential stakeholders may not come
to the meeting because of a personal issue. You choose not to take any action because
you think that you will manage without the presence of this stakeholder. What kind of
risk response strategy are you using here?

(a)   Accept
(b)   Avoid
(c)   Neglect
(d)   Mitigate

Go to the Answer

Question: 178
You have estimated the cost of your project by calculating the cost of each activity,
adding them together to get the cost of a work package, and then you adding together
the cost of all work packages. What kind of estimate are you using here?

(a) Top down
(b) Bottom up
(c) Parametric
(d) Ball park estimate

Go to the Answer

Question: 179
You were recently appointed as a project manager in an organization. You are well
recognized in the organization because of your connection with management, and team
members obey you because of this relationship. What kind of power do you possess
here?

(a)   Relational power
(b)   Punishment power
(c)   Expert power
(c)   Reward power

Go to the Answer

Question: 180
You are sitting with your team members and experts in a room and defining the
definition of probability of events occurring and the impact. What process is this?

(a)   Identify risks
(b)   Perform qualitative risk analysis
(c)   Plan risk management
(d)   Plan risk responses

Go to the Answer

Question: 181
The cost which changes according to the scope and the scale of the project is known as:

(a)   Wage
(b)   Fixed cost
(c)   Variable cost
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 182
You are planning to implement a change in your project. There is a 75% chance that it
will help your organization to save 100,000 USD. However, there is a 25% chance of
losing 50,000 USD. Calculate the expected monitory value (EMV).
(a)   37,500 USD
(b)   12,500 USD
(c)   87,500 USD
(d)   62,500 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 183
You are comparing the actual vs planned practice to those of comparable organizations
to identify best practices and provide a basis for measuring performance. What tool are
you using here?

(a)   Continuous improvement
(b)   Statistical sampling
(c)   Process analysis
(d)   Benchmarking

Go to the Answer

Question: 184
Based on the below figure, calculate the Expected Monitory Value (EMV) of Choice A.




(a) -280 USD
(b) -380 USD
(c) -320 USD
(d) -220 USD
Go to the Answer

Question: 185
Calculate which choice is a better choice.

(a) Choice A
(b) Choice B
(c) Choice C
(d) None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 186
You are reviewing a plan which explains how changes to the product will be initiated,
how impacts will be analyzed, and how they will be traced, tracked, and reported, as
well as the authorization levels required to approve these changes. What document is
this?

(a)   Monitor and control project work
(b)   Requirements management plan
(c)   Control configuration
(d)   Control change management

Go to the Answer

Question: 187
Two team members come to you with a dispute regarding their roles and
responsibilities. To resolve the dispute, which document will you refer to?

(a)   Resource histogram
(b)   RAM matrix
(c)   Scatter diagram
(d)   Stakeholder register

Go to the Answer

Question: 188
In a SWOT analysis, when you are able to convert threats into opportunities and
weaknesses into strengths, it is known as:

(a)   Conversion strategy
(b)   Reverse strategy
(c)   FMEA analysis
(d)   Benefit realization

Go to the Answer

Question: 189
Your project is running late and you are over budget. You review the situation and find
that it would be difficult for you to complete the project with the given budget. You
inform management and they ask you to come up with a new budget. After estimating
the new cost, you inform management that you may need 10,000 USD more to
complete the project. This is an example of:

(a)   Forecast analysis
(b)   Status report
(c)   Change request
(d)   Progress report

Go to the Answer

Question: 190
Your project is spread over a large geographical area so your team is also spread
throughout the globe. During a recent virtual meeting, you noticed that there is a
communication gap among some team members. What will you do to improve
communication?

(a)   Create a ground rule and stick to it
(b)   Always get consensus on time before scheduling any meeting
(c)   Record sessions and send the recording to all concerned team members
(d)   Bring one team member from each team to a war room

Go to the Answer

Question: 191
You are in the planning phase of a project and you find that, due to a
miscommunication, some additional features were added to the product which were not
requested by any of your stakeholders. Which of the following could help you avoid
such a situation?

(a)   Requirements traceability matrix
(b)   WBS
(c)   RACI chart
(d)   Checklist analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 192
You have joined an ongoing project which is on schedule, but over budget, and the cost
performance index is 0.55. There was something wrong with the project cost estimate.
Therefore, you started reviewing the project management plan and found that the
previous manager used a very old project's statistical data and applied it to the current
project to come up with the project budget. What will you do to correct the error?

(a)   You will add the contingency reserve
(b)   You will add the management reserve
(c)   You will calculate the fresh budget from a bottom up cost estimation technique
(d)   You will correct the old data and apply it again to get the right figure

Go to the Answer

Question: 193
Which of the following theories is based on trust and emphasizes involving workers
with the management?

(a)   Expectancy theory
(b)   Theory X & Y
(c)   Theory Z of Ouchi
(d)   Herzberg motivation theory

Go to the Answer

Question: 194
During the risk identification process, your team identifies an event for which you are
not able to find the probability and its impact. This event is known as:

(a)   Uncertainty
(b)   A risk
(c)   A negative risk
(d)   An unknown risk

Go to the Answer

Question: 195
You have joined an ongoing project. This project is in trouble, so you identify the issues
which have the highest effect on the project, and now you are analyzing the reason for
these issues. Which tool are you using now?

(a)   Fishbone diagram
(b)   Pareto diagram
(c)   Scatter diagram
(d)   Tornado diagram

Go to the Answer
Question: 196
You are in a process whose objective is outlining and guiding team selection and
responsibility assignment to obtain a successful team. Which of the following is an
output of this process?

(a)   Virtual team
(b)   Human resource management plan
(c)   Project staff assignments
(d)   Change request

Go to the Answer

Question: 197
You arrive at a site to inspect a deliverable. Suddenly a team member comes to you and
he is sweating and exhausted. He shouts at you and tells you that some equipment has
failed and it urgently needs to be replaced, otherwise other activities may be impacted
severely. Which of the following describes the pitch and tone of the voice?

(a)   Formal verbal
(b)   Para-lingual
(c)   Informal verbal
(d)   Formal communication

Go to the Answer

Question: 198
You are in a process which helps you evaluate the effectiveness of the risk process
throughout the project. Which of the following documents will not be updated here?

(a)   Assumption log
(b)   Issue log
(c)   Risk report
(d)   Change log

Go to the Answer

Question: 199
During the status review with your stakeholders, one of the stakeholders told you that
they were not asked for their opinion, and now they need a change in the product
characteristics. This change may lead to a change in your cost and schedule baseline.
Which of the following processes could have helped you prevent this issue?

(a) Collect requirements
(b) Control scope
(c) Identify risks
(d) Scope creep

Go to the Answer

Question: 200




Based on the above Tornado Diagram, you can tell management that:
(a) The project is at high risk
(b) Event 4 is least important event
(c) Event 2 has more influence on the project than event 3
(d) Event 1 is a very low risk event

Go to the Answer
                           Practice Questions: Set-II
Question: 201
Due to the lack of available expertise in your area, you have hired many team members
from diverse geographical areas and cultures. Therefore, they are having problems with
technical terms used by other team members. Sometimes they agree on the definition of a
term and other times they do not. What will you do to solve the issue?

(a) You ask them to sit and agree on the definition of each term.
(b) You will define the definition of each term and ask them to follow it.
(c) Since this is a forming stage, such disputes occur. Things will settle down when the
team moves on to next stage, so you will not take any action.
(d) You ask them to refer to any standard such as the PMBOK Guide.

Go to the Answer

Question: 202
The create WBS process is where you create the work breakdown structure. The WBS
helps you immensely in developing the schedule and other project management activities.
Which of the following is the highest element in the hierarchical breakdown of the work
breakdown structure?

(a)   Control account
(b)   Project work
(c)   Deliverable
(d)   Milestone

Go to the Answer

Question: 203
If you want to complete your project on schedule and with minimal obstruction, you must
pay close attention to the critical path. The duration of the critical path is the shortest
duration in which you can complete the project. Which of the following statements is not
true about the critical path?

(a)   The critical path is the longest path in the network diagram
(b)   In critical path, the float is zero
(c)   Buffers are used to manage activities
(d)   Here it is assumed that resources are available whenever they are needed

Go to the Answer
Question: 204
You have been assigned as project manager for a project. You are in the planning phase
when management asks you to provide them with all activities showing logical
relationships. You draw the network diagram and use dummy activities to make logical
relationships more clear. Which of the following network diagramming techniques are
you using here?

(a)   PERT
(b)   CCM
(c)   PDM
(d)   ADM

Go to the Answer

Question: 205
You are reviewing the lessons learned from previous projects and you notice a process
error that might cause a defect in the project deliverable. You review your project's
process and make sure that this error does not occur with your project deliverable. This is
an example of:

(a)   Defect repair
(b)   Corrective action
(c)   Preventive action
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 206
During the project execution, due to excessive hot weather some of your equipment has
started showing signs of malfunctioning. This problem was brought to you by a team
member so you decided to deal with it. Which of the following is not a methodological
step to solve the problem?

(a)   Identify the problem
(b)   Define the problem
(c)   Plan the solution
(d)   Check the solution

Go to the Answer

Question: 207
You are managing a large project with many contractors working on it. A stakeholder
comes to you and informs you that he never received the status report from one of your
contractors. What will your next step be?

(a)   Stop the payment and ask for clarification
(b)   Call the contractor
(c)   Review the communications management plan
(d)   Inform management

Go to the Answer

Question: 208
You are in the identifying risks process. You are meeting with your team members and
stated that the project may be delayed because of the late delivery of certain consumables
for your project. Now you ask the team members to find ways in which this problem can
occur. What technique are you using here?

(a)   Assumption and constraint analysis
(b)   Brainstorming
(c)   Sensitivity analysis
(d)   Root cause analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 209
You have floated a tender for your project, and to clarify some issues raised by bidders
you are conducting a bidder conference. What will not be done in a bidder conference?

(a)   Award the contract
(b)   Clarify the doubt
(c)   Explain the bid terms and conditions
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 210
You are gathering all the information about the stakeholders and discussing with your
team members what changes they can make to the project objective. Which technique are
you using here?

(a)   Information gathering technique
(b)   Stakeholders analysis
(c)   Stakeholders management strategy
(d)   Brainstorming
Go to the Answer

Question: 211
Which chapter of the PMI Code of Ethics says that "We negotiate in good faith"?

(a)   Responsibility
(b)   Fairness
(c)   Respect
(d)   Honesty

Go to the Answer

Question: 212
While reviewing the project parameters a team member tells you that due to an incorrect
activity duration estimate, the current schedule is no longer valid and you must update the
schedule baseline. You listen to him and analyze the issue. You agree with him and ask
him to start the process for a change request. Which of the following statements is true
about change management?

(a) The project manager is authorized to approve the change request
(b) You will not raise the change request if it requires a slight modification in the
schedule baseline
(c) Product characteristic changes will be managed through change management
(d) Usually, a change control board is responsible for approving or rejecting the change
request

Go to the Answer

Question: 213
You are in the process of dividing work into smaller components so you can get a
structured vision of what has to be delivered. What process is this?

(a)   Create WBS
(b)   Create RBS
(c)   Rolling wave planning
(d)   Progressive elaboration

Go to the Answer

Question: 214
In your project, you have two activities, D and E. These two activities have a common
successor, Activity F. Activity D will be completed on the 10th and activity E will be
completed on the 15th. Therefore, Activity D can be delayed by 5 days without affecting
the early start of Activity F. This delay is known as:

(a)   Total float
(b)   Free float
(c)   Project buffers
(d)   Feeding buffer

Go to the Answer

Question: 215
You are estimating the cost for your project by using historical data and applying it to
your project, such as the cost of painting per square foot. Which technique are you using
here?

(a)   Bottom up
(b)   Top down
(c)   Analogous
(d)   Parametric

Go to the Answer

Question: 216
You have set the control limits for your control chart as 5-30, and the mean is at 16.
While reviewing the chart, you see that some consecutive points are: 6, 8, 5, 11, 14, 12,
13, 9. What does this mean?

(a)   All data are within the limits, so no action will be taken
(b)   You will readjust the mean
(c)   You will readjust the control limit to 6-30
(d)   Find the cause for this reading

Go to the Answer

Question: 217
You are planning resources for your project and the team charter has been established.
This charter provides a clear guideline of the acceptable behavior of team members.
Which of the following is not included?

(a)   Communication guidelines
(b)   Decision making criteria
(c)   Conflict resolution process
(d)   Motivational processes
Go to the Answer

Question: 218
You realize that you have made an error in your monthly status meeting. Therefore, you
send stakeholders the correct report by email. What kind of communication method are
you using here?

(a)   Push
(b)   Pull
(c)   Interactive
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 219
You are working in a big organization. Due to a change in market conditions your
organization needs to raise a small project to accommodate the current change in the
organization's processes. The initiating phase is complete and now you are in the
planning phase and developing the project plan. Which of the following project
management processes can be omitted for this project?

(a)   Perform qualitative risk analysis
(b)   Manage quality
(c)   Perform quantitative risk analysis
(d)   Create WBS

Go to the Answer

Question: 220
You are constructing a big mall for a client. During the execution phase, the client
requests additional work and you agree. The scope of work is clear but you are lacking
expertise and time, so you decide to procure this part of the work. What kind of contract
will you select considering you can review invoices submitted by a contractor?

(a)   Firm fixed price
(b)   Cost plus fixed fee
(c)   Fixed price incentive fee
(d)   Time & material

Go to the Answer

Question: 221
A stakeholder register contains all the information about the stakeholders. Which of the
following is not included in the stakeholder register?

(a)   List of stakeholders
(b)   Stakeholders' classification
(c)   Responsibility of assignments
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 222
Which chapter of the PMI Code of Ethics talks about disclosing a conflict of interest?

(a)   Fairness
(b)   Respect
(c)   Honesty
(d)   Responsibility

Go to the Answer

Question: 223
Your organization has received two projects. One project is to design a call center for the
client, and the other is research work in pollution control. How are you going to manage
these two projects?

(a)   Under project management
(b)   Under portfolio management
(c)   Under program management
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 224
You have a large, multi-year project. Because of the large scope and duration, you decide
that you will plan near term work in detail, and for the rest, you will make a high-level
plan. Once you move ahead you will plan, in detail, for that work. This is an example of:

(a)   Rolling wave planning
(b)   Ball park planning
(c)   Near wave planning
(d)   Just in Time

Go to the Answer
Question: 225
Your project is delayed and you have another project to start as soon as possible. You are
also having a problem with resource allocating, so you started reviewing activities to find
which activities can be started late and which cannot. On a network diagram, what kind
of activities can have the maximum flexibility without causing more delay?

(a)   Activities on critical path
(b)   Activities with total float
(c)   Activities with free float
(d)   Hammock activities

Go to the Answer

Question: 226
The authorized time phased budget which you use to monitor and control the cost of the
project is known as:

(a)   Funding limit reconciliation
(b)   EAC
(c)   Cost baseline
(d)   Schedule baseline

Go to the Answer

Question: 227
You join an organization where you notice that a lot of inventory is lying idle and wasted,
because as some inventory is underutilized or it is expired. Therefore, you suggest that
your management follow a methodology which focuses on keeping less inventory and the
reduction in wastage to improve production and performance. What methodology is this?

(a)   Lean management
(b)   KAIZEN
(c)   KANBAN
(d)   JIT

Go to the Answer

Question: 228
Michael and John are having some conflicts and they come to you. Since you are too
busy and the problem is complex, you go with the midway of both parties and partially
satisfy both of them. What conflict resolution technique are you using here?

(a) Accommodate
(b) Withdraw
(c) Collaborate
(d) Compromise

Go to the Answer

Question: 229
Interpersonal skills are important for a project manager as they help him or her to manage
stakeholders properly. Which of the following is not an interpersonal skill?

(a)   Communication style assessment
(b)   Political awareness
(c)   Work environment
(d)   Cultural awareness

Go to the Answer

Question: 230
You are developing the project management plan. Management asks you to provide them
with information on the chances of completing the project under different circumstances.
The project is important and so management does not want to delay the schedule. You
compile the data and use a tool and tell management that there is a 90% chance you can
complete the project within the schedule, however, if you are given three weeks of extra
time, the chance of completing project rises to 98%. Which of the following statements is
true about the tool you have used to come up with this information?

(a)   It is a perform qualitative risk analysis process technique
(b)   It is a perform quantitative risk analysis process technique
(c)   It is a control quality process technique
(d)   It is a technique of the determine budget process

Go to the Answer

Question: 231
Your company is managing a large project and they are finding it difficult and risky to do
on their own, so they want to outsource some tasks to a third party. What kind of contract
will have a minimal risk for your company?

(a)   Firm fixed price
(b)   Time and material
(c)   Cost plus incentive fee
(d)   Cost plus fixed fee
Go to the Answer

Question: 232
Mike is an important stakeholder in your project. You have worked with him in a
previous project and know that he frequently changes his requirements and creates
trouble if those requirements are not met. How will you manage him?

(a)   Ignore him
(b)   Involve him from the very beginning of the project
(c)   Ask him to mend his ways
(d)   Inform management about it

Go to the Answer

Question: 233
You are a part of a tendering committee and are going to review the tenders from a few
contractors. While reviewing the tenders, you noticed that one contractor is your wife's
distant cousin. What will your next step be?

(a)   Do nothing
(b)   Give inside information to him
(c)   Ask your relative to withdraw the tender
(d)   Disclose it to the tender committee

Go to the Answer

Question: 234
You open a new hotel in Malaysia. You are new to this area and do not have experience
in catering services. You are discussing whether you should provide your own catering
service for your customers or to outsource it from another caterer who is experienced.
They are guaranteeing their service and ready to accept a fine if they fail to serve your
customers in a timely manner. Since their offer is lucrative, you decline starting your own
catering service for customers and accept their offer. What kind of risk response strategy
is this?

(a)   Accept
(b)   Avoid
(c)   Transfer
(d)   Exploit

Go to the Answer
Question: 235
You are collecting requirements for your project. For a few requirements you are having
difficulty reaching a consensus, so you decide to vote and select the choice which has the
largest number of votes. What voting technique is this?

(a)   Minority
(b)   Unanimity
(c)   Majority
(d)   Plurality

Go to the Answer

Question: 236
In which network diagrammatic technique do you assume that the resources will always
be available whenever they are needed?

(a)   CPM
(b)   PERT
(c)   CCM
(d)   All of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 237
Which of the following gives you the cost estimate of your project if you continue to
perform with the same cost performance?

(a)   ETC
(b)   VAC
(c)   EAC
(d)   BAC

Go to the Answer

Question: 238
You are asked to produce a 10-meter long tube, and you are producing tubes within the
range of 12.1 m, 11.98 m, 12.12 m, 12.08, etc. This means that:

(a)   Your process is accurate
(b)   Your process is precise
(c)   Your product is high grade
(d)   Your product is of high quality
Go to the Answer

Question: 239
Two very important stakeholders are having a conflict which may affect your project.
They come to you but you are very busy. In this case what kind of conflict resolution
technique should you select?

(a)   Problem solve
(b)   Force
(c)   Avoid
(d)   Smooth

Go to the Answer

Question: 240
You call your team member on his cell phone and ask for the current status of the project.
What kind of communication is this?

(a)   Formal verbal
(b)   Informal verbal
(c)   Para-lingual
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 241
During the execution phase, some equipment fails; the risk owner implements the
contingency plan and brings in new equipment immediately from an identified supplier.
This is an example of:

(a)   Unknown risk
(b)   Known risk
(c)   Secondary risk
(d)   Residual risk

Go to the Answer

Question: 242
You have made John responsible for painting a certain portion of the building you are
constructing. John completes the painting and submits his bills to you. You review his
invoices, pay him and close the contract. What process is this?

(a) Close project
(b) Conduct procurement
(c) Close procurement
(d) Control procurement

Go to the Answer

Question: 243
You have been given a project to clean an area where hundreds of families are living and
to develop residential flats for them. Since there so many stakeholders involved, how will
you manage them?

(a)   Ignore low-power stakeholders
(b)   Pick the dominating stakeholders
(c)   Find a way to manage them all
(d)   Manage only high power and high-interest group stakeholders

Go to the Answer

Question: 244
During the cost review, you noticed that, due to a mistake, you over calculated the cost of
a work package that led to an increase in the cost of the project. No one noticed it and the
budget is already approved. What will your next step be?

(a)   You will keep quiet
(b)   You will inform your management and make sure the client doesn't know about it
(c)   Discuss the issue with team members
(d)   You will accept your error and take corrective action

Go to the Answer

Question: 245
You have been hired as a consultant for a project that is in trouble. You meet the project
manager and ask several questions regarding the project budget, the project end date, etc.
The project manager was not able to answer some of these questions properly, so you
decided to verify them yourself. What document will you refer to in order to verify such
facts?

(a)   Project management plan
(b)   Cost and schedule baselines
(c)   Project charter
(d)   Performance report
Go to the Answer

Question: 246
Your client comes to you during the project execution. He tells you about a minor
requirement that he forgot during the collect requirement process. He assures you that
there will be no effect on the cost if you implement his request. What will your next step
be?

(a)   You will accept his request
(b)   You will deny his request
(c)   Review the change request
(d)   Try to influence the client

Go to the Answer

Question: 247
For your project, you have broken down the work package into activities and just now
completed the network diagram. Which process is this?

(a)   Develop schedule
(b)   Sequence activities
(c)   Define schedule
(d)   Create WBS

Go to the Answer

Question: 248
Your project is ahead of schedule but over budget. Therefore, you ask your team member
to collect data and compare it with the cost baseline. Which of the following is not
included in the cost baseline?

(a)   Contingency reserve
(b)   Activity cost estimation
(c)   Management reserve
(d)   Activity contingency reserve

Go to the Answer

Question: 249
Your company is having problems delivering the finished product from the factory to the
warehouses, which are located in different geographical areas. To smooth out the process,
you have identified all critical stages for this procedure. What will be your next step?
(a)   You will use a Tornado diagram
(b)   You will use an Ishikawa diagram
(c)   You will use a Scatter diagram
(d)   You will use a Pareto analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 250
In which of the following is the process where you define the objectives so that
management and employees understand it and understand how to work together to
achieve these objectives?

(a)   JIT
(b)   KAIZEN
(c)   TQM
(d)   Management by objective

Go to the Answer

Question: 251
The communication model helps you communicate information to stakeholders smoothly.
Which of the following is not a basic step in the communication model?

(a)   Encode
(b)   Transmit message
(c)   Remove noise
(d)   Decode message

Go to the Answer

Question: 252
Which of the following helps the project team to look at many sources from which
project risks may arise in a risk identification exercise?

(a) Work Breakdown Structure
(b) Risk Breakdown Structure
(c) Risk register
(d) Issue log

Go to the Answer

Question: 253
You have signed a contract to have a customer care support system built for your
company. In this contract, you have mentioned that you will pay all costs incurred plus a
monetary benefit if you are happy with the work and the contractor fulfills some
conditions set in the contract. What type of contract is this?

(a)   Cost plus incentive fee
(b)   Cost plus award fee
(c)   Time & material
(d)   Fixed price incentive fee

Go to the Answer

Question: 254
You have been assigned as project manager for a large project. This project has a very
large numbers of stakeholders and you have to identify and analyze each of them. What is
the best time to identify the project stakeholders?

(a)   Before developing the project management plan
(b)   After developing the project management plan
(c)   Before starting the executing phase
(d)   Before the collect requirement process

Go to the Answer

Question: 255
You have been transferred to a country where it is a local custom to give a gift to guests
when meeting for the first time. Therefore, during your first meeting they have offered
you a gift. What will you do now?

(a)   You will not accept the gift at any cost
(b)   You will accept the gift and inform your management
(c)   You will accept and keep the gift
(d)   You will accept the gift and politely return it later, citing ethical social responsibility

Go to the Answer

Question: 256
You are managing a multi-year, multi-billion dollar, highly complex project. The project
is very critical for your organization. Therefore, you need better control and management.
How will you achieve these objectives?

(a) Divide the project into milestones
(b) Divide the project into phases
(c) Divide the project into subprojects
(d) Subcontract parts of the project

Go to the Answer

Question: 257
The work breakdown structure provides you with a structured vision of what has to be
delivered, and the WBS dictionary provides you with detailed deliverables, activities, and
scheduling information about each component in the WBS. Which of the following
information cannot be found in the WBS dictionary?

(a)   Work description
(b)   List of assumptions
(c)   Resource requirement
(d)   Critical risks

Go to the Answer

Question: 258
You are sequencing activities to develop the schedule using a precedence diagram
method. To do this you need to identify the type of dependency between the activities.
Which of the following is not a type of dependency used in a precedence diagram
method?

(a)   Mandatory dependency
(b)   Linear dependency
(c)   Internal dependency
(d)   External dependency

Go to the Answer

Question: 259
You are managing a project whose budget is 150,000 USD. To date, you have spent 25%
of your budget and have earned 28,000 USD of the project, though according to the
schedule you should have earned 42,000 USD. What is the percentage of work
completed?

(a)   25%
(b)   18.7%
(c)   28%
(d)   46.7%
Go to the Answer

Question: 260
During an inspection, you are reviewing a chart and notice that a particular process is
outside the below specification limit. You instruct your team member to take corrective
action. What chart have you reviewed here?

(a)   Cause and effect diagram
(b)   Scatter diagram
(c)   Run chart
(d)   Control chart

Go to the Answer

Question: 261
You have been given a project to develop some gaming software for the client. You have
developed many similar games in the past and possess the knowledge and skills that are
needed to build the game. You have recruited your team and many of them are new,
however all of them respect you a lot. What kind of power are you showing here?

(a)   Coercive power
(b)   Positional power
(c)   Expert power
(d)   Referent power

Go to the Answer

Question: 262
As per the PMBOK Guide, which of the following is not a communication method that
you use to share information among project stakeholders?

(a)   Online communication
(b)   Interactive communication
(c)   Push communication
(d)   Pull communication

Go to the Answer

Question: 263
The credibility of your risk management depends on the unbiased probability and impact
of identified risks. If these parameters are not correctly assessed, your risk management is
not worth following. In which of the following process do you define the definition of
probability of risks?
(a)   Plan risk management
(b)   Identify risks
(c)   Plan risk responses
(d)   Perform qualitative risk analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 264
You are constructing an office building for your client. You decide to outsource painting
and electric work from a third party. You create a detailed work description and ask
bidders to apply for this part of the project. The document you just prepared is known as:

(a)   Procurement SOW
(b)   RFQ
(c)   RFP
(d)   Requirement document

Go to the Answer

Question: 265
A need arises to extend the office building to accommodate more employees. Your
organization has all necessary capabilities to build it on your own. You have been
assigned as project manager for this project, and you have immediately started
identifying the project stakeholders. Which of the following is least useful in this
process?

(a)   Project charter
(b)   Enterprise environmental factor
(c)   Organizational process assets
(d)   Procurement document

Go to the Answer

Question: 266
While browsing the internet you find a website offering real PMP exam questions to
students. What will your next step be?

(a)   You will pass this website on to your friends preparing for the PMP exam
(b)   You will ignore it
(c)   You will inform the PMI
(d)   You will report to the police
Go to the Answer

Question: 267
During the risk response process, you find a risk which would be difficult for you to
manage. You discuss the issue with management and a decision is taken to transfer the
management of this risk to your portfolio manager. What risk response strategy is this?

(a)   Mitigate
(b)   Escalate
(c)   Transfer
(d)   Avoid

Go to the Answer

Question: 268
The project charter is a document which initiates the project, establishes your authority
and contains some high-level information. Which of the following information will not
be included in the project charter?

(a)   Project purpose
(b)   High-level requirements
(c)   High-level risks
(d)   Name of the competitor

Go to the Answer

Question: 269
Crashing helps you bring the project back on schedule if it is late. Which of the following
statements is true about crashing?

(a)   Crashing should be done on the critical path
(b)   Crashing does not increase the cost
(c)   In crashing, you don't start activities in parallel
(d)   All of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 270
Your project is 10% complete when due to a sudden change in market conditions,
management analyzes whether to proceed with the project or not. In one such discussion,
a stakeholder says that you have already spent a lot of money so they will have to
consider this point as well. However, you tell him that this cost is already incurred and
should not affect future decisions. This cost is known as:
(a)   Direct cost
(b)   Sunk cost
(c)   Spent cost
(d)   Indirect cost

Go to the Answer

Question: 271
Your company wants to get ISO 9001 certified. Therefore, they call some experts from a
lead consultancy to come and certify the company as ISO 9001. These experts come and
review your documents and verify each and every detail. What process is this?

(a)   Manage quality
(b)   Quality control
(c)   Inspection
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 272
Jijo and Stefan are two employees of your organization. Jijo is working in an office and
Stefan is on a site so their working conditions are different. During the project execution,
both of them have some kind of conflict and come to you. You listen to them and solve
the conflict. Which of the following is most likely to be a reason for a conflict in the
working environment?

(a)   Ground rules
(b)   Personal work style
(c)   Salary
(d)   Working conditions

Go to the Answer

Question: 273
You are in the process of creating, collecting, distributing, storing, retrieving, and the
ultimate disposition of project information in accordance with the communications
management plan. What is the output of this process?

(a)   Project management plan update
(b)   Communication management plan
(c)   Change requests
(d)   Work performance information
Go to the Answer

Question: 274
During risk planning, a team member comes to you and informs you about a risk. This
risk was not important; therefore, you tell him to just note down the risk and you will
manage this risk if it occurs. What risk response strategy you are using here?

(a)   Mitigate
(b)   Accept
(c)   Avoid
(d)   Exploit

Go to the Answer

Question: 275
Your company is a supplier of chemicals used by paint industry, and you see that a big
painting manufacturer is requiring a chemical that you can provide them with at a lower
cost. You try to get this contract but you are facing difficulties because you are not on
their qualified seller list. What is the qualified seller list?

(a)   List of pre-qualified sellers
(b)   List of selected sellers for the contract
(c)   List of sellers not selected for the contract
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 276
You have been assigned as project manager to conduct a study to find the impact of
pollution on the environment. After the project charter is signed, you have completed the
identify project stakeholders process and are now about to classify them. Which of the
following models of classifying the project stakeholders is not mentioned in the PMBOK
Guide 6th Edition?

(a)   Power / Interest grid
(b)   Power / Influence grid
(c)   Impact / Influence grid
(d)   Impact / Power grid

Go to the Answer
Question: 277
Your company has terminated you for acts which you did not perform. After your
termination, one of your old company's competitors contacts you and asks for some
inside information in return for some financial favors. What will you do now?

(a)   You will pass on the information
(b)   You will not pass on the information
(c)   You will ask for more money
(d)   You will ask for a job instead of money

Go to the Answer

Question: 278
You are working in an organization where you have a full-time role, authority over the
budget, and a full-time project team. Which of the following statements is not true about
this type of organization?

(a)   Decision making is faster
(b)   Team members are flexible and versatile
(c)   There is a fast learning curve for new members
(d)   Members have a clear career growth path

Go to the Answer

Question: 279
To demonstrate your product, you develop a small functional model of your real product
and show to your stakeholders to get their feedback. This model is known as:

(a)   Simulation
(b)   Sampling
(c)   Prototype
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 280
You have joined an ongoing project which is 25% completed. As the project is big, to
understand its activities you started reviewing a network diagram. The network diagram
is complex and contains many dummy activities. Which network diagram technique is
used to draw this chart?

(a) PERT
(b) Pareto diagram
(c) CPM
(d) Critical chain

Go to the Answer

Question: 281
The budget of your project is 350,000 USD and you have spent 200,000 USD. However,
upon analyzing the project's performance you find that you are over budget and may
need 200,000 USD to complete the remaining work. This 200,000 USD is known as:

(a)   BAC
(b)   ETC
(c)   TCPI
(d)   EAC

Go to the Answer

Question: 282
You draw a scatter diagram and all points are scattered and look like that they lie in a
circle. What does this mean?

(a)   No correlation
(b)   Circular correlation
(c)   Positive correlation
(d)   Axial correlation

Go to the Answer

Question: 283
Your management is concerned about the performance of their employees. They feel that
their employees are not motivated enough to perform better and that they lack
enthusiasm. Therefore, they ask you come up with ways to motivate them. Which of the
following can be a motivating factor?

(a)   Salary
(b)   Working conditions
(c)   Relation with the boss
(d)   Career growth

Go to the Answer

Question: 284
During the project execution, a very influential stakeholder comes to you and asks for a
change. He tells you that this change will not impact any baseline or project objectives.
You agree with him and implement the change. What went wrong here?

(a)   You should have consulted with your team members
(b)   You should have informed the management
(c)   You should have implemented it through the change request
(d)   You did not analyze it properly

Go to the Answer

Question: 285
You identified a risk in your project that is difficult for you to manage, therefore, you
give the responsibility to manage this risk to an outside source. What kind of risk
response strategy is this?

(a)   Accept
(b)   Avoid
(c)   Transfer
(d)   Exploit

Go to the Answer

Question: 286
You are in the process of developing procurement contracts for your project for which the
scope is not very clear. You know that you will be very busy with other activities and will
not have the time to monitor contractor work and audit the payment details. In this case,
what kind of contract will you select?

(a)   Fixed price
(b)   Cost plus fixed fee
(c)   Fixed price incentive fee
(d)   Time and material

Go to the Answer

Question: 287
Identify stakeholders is a process where you identify stakeholders for your project.
Which of the following statements is not true regarding this process?

(a)   This process happens throughout the project
(b)   This process happens in the planning phase
(c)   This process happens in the executing phase
(d)   This process is started only when the project charter is signed
Go to the Answer

Question: 288
You are working in a country where people are used to giving bribes to get work done
faster. You also need some work done quickly so one of your team members told you to
give a bribe to the official responsible for this job. What will you do now?

(a)   You will not give the bribe
(b)   You will give the bribe
(c)   You will negotiate a lower deal
(d)   You will discuss it with your superior

Go to the Answer

Question: 289
The client has given you a project to install a new kind of elevator, so you start designing
it from scratch. The planning phase is completed and you are now about to install the
elevator. Suddenly a team member comes to you and asks for a change in the quality
management plan as he has identified a flaw in the process. In which process can you
perform the integrated change control?

(a)   During the monitoring & controlling phase
(b)   During the execution phase
(c)   Throughout the project
(d)   During the executing, and monitoring & controlling phase

Go to the Answer

Question: 290
Which of the following statements is not correct regarding the best practice to be used for
lessons learned?

(a) You will note all lessons learned
(b) You will note down only the important lessons learned, otherwise the lessons learned
process will be messy
(c) All incidents should be noted immediately
(d) You will involve all of your project stakeholders to collect the lessons learned

Go to the Answer

Question: 291
Activity A has ES-5, EF-10 and Activity B has ES-7, and the duration is 4 days. What
kind of relationship exists between these two activities?

(a)   Finish to Start
(b)   Finish to Finish
(c)   Start to Finish
(d)   Start to Start

Go to the Answer

Question: 292
Your project is 90% completed, the cost performance index is 1.2 and the schedule
performance index is 0.8. Management is concerned about the delay and asks you to
utilize schedule compression so the project can be completed on time. Which of the
following statements is true about the schedule performance index?

(a)   SPI will be 1 when the project completes
(b)   SPI will be less than 1 when the project completes
(c)   SPI will be greater than 1 when the project completes
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 293
During the review of a control chart, you observe that the limit for one deliverable is
below the lower control limit but above the specification limit. What will your next step
be?

(a)   As it is within the specification limits, no action will be taken
(b)   You will take corrective action
(c)   You will replace the product
(d)   You will adjust the control limits

Go to the Answer

Question: 294
During the project execution, a stakeholder comes to you and tells you that she suspects
that some team members are not doing their tasks and are busy with other activities. You
discuss her concerns with her and show her a document. After seeing it, she agrees with
that the team members are doing the right job. What document was this?

(a) RACI chart
(b) GANTT chart
(c) Organizational chart
(d) WBS

Go to the Answer

Question: 295
During your project execution, some spare parts did not arrive and you need them
urgently. This risk was not previously identified. What will your next step be?

(a)   Implement the mitigation plan
(b)   Implement the fallback plan
(c)   Create a workaround
(d)   Inform the management

Go to the Answer

Question: 296
You are discussing strategies to be used to manage and engage stakeholders in your
project. Which process are you in?

(a)   Plan stakeholder engagement
(b)   Develop stakeholder management strategy
(c)   Manage stakeholders engagement
(d)   Plan communication management

Go to the Answer

Question: 297
Interpersonal skills are also known as soft skills, which are behavioral competencies that
help you develop your project management team. Which of the following is not an
interpersonal skill which is required to manage the project team?

(a)   Leadership
(b)   Rewards
(c)   Influencing
(d)   Decision making

Go to the Answer

Question: 298
Validate scope is the process which helps increase the chances that the client will accept
the deliverable. Here, the client reviews the verified deliverable from the control quality
process. Which of the following statements is true about validate scope process?
(a)   You complete this process with the client
(b)   You and your team members complete the process
(c)   It is performed by QA / QC personal
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 299
You are in the process of estimating the number of working days needed to complete
activities. There are many techniques available to do this. Which of the following is not a
technique that you will use for this purpose?

(a)   Analogous
(b)   Parametric
(c)   Three point
(d)   Monte Carlo

Go to the Answer

Question: 300
You have been supplying engines to an auto-production company. During inspection at
the client's facility, a few of your engines failed testing. Therefore, they send you those
engines for replacement. What kind of cost of quality is this?

(a)   Internal
(b)   External
(c)   Variable
(d)   Damaged

Go to the Answer

Question: 301
You are using an analytic tool to find the strengths and weaknesses of alternatives to
determine the best option in terms of benefits provided. What tool is this?

(a)   SWOT analysis
(b)   Prototype
(c)   Benchmarking
(d)   Cost benefit analysis

Go to the Answer
Question: 302
Some of your team members do not come to meetings on time. A few other members
keep themselves busy with other activities during meetings, and their behavior is not
proper. Therefore, to improve the environment what step will you take?

(a)   Co-locate team members
(b)   Bring them into the war room
(c)   Warn them, and if they don't listen, punish them
(d)   Implement ground rules

Go to the Answer

Question: 303
An identified risk occurred during the execution phase and the risk owner implemented
the risk response plan. The impact of the risk was higher than the planned impact and the
risk response plan was not effective. So, you ask the risk owner to implement the fallback
plan to contain the situation. To implement the fallback plan, which reserve is most likely
to be utilized?

(a)   Contingency reserve
(b)   Management reserve
(c)   Cost reserve
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 304
You need to hire several subject matter experts for your project. Time is limited and the
scope of work is also not very clear. In this situation what kind of procurement contract
will you utilize to hire experts?

(a)   Cost plus fixed fee
(b)   Firm fixed price
(c)   Fixed price economic price adjustment
(d)   Time and material

Go to the Answer

Question: 305
Your project is 60% complete and while reviewing the lessons learned document you
notice that it has missed a few lessons you have learned recently. You call all your team
members and tell them to update the lessons learned as they happen. On any project, who
is responsible for updating the lessons learned?
(a)   Project manager
(b)   Project management team
(c)   Quality control personnel
(d)   Quality assurance personnel

Go to the Answer

Question: 306
Management wants to track the project cost and you want to provide them with this
information with the use of a chart. Which of the following charts can be used for this
purpose?

(a)   Resource calendar
(b)   Hierarchical structure
(c)   Cost chart
(d)   Resource breakdown structure

Go to the Answer

Question: 307
You are in the process of subdividing project deliverables and project work into smaller,
more manageable parts so the project management team can get a structured vision of
what has to be delivered. Which of the following is an output of this process?

(a)   Scope baseline
(b)   RBS
(c)   Network diagram
(d)   OBS

Go to the Answer

Question: 308
An activity can be completed in 5 days if the conditions are favorable; however, if the
conditions are unfavorable, it will take 10 days to complete. The most likely time for this
activity to be completed is 6 days. Determine the PERT estimate for this activity.

(a)   6.5
(b)   7
(c)   5
(d)   3.5
Go to the Answer

Question: 309
What is the standard deviation for the above activity?

(a)   0.833
(b)   2
(c)   1/3
(d)   0.5

Go to the Answer

Question: 310
You are reviewing a chart which looks like an S-Curve during the execution phase of
your project. What kind of chart is this?

(a)   Cause and effect diagram
(b)   Pareto diagram
(c)   Cost baseline
(d)   Sensitivity diagram

Go to the Answer

Question: 311
A team member tells you that if he adds a few extra lines of code to the program, it will
add some more functionality to the program and the client will appreciate the product.
You ask him to refrain from doing so. What the team member was going to do is known
as:

(a)   Gold plating
(b)   Fast tracking
(c)   Scope creep
(d)   Crashing

Go to the Answer

Question: 312
You are going to launch a new product in the market and to attract customers you sign an
advertisement contract with a famous Hollywood actor. What kind of power are you
using here to market your product?

(a) Formal power
(b) Referent power
(c) Expert power
(d) Influential power

Go to the Answer

Question: 313
The probability and impact matrix helps you rank risks so you can develop your risk
management plan accordingly. Which statement is true about the probability and impact
matrix?

(a)   It includes high-grade risks with its impact
(b)   It includes low-grade risks with its impact
(c)   Here the definition of probability and impact is decided
(d)   A grid showing probability and impact of the risk

Go to the Answer

Question: 314
You have signed a multi-year contract with a customer to complete a project for a fixed
price. Since the duration of the contract is long, you have added a provision to adjust the
price of the contract according to the market inflation. What kind of contract is this?

(a)   FPIF
(b)   FP-EPA
(c)   Time and material
(d)   CPIF

Go to the Answer

Question: 315
Your organization has an opportunity to select one project from many available projects.
Therefore, they ask you to select a project based on the constrained optimization selection
method. Which of the following techniques will you use to select the project?

(a)   NPV
(b)   IRR
(c)   Linear programming
(d)   Payback period

Go to the Answer

Question: 316
Enterprise environmental factors are conditions under which you must work and you
cannot control them. Which of the following is not an enterprise environmental factor?

(a)   Organization culture
(b)   Market condition
(c)   Corporate knowledge base
(d)   Project management information system

Go to the Answer

Question: 317
Your organization gets a new project and wants you to assign the project manager for this
project. As management is busy with other activities, they ask you to develop the project
charter so the project can get started. To develop the project charter, which of the
following is not needed?

(a)   Strategic plan
(b)   Business case
(c)   Agreements
(d)   Project plan

Go to the Answer

Question: 318
The client has given you a project to construct a cold storage plant. Everything was going
as planned, however, due to some unforeseen incidents, your project is delayed. The
client is in a hurry and has threatened you with a large penalty if you are not able to
complete the project on time. So, you started working hard to complete the project and
avoid the fine. You are working overtime, bringing in more resources from other projects,
and renting extra equipment; finally, you complete the project on time. This is an
example of:

(a)   Critical chain
(b)   Fast tracking
(c)   Crashing
(d)   Resource leveling

Go to the Answer

Question: 319
Due to an improper cost management plan, you are over budget and a new estimate is
required to complete the project. Management asks you what the new estimate for the
project will be. Which of the following formulas is not used to find this new estimate?
(a)   BAC / CPI
(b)   AC + (BAC - PV)
(c)   AC + (BAC - EV)
(d)   AC + (BAC - EV) / (CPI * SPI)

Go to the Answer

Question: 320
Management wants to get your organization accredited by ISO for its quality
management system. Therefore, they call some external auditors to come and review your
processes for ISO QMS compliance. Which ISO standard is used for a quality
management system?

(a)   ISO 9001
(b)   ISO 9000
(c)   ISO 31000
(d)   ISO 1800

Go to the Answer

Question: 321
You are working in a large organization and directly reporting to the project manager.
Whenever you give any report to the project manager, he asks for supporting evidence
and documents. He also routinely watches all his team members' minute activities. What
kind of boss is he?

(a)   Theory Y
(b)   Theory X
(c)   Theory Z
(d)   Hygiene theory

Go to the Answer

Question: 322
You are behind schedule and the client has threatened you with a penalty if you fail to
complete the project on time. Therefore, you fast-track many activities to finish the
project earlier. Unfortunately, an important team member has become ill and left the job.
You did not plan for this incident; however, you manage to get a replacement from a
manpower supply company and the risk is mitigated, although you have to pay him more
salary. From where will you deduct this extra amount?

(a) Contingency reserve
(b) Project cost
(c) Management reserve
(d) Project budget

Go to the Answer

Question: 323
The project statement of work is a narrative description of products, services, or results to
be delivered by a project. The procurement statement of work includes:

(a)   Project scope statement
(b)   WBS dictionary
(c)   WBS
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 324
Your project is 70% complete and within the next two months it will be 100% complete
and the deliverable will be handed over to the client. Afterward, you will be assigned to a
new project. You have your staff but they are worried about their jobs. What type of
organizational structure is this?

(a)   Projectized organization
(b)   Matrix organization
(c)   Balanced matrix organization
(d)   Weak matrix organization

Go to the Answer

Question: 325
You have joined a new organization and are assigned a project. This is a new type of
project but the organization has completed many similar projects in the past. You decide
to review the lessons learned from past projects. You go to the archives and ask for the
lessons learned from past projects. Lessons learned is a part of which of the following?

(a)   Organizational process assets
(b)   Enterprise environment factor
(c)   Project management plan
(d)   Project archive

Go to the Answer
Question: 326
The client informs you that he noticed some parts of the work are not being completed by
your team. You ensure him you will look into it and give a proper response after
verifying the facts. Which document will you refer to verify it?

(a)   Scope statement
(b)   WBS dictionary
(c)   Schedule baseline
(d)   WBS

Go to the Answer

Question: 327
Your project is delayed and you are trying to compress the schedule so that you can bring
your project on track. While reviewing the activities of your project, you notice that
plumbing work starts after completing electrical work. You discuss these two activities
with your team members and reach a conclusion that these two activities can start at the
same time. Therefore, you make a change to the plan to start these two activities together.
Which technique are you using here?

(a)   Resource leveling
(b)   Resource optimization
(c)   Fast tracking
(d)   Crashing

Go to the Answer

Question: 328
You are developing a video game for a client. The cost of the project is 250,000 USD. To
date, you have spent 100,000 USD and you have completed the 30% of the project. Upon
a review of the project you find that, due to an error, you are over budget and from now
onward you can move ahead as planned. What is the EAC of the project?

(a)   425,000 USD
(b)   357,142 USD
(c)   225,000 USD
(d)   275,000 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 329
You have delivered a batch of spare parts to a client. The client performed an inspection
of these items and found that they do not meet their quality requirements. The client is
not satisfied and they have returned the items to you which requires a lot of rework. What
will happen if you do not meet the quality requirements of the product?

(a)   More profit
(b)   Less rework
(c)   Stakeholder satisfaction
(d)   More after sale support

Go to the Answer

Question: 330
Two of your team members are having conflicts about their roles and responsibilities. In
attempting to resolve this conflict you ask them to refer to the responsibility assignment
matrix. Which of the following statements is not true about the responsibility assignment
matrix?

(a)   It shows the individual responsibilities for each activity
(b)   It helps you rank risks
(c)   RACI is an example of RAM
(d)   It shows resources assigned to each work package

Go to the Answer

Question: 331
You see an opportunity if you complete the project ahead of time: you may get a new
project. Therefore, you try to complete the project early, but due to lack of resources, you
are only able to shorten the duration of a few activities by starting the parallel or
partially-parallel. Which risk response strategy are you employing here?

(a)   Exploit
(b)   Mitigate
(c)   Enhance
(d)   Accept

Go to the Answer

Question: 332
You have advertised in several newspapers to inform interested contractors to apply for a
bid for some of your procurement needs. Which process are you currently in?

(a) Plan procurement management
(b) Conduct procurement
(c) Control procurement
(d) None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 333
You have been given four possible projects and must select one project to work. The
NPV of each project is: 10,000 USD, 15,000 USD, 20,000 USD, and 25,000 USD. Which
of the following projects will you select?

(a)   The project with 10,000 USD NPV
(b)   The project with 15,000 USD NPV
(c)   The project with 20,000 USD NPV
(d)   The project with 25,000 USD NPV

Go to the Answer

Question: 334
You are developing a smartphone, when suddenly your competitor has launched a
smartphone which is better than yours. Therefore, you make some changes to the product
which causes WBS elements to be amended heavily. What kind of changes have you
made to your project?

(a)   Change in scope
(b)   Change in schedule
(c)   Change in quality
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 335
In procurement management, you have many documents to help you such as request for
quotation, request for information and invitation for bid, etc. These documents are
knowns as:

(a)   Organizational process assets
(b)   Project documents
(c)   Contract documents
(d)   Procurements documents

Go to the Answer
Question: 336
Management is asking you to provide them with the report on the project's status and
progress. Therefore, you start preparing a report on it. You are preparing a chart where
you are using a virtual activity (an aggregation of several activities) showing the
summary levels so management can understand it easily. This virtual activity is known
as:

(a)   Milestone
(b)   Control activity
(c)   Hammock activity
(d)   WBS activity

Go to the Answer

Question: 337
You want to buy a cell phone and you have two options. The first phone is cheaper and
offers less functionality, but it has a proven track record of good stability and reliability.
The second phone is a feature rich, costly phone but it has some stability and reliability
issues. Which of the following statements is correct about these phones?

(a)   The first cell phone is a low grade, high-quality phone
(b)   The second cell phone is a low grade, high-quality phone
(c)   The first cell phone is a high grade, low-quality phone
(d)   The second cell phone is a high grade, high-quality phone

Go to the Answer

Question: 338
You have joined a new project which is having a lot of conflicts. Management has asked
you analyze the causes of these conflicts and provide suggestions to reduce them as they
are affecting the project performance. Which of the following is least likely to be a cause
of conflict in a project?

(a)   Ground rules
(b)   Clarity in roles and responsibilities
(c)   High salary
(d)   Proper communication

Go to the Answer

Question: 339
You have identified risks and now have asked your team members to analyze which risks
have the largest potential impact on the project. Which of the following tools will help
you find this impact?

(a)   Sensitivity analysis
(b)   Pareto analysis
(c)   Probability and impact analysis
(d)   Decision tree method

Go to the Answer

Question: 340
You have two projects with NPV 10,000 USD and 15,000 USD. Since the NPV of the
second project is higher, you will select it. In this case, the cost 10,000 USD will be
known as:

(a)   Sunk cost
(b)   Opportunity cost
(c)   Lost cost
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 341
You are managing two projects. The first project is to design a simulator for a client
which he will use in his driving school. The second project is to install a security system
on a client's premises to ensure its security around the clock. What is your role here?

(a)   Project manager
(b)   Portfolio manager
(c)   Program manager
(d)   Project coordinator

Go to the Answer

Question: 342
Due to improper cost planning, your cost performance is not as planned and you are over
budget. Therefore, you again estimate the cost of the project and find that you will
require more money to complete the project. This will require an update of the cost
baseline. What will you do?

(a)   Update the cost baseline
(b)   Raise the change request to update the cost baseline
(c)   Update the cost baseline and inform management
(d)   None of the above
Go to the Answer

Question: 343
Assumptions and constraints are important for your project. They help shape your project
management plan. Any wrong assumptions or constraints can severely impact your
project. How will your project be affected when a constraint turns out to be false?

(a)   Positively
(b)   Negatively
(c)   Depends on the constraint
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 344
You have a project with a budget of 100,000 USD. The duration of the project is 20
months, and the work is evenly distributed throughout the duration. After 10 months, you
review the project's progress and you find that 55% of the work is completed and 65,000
USD has been spent. Based on the above information, you come to the conclusion that:

(a)   The project is behind schedule
(b)   The project is ahead of schedule
(c)   The project is under budget
(d)   Not enough information

Go to the Answer

Question: 345
For question number 344, determine the estimate at completion assuming the future cost
performance is same as the past cost performance.

(a)   110,000 USD
(b)   85,000 USD
(c)   909,09 USD
(d)   117,647 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 346
You have been producing rods with the following lengths: 50 cm, 55 cm, 62 cm, 65 cm,
and 68 cm. What is the standard deviation?
(a)   35
(b)   43.6
(c)   6.6
(d)   4

Go to the Answer

Question: 347
You are working as a project manager in a functional organization. You have limited
power and no team member reports to you directly. In this situation, which power will
you use to get the job done?

(a)   Reward power
(b)   Expert power
(c)   Referent power
(d)   Formal power

Go to the Answer

Question: 348
During risk planning, you encounter a risk that you find difficult to manage; therefore,
you make small changes to your project management plan to eliminate the risk. Which
risk response strategy are you using here?

(a)   Avoid
(b)   Mitigate
(c)   Accept
(d)   Exploit

Go to the Answer

Question: 349
To create the status report, you have collected the data for value of completed work,
actual duration, actual completed work, etc. These data are examples of:

(a)   Work performance data
(b)   Work performance information
(c)   Work performance measurement
(d)   Performance data

Go to the Answer
Question: 350
The client needs a small modification in the project scope, and he discusses it with you.
He has told you that this may not increase the cost and may actually save some money.
What will your next step be?

(a)   Approve it
(b)   Reject it
(c)   Review it
(d)   Discuss it with the management

Go to the Answer

Question: 351
You are using a technique involving the project's risk and uncertainty to find the
probability of completing the project under different situations. What process is this?

(a)   Estimate activity duration
(b)   Perform qualitative risk analysis
(c)   Develop schedule
(d)   Perform quantitative risk analysis

Go to the Answer

Question: 352
You are constructing an office building. The cost of this project is 200,000 USD, and the
duration of the project is 8 months. During the performance review in the sixth month,
you find that 65% of the work is completed and the cost performance index is 1.3. The
Planned Value (PV) will be:

(a)   150,000 USD
(b)   130,000 USD
(c)   70,000 USD
(d)   266,666 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 353
You have been assigned a very critical project. Although your team members are experts
and efficient, your team performance is poor. What will you do to improve your team
performance?

(a) Train them
(b) Warn them
(c) Co-locate them
(d) Punish them for poor performance

Go to the Answer

Question: 354
You have been given a task to find cost estimates for several projects, and your
organization will submit its bid based on these estimates. The financial position of the
organization is not very good; therefore, they tell you that they cannot invest more than
500,000 USD. They also give you a leeway of 10% on either side of it. This leeway is a
part of:

(a)   Organizational process assets
(b)   Enterprise environmental factors
(c)   Threats
(d)   Opportunities

Go to the Answer

Question: 355
You are developing a product for your client. During the development of the product, the
client has indicated that he needs some changes in the product, so you process his
request. How do you manage changes in product specification?

(a)   Change management
(b)   Integration management
(c)   Product management
(d)   Configuration management

Go to the Answer

Question: 356
Work authorization is a subsystem of the project management system, which is used by
the project manager or any authorized person to run the project with command and
control. Which statement is not true about the work authorization system?

(a)   It is used to manage proper sequence of work
(b)   It ensures how the project will be authorized
(c)   It defines approval levels to issue work authorization
(d)   It identifies the person accountable for each activity

Go to the Answer
Question: 357
Your organization manages many projects at one time. For your project, you have been
assigned a place in a building to utilize for your project related activities. However, to use
this facility, you have to pay the electricity bill which is distributed to all project teams.
This electricity bill is an example of:

(a)   Direct cost
(b)   Indirect cost
(c)   Variable cost
(d)   Fixed cost

Go to the Answer

Question: 358
You have been assigned as a project manager for an ongoing project. While reviewing
the project documents you notice that the project does not have a risk management plan.
What will your next step be?

(a)   As the project has already started, you will do nothing
(b)   Ignore the risk management plan
(c)   Start developing the risk management plan
(d)   Inform the stakeholders

Go to the Answer

Question: 359
The client is asking for many changes in the project which is causing you to change the
baseline many times. You are constantly estimating the cost of impact and raising the
change request, and once it is approved, you will update the cost baseline. Which of the
following should be updated frequently?

(a)   Cost baseline
(b)   Schedule baseline
(c)   Lessons learned
(d)   Project charter

Go to the Answer

Question: 360
You are constructing an office building. Work has started and you are in the middle of
your project. You feel that if you add one more floor to the building it will cost much less
than if the client decides to add it in the future. This change, however, will lead to a
change in various baselines and the project charter as well. Therefore, you discuss the
issue with all relevant stakeholders, and after their agreement, you process these change
requests. In all of these changes, who is responsible for making this change in the project
charter?

(a)   The project manager
(b)   The client
(c)   Management
(d)   The project management team

Go to the Answer

Question: 361
You have a project with a cost of 10,000 USD, and the duration is 10 months. Five
months have passed, 45% of the work is completed and you have spent 5,500 USD. The
value of this 45% of the work is known as:

(a)   Planned value
(b)   Earned value
(c)   Actual cost
(d)   Schedule variance

Go to the Answer

Question: 362
Management is sending a team of experts for a risk audit. You inform management that
you have already completed the risk review process and did not find any shortcomings,
so there is no need for a risk audit. However, management is firm on their decision.
Which of the following is true about the risk audit and risk review?

(a) A risk audit is performed to see the effectiveness of a risk response plan
(b) A risk audit is performed to see if you are following the correct procedures
(c) A risk review is performed to see if you are following the correct procedures
(d) Both are the same but an audit is done by external experts and a review is done
internally

Go to the Answer

Question: 363
Your project is delayed because of some regulatory issues and the client has asked you to
stop the work until he gets government clearance. The project team members are afraid
that the project may be terminated early and you may need to enter into the close project
process. In which of the following cases will you not perform the close project or close
phase process?
(a)   When the project is terminated due to cost overrun
(b)   When the project is terminated due to schedule overrun
(c)   The client decided to terminate the project
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 364
A new law is going to come into effect; after five years, all motor engines are required to
be Euro IV compliant. Therefore, your company has given you a project to ensure that all
process and procedures are modified to produce Euro IV compliant engines when the law
goes into effect. This project has arisen because of which need?

(a)   Legal requirement
(b)   Customer request
(c)   Technological advancement
(d)   Business need

Go to the Answer

Question: 365
Your organization has received two possible projects. The first project will give you
50,000 USD profit but it is a bit time consuming, and the second project will give you
35,000 USD and it will complete earlier than the first project. Therefore, you select the
second project. What is the opportunity cost of selecting the second project?

(a)   50,000 USD
(b)   35,000 USD
(c)   85000 USD
(d)   15,000 USD

Go to the Answer

Question: 366
You are determining the probability and impact of risks in order to find the expected
monetary value and then the contingency reserve. Which of the following statements is
true about the expected monetary value?

(a)   You don't consider positive risks while calculating the EMV
(b)   You consider positive as well as negative risks while calculating the EMV
(c)   It is a tool and technique of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process
(d)   None of the above
Go to the Answer

Question: 367
You are managing two projects. The first project is to design and construct a school
building, and the second project is to construct an office building for your company's
employees. What is your current role?

(a)   Project manager
(b)   Program manager
(c)   Portfolio manager
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 368
You have been appointed as project manager for an ongoing project. Upon reviewing the
project documents, you notice that a WBS was not created and work is moving ahead
without it. What will your next step be?

(a)   You will continue to work without a WBS
(b)   Start developing the WBS immediately
(c)   Inform the customer
(d)   Investigate why the WBS was not developed

Go to the Answer

Question: 369
A risk occurred in your project. This was an identified risk, so the risk owner
implemented the risk response plan and the risk was mitigated. Which of the following is
least likely to be updated due to this action?

(a)   Project team assignments
(b)   Risk report
(c)   Issue log
(d)   Project management plan

Go to the Answer

Question: 370
Your organization is evaluating a project to decide whether to go or not go for it. The
estimated cost of this project is 500,000 USD and the duration of this project is three
years. At the end of the first year, you will get 200,000 USD revenue, at the end of the
second year, you will get 170,000 USD, and at the end of the third year, you will get
200,000 USD. Considering 8% discount rate, which of the following statements is true
about the NPV of the project?

(a)   The NPV is positive, you will go for it
(b)   The NPV is positive, you will not go for it
(c)   The NPV is negative, you will go for it
(d)   The NPV is negative, you will not go for it

Go to the Answer

Question: 371
Many problems have arisen in your project and you are finding it difficult to manage.
You decide to identify the problems, quantify the source, and solve them. Which of the
following tools will you use here?

(a)   Tornado analysis
(b)   Pareto analysis
(c)   Ishikawa diagram
(d)   Latin Hypercube technique

Go to the Answer

Question: 372
You are in the process of planning human resources and developing the roles and
responsibilities for your team members. Which of the following will you not address
during this process?

(a)   Role
(b)   Authority
(c)   Training
(d)   Competency

Go to the Answer

Question: 373
During the risk qualification process, you have identified many risks with a low impact or
probability of happening. How will you deal with these risks?

(a)   Ignore them
(b)   Analyze them further
(c)   Keep on the watch list
(d)   Plan a risk response for them
Go to the Answer

Question: 374
You have an agreement with one of your suppliers which allows you to make limited
changes in some exceptional situations. Under one such situation, you make some
changes in the scope of the work. What will your next step be?

(a)   Call the supplier and inform them about it
(b)   Call for a meeting with the supplier to discuss the change
(c)   Send an official memo informing about this change
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 375
You are analyzing whether the stakeholders are resistant, neutral, or supporting and
noting down all the information in a table. What tool is this?

(a)   Stakeholder register
(b)   Stakeholders engagement assessment matrix
(c)   RACI chart
(d)   RAM

Go to the Answer

Question: 376
John has been assigned a task to build a facility where different types of bicycles can be
produced. John builds this facility and hands it over to Andrew to run it. What is
Andrew's role?

(a)   Project manager
(b)   Program manager
(c)   Operation manager
(d)   Portfolio manager

Go to the Answer

Question: 377
Your project is complete and the product is ready to be delivered. The client inspects the
deliverable and accepts it. What process is this?

(a) Close procurement
(b) Close project
(c) Validate scope
(d) Verify scope

Go to the Answer

Question: 378
You have been assigned as a project manager for an ongoing project. After joining the
project, you start reviewing the project document and notice that the WBS dictionary has
many discrepancies. Due to these discrepancies, which of the following will be least
affected?

(a)   Resources required
(b)   Description of the work
(c)   Code of account identifiers
(d)   Training program for team members

Go to the Answer

Question: 379
Based on the below given diagram, which statement is correct?




(a)   In the second month, the project was under budget
(b)   In the fourth month, the project was ahead of schedule
(c)   In the third month, the project was under budget
(d)   In the fifth month, the project is behind schedule

Go to the Answer
Question: 380
You have been producing ball bearings in large numbers. For this kind of process, what
technique will you use to verify if the products are of the right quality?

(a)   Inspection of all products
(b)   Statistical sampling
(c)   Inspection of the first three samples
(d)   Inspection of the last three samples

Go to the Answer

Question: 381
You are having some issues in your project, therefore, you bring all team members into
the war room to resolve the issues. What is the purpose of the war room?

(a)   To punish guilty members
(b)   To keep members in isolation
(c)   Enhance communication
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 382
You have two mutually exclusive events, which have a chance of happening of 15% and
25%. What is the chance that one of them will occur?

(a)   40%
(b)   60%
(c)   15%
(d)   25%

Go to the Answer

Question: 383
Due to a shortage of funds, a client asks you to end the project immediately. What will
your next step be?

(a)   Try to convince the client to not close the project
(b)   Discuss the issue with your team members
(c)   Enter the close procurement process
(d)   Enter the close project process
Go to the Answer

Question: 384
Which of the following is not an interpersonal skill that the project manager will use to
manage stakeholders' expectations?

(a)   Active listening
(b)   Overcoming resistance to change
(c)   Punishment
(d)   Building trust

Go to the Answer

Question: 385
You have bought a piece of land with a worth of 120,000 USD. You also have an
agreement with the company that if you return this land to them after 2 years, they will
give you 160,000 USD. What is the appreciation rate?

(a)   15.5
(b)   20
(c)   10
(d)   7

Go to the Answer

Question: 386
During the execution phase many small, unforeseen incidents happen which you manage
with a workaround. What will your first step be after managing these unforeseen
incidents?

(a)   Raise the change request
(b)   Update the cost baseline
(c)   Update the schedule baseline
(d)   Record it in lessons learned

Go to the Answer

Question: 387
You are designing a motor engine. During the design phase, you find that a technique
required to develop the piston is a bit more advanced than the technology you currently
possess. Although you can acquire this technology, it is too time consuming. On the other
hand, there is a supplier that can provide you with the same component but at a higher
cost. You are still discussing the options with your team members. Which technique are
you using here?

(a)   Select seller
(b)   Source selection criteria
(c)   Make or buy analysis
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 388
Which of the following is not a management skill that a project manager will use to get
support from the stakeholders?

(a)   Facilitate consensus
(b)   Resolving conflicts
(c)   Negotiate agreement to satisfy needs
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 389
You are responsible for IT maintenance in your organization. The head of the IT
department comes to you with an internet security expert and tells you to disable auto
login and force authentic login based on a new password. The password will be 15
characters long and consist of letters, numerals, and one special character, and this
password must expire after every 30 days. This is an example of:

(a)   Operation
(b)   Project
(c)   Maintenance
(d)   None of the above

Go to the Answer

Question: 390
Based on the table given below, find out which activity will have the free float?
(a)   Activity F
(b)   Activity E
(c)   Activity G
(d)   Activity C

Go to the Answer

Question: 391
For the table given in question 390, what will the free float be for the identified activity?

(a)   6
(b)   23
(c)   21
(d)   2

Go to the Answer

Question: 392
Based on the table below, which of these statements is correct?




(a)   The project is ahead of schedule
(b)   The project is behind schedule
(c)   CPI is 0.98
(d)   Not sufficient data

Go to the Answer
Question: 393
Your organization is following a methodology where the long term approach is customer
satisfaction, and to achieve this objective all members of your organization participate.
What methodology is this?

(a)   JIT
(b)   KAIZEN
(c)   KANBAN
(d)   TQM

Go to the Answer

Question: 394
When any phase closes, some type of hand-off happens. Which of the following options
is not a name for this point?

(a)   Milestone
(b)   Kill point
(c)   Stage gate
(d)   Exit point

Go to the Answer

Question: 395
You get some information that two of your members are going to have a conflict on some
issues and this may affect your project performance. To stop this conflict from
happening, what kind of communication will you use initially?

(a)   Formal verbal
(b)   Informal verbal
(c)   Formal written
(d)   Informal written

Go to the Answer

Question: 396
A SWOT analysis helps you identify opportunities which arise from organizational
strengths threats dues to its weakness. According to this analysis, analyzing the strengths
and weaknesses is a part of:

(a) Internal factors
(b) External factors
(c) Discretionary factors
(d) Mandatory factors

Go to the Answer

Question: 397
You are performing the inspection of a deliverable with your contractor to determine if
the deliverable is meeting requirements. After being satisfied with the inspection, you
accept the deliverable. Which process are you in?

(a)   Quality control
(b)   Validate scope
(c)   Close procurement
(d)   Procurement audit

Go to the Answer

Question: 398
The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process helps you increase the effectiveness of
stakeholders' engagement with your project. Which of the following is not an output of
this process?

(a)   Change request
(b)   Project document update
(c)   Issue log
(d)   Stakeholder management plan

Go to the Answer

Question: 399
You are going to apply for registration of your company in a new country. There are two
routes to apply within the registration process: the first route is the normal process where
you have to pay a fee and become registered. The other is an express process where you
have to pay more to get registered faster. You need to register your company quickly,
otherwise, you will not be able to apply for a project. Your organization has given you
free hand to get registered. What will your next step be?

(a)   You will never pay more, and you will go for the normal route
(b)   You will report to the authorities
(c)   You will discuss this with your team members
(d)   You will go for the express route
Go to the Answer

Question: 400
You have signed a Cost Plus Incentive Fee contract with the client. The details of the
contract are as follows:

Target cost: 300,000 USD
Target fee: 30,000 USD
Maximum fee: 40,000 USD
Minimum fee: 15,000 USD
Share ratio: 60/40

You have completed the work and the actual cost is 270,000 USD. The amount you will
be paid from the client will be:

(a)   312,000 USD
(b)   310,000 USD
(c)   330,000 USD
(d)   315,000 USD

Go to the Answer
                              Answers Sheet: Set-I
Answer-1: b

Explanation: The configuration management system deals with the change in the
product scope and therefore, the change management system is a subset of the
configuration management system.

Go to Question: 1

                                           ***
Answer-2: b

Explanation: Work performance data is raw data on observations and measurements of
the project status; e.g. actual cost, time duration, percentage of completed work, the
number of defects, etc. Work performance information is an analysis of work
performance data against planned progress, for example actual completed vs planned
completion. `Work performance measurements' is not a term found in the PMBOK
Guide 6th Edition.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 26, 95

Go to Question: 2

                                           ***
Answer-3: a

Explanation: You are in the define scope process. In this process, you develop the
project scope and product description. At the end of this process, you update the project
document which includes the stakeholder register, requirement documentations, and
requirement traceability matrix.

Define scope belongs to the planning process group, and issues happen in the executing.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 155

Go to Question: 3

                                           ***
Answer-4: b

Explanation: You are visiting stakeholders to discover their needs and collect their
requirements. This process is known as collect requirements.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 138

Go to Question: 4

                                            ***
Answer-5: d

Explanation:

In the question, you have not been provided with the budget, therefore, let us assume that
the project budget is "x".

Earned Value = 40% of the budget
= 0.4x

Actual Cost = 60% of the budget
= 0.6x

We know that the cost performance index = (Earned Value) / (Actual Cost)
= 0.4x / 0.6x
= 0.67

Go to Question: 5

                                            ***
Answer-6: a

Explanation: In the quality control process, you inspect the deliverable for any possible
defects.

As you are doing an inspection, you are in the quality control process. Please note that
although the quality audit is performed in the manage quality process, it has not started
yet and you are doing an inspection, which is a tool of the quality control process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 303

Go to Question: 6

                                            ***
Answer-7: c
Explanation: The RACI stands for responsible, accountable, consult, and inform. This
chart shows the relationship between the deliverable and the person who is responsible
for it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 317

Go to Question: 7

                                            ***
Answer-8: a

Explanation: Work performance information is an organized summary of work
performance data. Among all the choices, "number of changes requests" represents work
performance data and all the other options are work performance information. So, "a" is
the correct choice.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 26

Go to Question: 8

                                            ***
Answer-9: b

Explanation: Risks are either positive or negative; there are no neutral risks so it is a
made-up term. After the risk response plan is created, the next step is to update the
project management plan. This includes updating baselines and project management
plans. So, "b" is the correct choice.

Risk owner assignment is already completed during risk response planning. Changing the
critical path (if required) will be done while updating the project management plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 437

Go to Question: 9

                                            ***
Answer-10: b

Explanation: The T&M contract is a hybrid type contract which contains the prospect of
cost plus and fixed price contracts.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472
Go to Question: 10

                                           ***
Answer-11: d

Explanation: You are in the plan stakeholder engagement process and the output of this
process is the stakeholder engagement plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 516

Go to Question: 11

                                           ***
Answer-12: a

Explanation: The four basic elements of the PMI code of ethics and professional
conduct are responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty.

Go to Question: 12

                                           ***
Answer-13: b

Explanation: Configuration identification, configuration status accounting, configuration
verification, and audit are configuration management activities. Configuration account
checking is made-up.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 118

Go to Question: 13

                                           ***
Answer-14: d

Explanation: Work performance report is a compilation of work performance
information intended for making a decision or creating awareness; e.g. status reports,
memos, etc.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 26

Go to Question: 14

                                           ***
Answer-15: a

Explanation: The salience model uses three parameters to analyze the project
stakeholders. These parameters are: power, urgency, and legitimacy.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide 6th Edition, Page: 513

Go to Question: 15

                                            ***
Answer-16: b

Explanation: In all estimating techniques, the analogous cost estimation is the fastest. In
this estimation, you see the cost of any past similar project and apply the parameters to
your project and get the approximate cost. Symmetric estimate is a made-up term.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 244

Go to Question: 16

                                            ***
Answer-17: b

Explanation: In manage quality process, it is ensured that you are following the policies
and procedures set by organization.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 288, 294

Go to Question: 17

                                            ***
Answer-18: b

Explanation: OBS stands for organizational breakdown structure. In the OBS chart, you
can see the hierarchical structure of your organization and the roles and responsibilities of
each department.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 316

Go to Question: 18

                                            ***
Answer-19: d

Explanation: In informal verbal discussions, you meet with someone casually and
discuss matters; however, this discussion does not hold any official significance.

Go to Question: 19

                                           ***
Answer-20: c

Explanation: This is an example of negative risk; therefore, you will use mitigation
strategy to minimize the impact. The other two strategies, exploit and enhance, are
positive risk response strategies.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 442, 443, 444, 445, 446

Go to Question: 20

                                           ***
Answer-21: c

Explanation: When you need to hire technical experts, you will use the T&M contract.
T&M contract is a hybrid of fixed price and cost reimbursable contract.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472

Go to Question: 21

                                           ***
Answer-22: c

Explanation: Power / Interest grid, Influence / Impact grid, and salience model are
classification models for the stakeholder analysis, while Tornado diagram is used in
sensitivity analysis. Tornado diagram is used to compare the relative importance of the
variables.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 512

Go to Question: 22

                                           ***
Answer-23: c
Explanation: As it is clear that no bidder is interested in a fixed price contract this is the
wrong answer. Also, you don't have time to audit the contractor's cost, therefore, you
will also not go for the cost plus contract.

Now, you are left with the time and materials; therefore, you will use that one. In time
and materials, there is less risk for the seller and the buyer does not need to invest much
time.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472

Go to Question: 23

                                             ***
Answer-24: c

Explanation: A murder board is a committee of experts that critically reviews the
proposal. In this review, team members have to give answers to very critical questions
raised by the committee members. It is like an oral exam.

Go to Question: 24

                                             ***
Answer-25: a

Explanation: Project management plan, WBS, and schedule baselines are not a part of
the project charter. Therefore, "a" is the correct choice.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 81

Go to Question: 25

                                             ***
Answer-26: c

Explanation: Acceptance criteria, project exclusions, and project constraints are
included in the project scope statement. The stakeholder register is also updated here but
the risk register is not.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 154

Go to Question: 26

                                             ***
Answer-27: c

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 190

Go to Question: 27

                                          ***
Answer-28: c

Explanation:
Given in the question:
BAC = 250,000 USD
EAC = 300,000 USD
AC = 100,000 USD

First, we will calculate the CPI.
We know that:
EAC = BAC / CPI
CPI = BAC / EAC
= 250,000 / 300,000
= 0.83

Now we will calculate the CPI.
CPI = EV / AC
0.83 = EV / 100,000
EV= 83,000

The earned value is 83,000 USD.

Go to Question: 28

                                          ***
Answer-29: c

Explanation: Pareto chart helps you identify the sources causing most of the trouble.

Go to Question: 29

                                          ***
Answer-30: a

Explanation: This is an example of Theory X and Theory Y, which was developed by
Douglas McGregor. In Theory X, the boss assumes that his employees are lazy and avoid
work; therefore, they need micromanagement. In Theory Y, the boss assumes that his
employees are capable and self-motivated; therefore, they need macro management.

Go to Question: 30

                                           ***
Answer-31: d

Explanation: The number of stakeholders does not affect the communication technology
used to transfer the information to your stakeholders.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 370, 371

Go to Question: 31

                                           ***
Answer-32: b

Explanation: A secondary risk is a risk which is caused by a response to a primary risk.
Here, you bring in a new employee to mitigate the effect of the employee who has left
you. Now, the behavior of this employee is a secondary risk for you to manage.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 439

Go to Question: 32

                                           ***
Answer-33: c

Explanation: Fixed price with economic price adjustment is a type of contract which is
used for a long-term fixed type contract where the price can be adjusted due to inflation.
This provision saves the seller from external conditions which are beyond the seller's
control.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 471

Go to Question: 33

                                           ***
Answer-34: a

Explanation: Besides brain writing, all other options are data representation techniques.
Brain writing is a gathering technique.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 511, 512, 513

Go to Question: 34

                                             ***
Answer-35: b

Explanation: You must obey the rules and regulation at all times and never break them,
whatever the circumstances.

Go to Question: 35

                                             ***
Answer-36: c

Explanation: In balanced matrix organization, the project manager has some authority to
manage the budget, and has some part-time employees.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 47

Go to Question: 36

                                             ***
Answer-37: c

Explanation: The stakeholder register, risk register, project calendar, etc., are part of the
project files.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 41

Go to Question: 37

                                             ***
Answer-38: c

Explanation: In define scope process, you define the project and project requirements.
You define what should be included and what should not.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 151, 151

Go to Question: 38
                                           ***
Answer-39: a

Explanation: You cannot build the wall unless the foundation is built. This is a
mandatory type of dependency. Mandatory dependency can be of three types: legally
required, contractually required or inherent in the nature of the work.

Discretionary dependency is also known as preferential logic. These dependencies are
based on the best industry practice and knowledge.

External dependency is a relationship between project activities and non-project
activities. These dependencies are usually outside the project team's control.

Internal dependency is a precedence relationship between project activities. These
dependencies are usually inside the project team's control.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 191, 192

Go to Question: 39

                                           ***
Answer-40: d

Explanation:
Given in the question:
EAC = 250,000 USD
BAC = 200,000 USD
EV = 50,000 USD

Since the future cost performance will be the same as the past cost performance, you will
use the formula:
EAC = BAC / CPI
250,000 = 200,000 / CPI
CPI = 200,000 / 250,000
= 0.8

Now we know that:
CPI = EV / AC
AC = EV / CPI
= 50,000 / 0.8
= 62,500

The money spent to date is 62,500 USD
Go to Question: 40

                                            ***
Answer-41: a

Explanation: You have four control charts for discrete data.

The p-chart is used when each unit is considered either passed or failed.

The c-chart is used when you want to identify the total number of defects per unit. This
chart is used when the number of samples for each sampling period is the same.

The u-chart also helps you find the total number of defects in units, like c-charts. This
chart is used when the number of samples for each sampling period may vary
significantly.

The np-chart helps you identify the total number of defective units within a constant
sampling size. The unit may have one or more defects.

Go to Question: 41

                                            ***
Answer-42: d

Explanation: Schedule priorities and scarce resources are the main sources of conflict
within projects, while personnel reasons are least.

Go to Question: 42

                                            ***
Answer-43: d

Explanation:
Communication lines = N * (N - 1) / 2

Communication lines before adding the new members = 10 * (10 - 1) / 2
= 45

Communication lines after introducing new members = 12 * (12 - 1) / 2
= 66

Increase in communication lines: 66 - 45
= 21

Go to Question: 43

                                          ***
Answer-44: c

Explanation: If any unidentified risk occurs, you will manage it through a workaround.
Simply put, a workaround is a response to an unidentified risk event.

Go to Question: 44

                                          ***
Answer-45: b

Explanation: This is a conduct procurement process and you are in the process of
selecting a seller.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 482

Go to Question: 45

                                          ***
Answer-46: d

Explanation: The stakeholder register contains information about the project
stakeholders. Therefore, whenever you need to find/update/record any information
regarding the stakeholders, you will need to open the stakeholder register.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 514

Go to Question: 46

                                          ***
Answer-47: d

Explanation: You must not pay the bribe in any condition.

Go to Question: 47

                                          ***
Answer-48: a
Explanation: In portfolio management, a group of related or non-related projects and
programs are managed in a coordinated way.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 13

Go to Question: 48

                                            ***
Answer-49: b

Explanation: You may have confused this with an enterprise environmental factor
because the project was terminated due to some government regulations, and government
regulations are an example of an enterprise environmental factor. Although the project
was canceled due to government regulations, this is past information and it is a part of the
organizational process assets.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 39, 40, 41

Go to Question: 49

                                            ***
Answer-50: c

Explanation: In group creativity technique, you interact with a group of people.
Interviews usually happen one to one.

Go to Question: 50

                                            ***
Answer-51: d

Explanation: This is the definition of the manage project knowledge process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide 6th Edition, Page: 98

Go to Question: 51

                                            ***
Answer-52: c

Explanation: During the estimate creation, you will have to see if the estimate will
include the indirect costs or not. Indirect costs are those costs which are not under your
control such as rent, cost of electricity, etc.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 246

Go to Question: 52

                                                  ***
Answer-53: d

Explanation: Just in Time is a Japanese methodology which tries to improve
performance by reducing the cost of inventory to a minimum level (ideally zero).

Go to Question: 53

                                                  ***
Answer-54: a

Explanation: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs is as follows (from lowest to highest):
physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization.

Go to Question: 54

                                                  ***
Answer-55: a

Explanation: Any reports; e.g. minutes of meeting, are examples of formal written
communication.

Go to Question: 55

                                                  ***
Answer-56: d

Explanation: The target cost was 500,000 USD and the actual cost spent to complete the
project was 400,000 USD.

This means you have saved 100,000 USD, and this 100,000 USD profit will be divided
according to the share ratio that was agreed upon.

In the question, the share ratio is 80/20, which means that 80% will be taken by you and
20% will be taken by the seller.

Therefore, the seller's part = 20% of 100,000 USD
= 20,000 USD

Since you have completed the project within the target cost, these savings will be added
to your target profit.

Final profit to the seller = 50,000 + 20,000

= 70,000 USD

Since you have completed the project within the target cost, the ceiling price will not
have any role here.

Go to Question: 56

                                               ***
Answer-57: c

Explanation: The PMBOK Guide classifies stakeholders into five groups based on the
engagement level. These engagement levels are as follows: unaware, resistant, neutral,
supportive, and leading. Hence, `c' is correct.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 521

Go to Question: 57

                                               ***
Answer-58: a

Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Point: 2.3.2, Page No: 3

Go to Question: 58

                                               ***
Answer-59: b

Explanation: Approved change requests are implemented in the direct and manage
project work process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 90

Go to Question: 59
                                           ***
Answer-60: b

Explanation: All the given information is high-level information, and can be found in
the project charter.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 81

Go to Question: 60

                                           ***
Answer-61: a

Explanation: WBS stands for work breakdown structure. Here, work is broken down
into smaller, manageable, packages.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 161

Go to Question: 61

                                           ***
Answer-62: b

Explanation: In fast tracking, those activities planned in sequence, performed in parallel
or partially parallel to reduce the schedule (if possible).

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 215

Go to Question: 62

                                           ***
Answer-63: b

Explanation:

Given in the question:

BAC = 500,000 USD
CV = -45,000 USD
AC = 200,000 USD
PV = 140,000 USD
Since the cost variance is negative, you are over budget. This answer is not an option in
the given choices, so we will calculate the schedule variance.
To calculate the schedule variance, we need EV and PV. PV is given in the question but
the EV is not.

So, now we will calculate the EV using the cost variance formula.

We know that:

CV = EV - AC
-45,000 = EV - 200,000
EV = 200,000 - 45,000
= 155,000 USD

Now we will find out the schedule variance:

SV = EV - PV
= 155,000 - 140,000
= 15,000 USD

Since the schedule variance is positive, you are ahead of schedule.

Go to Question: 63

                                           ***
Answer-64: b

Explanation: The four steps in the cycle are: Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA). Here, you
check the improvement in the process in the `check' phase.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 275

Go to Question: 64

                                           ***
Answer-65: b

Explanation: Here, you are negotiating with the functional manager to get a particular
employee from his section to work on your project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 332
Go to Question: 65

                                            ***
Answer-66: d

Explanation: Gestures, physical appearance or facial expressions are examples of non-
verbal communication.

Go to Question: 66

                                            ***
Answer-67: c

Explanation: Low-priority and low-impact risks are kept on a watch list to monitor
them. You never know when they may become a high-priority risk.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 423

Go to Question: 67

                                            ***
Answer-68: d

Explanation: Let's say that after "x" number of days the total rent will be equal to the
cost of the equipment.

Total cost after x days = 250x

And this is equal to the cost of the generator; i.e. 50,000 USD.
250x = 50,000
x = 50,000 / 250
= 200

Go to Question: 68

                                            ***
Answer-69: b

Explanation: In the issue log, you log all issues and the resolution of those issues.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 96, 528

Go to Question: 69
                                           ***
Answer-70: d

Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Point: 5.2.2, Page No: 6

Go to Question: 70

                                           ***
Answer-71: c

Explanation: It is denoted by an S-curve and measured against the actual cost incurred.

Go to Question: 71

                                           ***
Answer-72: c

Explanation: Here, the project's output is a manufacturing facility to produce the
helmets; therefore, assembly line workers will be the users of the project who will
manufacture the helmet.

Go to Question: 72

                                           ***
Answer-73: a

Explanation: The traceability matrix connects the product requirement with its source.
From here you can see which stakeholder has requested the particular requirement
because they were arguing that the requirement was not requested by any stakeholder.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 148

Go to Question: 73

                                           ***
Answer-74: b

Explanation:
Given in the question
Optimistic Time = 10 days
Pessimistic Time = 22 days
Most Likely Time = 15 days
We know that
Standard Deviation = (Pessimistic Time - Optimistic Time) / 6
= (22 - 10) / 6
= 12 / 6
=2

Go to Question: 74

                                            ***
Answer-75: d

Explanation: The first three costs are under the project manager's control so they can be
managed under the manager's authority. However, the overhead cost which includes the
cost of electricity, office rent, etc., are beyond the project manager's control. These costs
are controlled by the organization so the project manager cannot control them.

Go to Question: 75

                                            ***
Answer-76: d

Explanation: KAIZEN is a Japanese term which means `improvement', and KAIZEN
philosophy refers to the continuous improvement of processes.

Go to Question: 76

                                            ***
Answer-77: b

Explanation: Having the PMP certification, sound knowledge of project management
skills and experience shows that you have expert power.

Go to Question: 77

                                            ***
Answer-78: c

Explanation: After the project ends, you should work with the client to make sure they
are able to realize the benefits of the product. If they face any issues, you should help
them find a solution. This is known as benefit realization and PMI recommends it.

Go to Question: 78
                                            ***
Answer-79: c

Explanation: Quantitative risk analysis is performed after the qualitative risk analysis.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 25

Go to Question: 79

                                            ***
Answer-80: a

Explanation: In this case, you use the cost reimbursable contract because this contract
provides you with flexibility when the scope of work is flexible.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472

Go to Question: 80

                                            ***
Answer-81: c

Explanation: You are in the manage stakeholder engagement process; ground rules,
expert judgment, and meetings are tools and techniques of the manage stakeholder
engagement process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 523

Go to Question: 81

                                            ***
Answer-82: c

Explanation: Whatever the situation, you will always provide the correct figure to the
client. However, you will include the detailed description of how have you calculated the
cost. You may also include the risks that the project may have if the budget is reduced.

Go to Question: 82

                                            ***
Answer-83: d
Explanation: Delphi technique helps you get experts' opinions, and reach a consensus,
without bringing them face to face.

In this technique, a facilitator forwards a questionnaire to each participant anonymously.
The facilitator compiles their responses, and again forwards these compiled responses to
all participants until it reaches some consensus.

Go to Question: 83

                                           ***
Answer-84: a

Explanation: Since you are new to the company, it is important for you to understand the
policies and procedures used in the company before you start anything.

Go to Question: 84

                                           ***
Answer-85: c

Explanation: WBS dictionary provides details of the work package.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 162

Go to Question: 85

                                           ***
Answer-86: a

Explanation: You can see that the project has three critical paths. This means you will
have to manage three paths very closely and this also means there is more risk.

Go to Question: 86

                                           ***
Answer-87: a

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 241

Go to Question: 87

                                           ***
Answer-88: b
Explanation: In manage quality process, you review the information obtained in the
quality control process and check whether or not it is meeting the quality requirements.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 288

Go to Question: 88

                                           ***
Answer-89: d

Explanation: You have established team charter and once it is established, all project
team members are responsible to enforce it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 320

Go to Question: 89

                                           ***
Answer-90: c

Explanation: Talking in private is an example of informal verbal communication.

Go to Question: 90

                                           ***
Answer-91: a

Explanation: After identifying risks, your next step will be to prioritize them. To do so
you will use the probability and impact matrix.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 408

Go to Question: 91

                                           ***
Answer-92: d

Explanation: You're doing make or buy analysis. In this analysis, you determine which
particular work you will be doing on your own, and which work you should outsource.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 473

Go to Question: 92
                                            ***
Answer-93: a

Explanation: You are in the manage stakeholder engagement process and interpersonal
skills are a tool and technique of this process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 523

Go to Question: 93

                                            ***
Answer-94: c

Explanation: In this situation, you must report this incident to the project manager for
any possible disciplinary action.

Go to Question: 94

                                            ***
Answer-95: d

Explanation: These are the characteristics of an organic or simple type of organizational
structure where the team is flexible and the project manager has little or no authority and
no authority over the project budget.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 47

Go to Question: 95

                                            ***
Answer-96: d

Explanation: Monitoring and controlling the work is a project management process; it is
not a project life cycle phase.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 547, 548

Go to Question: 96

                                            ***
Answer-97: c
Explanation: Gold plating is a phenomenon where you add some extra features to the
product in order to make the client happy. Gold plating may increase the cost and risks.

Go to Question: 97

                                           ***
Answer-98: c

Explanation: This is a research type of project, so therefore, you will draw a PERT
diagram. In PERT diagram, you can only use a "Finish to Start" type of relationship.

Go to Question: 98

                                           ***
Answer-99: a

Explanation: The full form of TCPI is To Complete Performance Index. This is the cost
performance which you must maintain if you want to complete the project within a given
budget.

Go to Question: 99

                                           ***
Answer-100: d

Explanation: You are reviewing a control chart and the purpose of the control chart is to
determine if the process is stable or not.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 304

Go to Question: 100

                                           ***
Answer-101: b

Explanation: The halo effect refers to a situation where you promote an employee to a
management position because they are good at their technical work. However, later you
observe that they are not performing their management responsibilities well. Therefore,
you have lost a good technical employee and acquired bad management personnel.

Go to Question: 101

                                           ***
Answer-102: c

Explanation: "Inward" is not a way to classify stakeholders in a "Direction of Influence"
method.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 513

Go to Question: 102

                                           ***
Answer-103: d

Explanation: In the Delphi technique, you forward a questionnaire to all stakeholders
anonymously and get their replies. After compiling their replies, you again forward it to
them until you reach a consensus. In this way, this tool ensures a fair contribution from
all stakeholders.

Go to Question: 103

                                           ***
Answer-104: a

Explanation: Here, you are evaluating the proposals submitted by bidders, and proposal
evaluation is a technique of the conduct procurement process. Please note that the
question is asking about the process, not the technique. Therefore, the option "proposal
evaluation technique" is incorrect.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 487

Go to Question: 104

                                           ***
Answer-105: c

Explanation: You should investigate it, and then report it to PMI.

Go to Question: 105

                                           ***
Answer-106: b

Explanation: To buy materials for direct consumption you use a purchase order.
Go to Question: 106

                                           ***
Answer-107: a

Explanation: You must discuss the impact of the change request on the project cost with
the client. You cannot process the change request unless the client agrees with its impact
on any project objective.

Go to Question: 107

                                           ***
Answer-108: a

Explanation: The uncontrolled addition to the scope is known as scope creep. Scope
creep shows that you do not have complete control over your project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 168

Go to Question: 108

                                           ***
Answer-109: d

Explanation: In PERT analysis, the most likely estimate is multiplied by four, added to
the other two estimates, and then divided by 6. Therefore, it is called weighted average
duration estimate.

Go to Question: 109

                                           ***
Answer-110: b

Explanation: Indirect costs are overhead costs and costs distributed to projects run by an
organization. For example, the cost of electricity, taxes, etc.

Go to Question: 110

                                           ***
Answer-111: a

Explanation: A run chart is a line graph of data plotted over time. This chart helps you
see the pattern in the process. (Note: A run chart does not have control limits; therefore, it
cannot tell you whether or not the process is stable.)

Go to Question: 111

                                             ***
Answer-112: c

Explanation: When the team is located in different places and performance is poor, you
can bring them together to improve performance.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 340

Go to Question: 112

                                             ***
Answer-113: a

Explanation: In a pull communication method, you keep information somewhere and
ask stakeholders to access it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 374

Go to Question: 113

                                             ***
Answer-114: a

Explanation: A trigger is a warning that an identified risk is about to occur.

Go to Question: 114

                                             ***
Answer-115: b

Explanation: You are doing procurement performance reviews, which is a tool and
technique of the control procurement process. Here, you review the seller's performance
against the conditions laid down in the contract.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 498

Go to Question: 115
                                           ***
Answer-116: c

Explanation: If you see any problems with any of your team members, you should talk
with them to find the cause.

Go to Question: 116

                                           ***
Answer-117: d

Explanation: Regulations are always mandatory, you cannot escape them. On the other
hand, standards are guidelines to help you to accomplish tasks with tested and approved
methods or procedures.

Go to Question: 117

                                           ***
Answer-118: c

Explanation: During the close project or phase process, you update the lessons learned
and release the resources. Accepting deliverable is the output of the validate scope
process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 163

Go to Question: 118

                                           ***
Answer-119: b

Explanation: In majority, a decision is accepted if it receives more than 50% of total
votes.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 144

Go to Question: 119

                                           ***
Answer-120: a

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 255
Go to Question: 120

                                             ***
Answer-121: d

Explanation: In the first line the question itself is saying that the problem is in the
process. Therefore, you will go for quality assurance to improve the process.

Go to Question: 121

                                             ***
Answer-122: d

Explanation: In the norming stage, team members begin to work together, adjust their
habits, and learn to trust each other.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 338

Go to Question: 122

                                             ***
Answer-123: c

Explanation: Making eye contact and repeating phrases are examples of active listening.

Go to Question: 123

                                             ***
Answer-124: b

Explanation: If the bell curve is spread widely it means the process is very risky, and if
the curve is thin it means the process is less risky.

Go to Question: 124

                                             ***
Answer-125: d

Explanation: In the control procurements process, the buyer issues a formal written
notice that the contract has been completed.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 499
Go to Question: 125

                                          ***
Answer-126: b

Explanation: This is an example of corrective action where you took measures to keep
the same error from happening again.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 96

Go to Question: 126

                                          ***
Answer-127: b

Explanation: A controlling PMO provides you with support and expects you to comply
with their requests and wishes.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 48

Go to Question: 127

                                          ***
Answer-128: c

Explanation: This is an example of rolling wave planning. In rolling wave planning, you
make a detailed plan for near term work. You will make the plan for the rest of the work
when you get more information on it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 160

Go to Question: 128

                                          ***
Answer-129: b

Explanation: The requirement traceability matrix connects the requirements to their
deliverables. From this document, you can see the requirement and the requestor.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 148

Go to Question: 129
                                            ***
Answer-130: a

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 244

Go to Question: 130

                                            ***
Answer-131: b

Explanation: In manage quality process, it is ensured that you are following the policies
and procedures set by an organization.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 247

Go to Question: 131

                                            ***
Answer-132: a
Explanation: According to the Tuckman Ladder's theory, the different stages of team
development are as follows: forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. In
the performing stage, the team starts working as a well-organized unit, they are
interdependent and work smoothly and effectively.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 338

Go to Question: 132

                                            ***
Answer-133: d

Explanation: A question by bidders is a part of the meeting. Computer and telephone are
kept in their places; they are not making any noise. The sound of a vacuum cleaner, of
course, is a noise.

Go to Question: 133

                                            ***
Answer-134: c

Explanation: In mitigation risk response strategy, you plan to mitigate it and assign it to
a risk owner.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443

Go to Question: 134

                                           ***
Answer-135: a

Explanation: Under the FPIF, you set a ceiling price; once this ceiling price is passed,
the seller bears all the cost. This point is known as the point of total assumption.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 471

Go to Question: 135

                                           ***
Answer-136: c

Explanation: In change log, you record any change that occurs during the project, along
with its impact on any project objective.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 120

Go to Question: 136

                                           ***
Answer-137: b

Explanation: Scope baseline consists of scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 161

Go to Question: 137

                                           ***
Answer-138: a

Explanation: Resource breakdown structure (RBS) hierarchically categorizes resources
by category or type.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 165

Go to Question: 138
                                           ***
Answer-139: b

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 248

Go to Question: 139

                                           ***
Answer-140: b

Explanation: Pareto analysis is also sometimes known as an 80/20 principle.
This law states that 80% of the problems are due to 20% of the causes. Here, you find the
minimum causes for the maximum amount of problems.

Go to Question: 140

                                           ***
Answer-141: c

Explanation: During develop project team process, if you see that any of your team
members are lacking certain skills, you will develop a training program for him.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 342

Go to Question: 141

                                           ***
Answer-142: b

Explanation: In horizontal communication, you communicate with your peers or people
on your level; therefore, this is a wrong choice. In vertical communication,
communication hierarchy is from lower level to upper level, as shown in the question;
hence `b' is the correct answer.

Parallel and triangular communication are made-up words.

Go to Question: 142

                                           ***
Answer-143: a

Explanation: Exploit is a risk response strategy where you use all means to realize the
opportunity.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 444

Go to Question: 143

                                           ***
Answer-144: d

Explanation: In cost plus award fee (CPAF), seller is given all cost for his work plus an
award based upon some pre-defined performance achievement, which is not subjected to
an appeal.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472

Go to Question: 144

                                           ***
Answer-145: b

Explanation: Regardless of whether the project is successfully completed or terminated
before the completion, you must start close project process in order to close the project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 121

Go to Question: 145

                                           ***
Answer-146: a

Explanation: In a WBS dictionary, you can see the details of each component in a WBS.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 162

Go to Question: 146

                                           ***
Answer-147: b

Explanation: You are in the plan schedule management stage. Expert judgment, data
analysis, and meetings are tools and techniques of this process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 179
Go to Question: 147

                                           ***
Answer-148: d

Explanation: If the TCPI is calculated based on the original budget, you will use the
formula mentioned in "c". However, if the new budget is approved, you'll use the
formula mentioned in "d".

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 266

Go to Question: 148

                                           ***
Answer-149: d

Explanation: Destructive testing loss is an example of the cost of conformance, the rest
are examples of cost of non-conformance.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 283

Go to Question: 149

                                           ***
Answer-150: c

Explanation: This is an example of force/direct technique; here, you push one's
viewpoint at the expense of the other.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 348, 349

Go to Question: 150

                                           ***
Answer-151: d

Explanation: In video conferencing, you interact with another person; it is a type of
interactive communication method, which is the most effective communication method.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 374

Go to Question: 151
                                           ***
Answer-152: a

Explanation: Risk tolerance helps the project manager to rank the risk. Risk tolerance
gives the project manager an idea of how much stakeholders are willing to take risks.

Go to Question: 152

                                           ***
Answer-153: a

Explanation: Every change request must go through the integrated change control
process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 113, 115

Go to Question: 153

                                           ***
Answer-154: c

Explanation: In the project scope statement, you can see the product acceptance criteria.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 154

Go to Question: 154

                                           ***
Answer-155: d

Explanation: Refer to the diagram at the end of this answer sheet.

Go to Question: 155

                                           ***
Answer-156: b

Explanation: Refer to the diagram at the end of this answer sheet.

Go to Question: 156

                                           ***
Answer-157: b

Explanation: Refer to the diagram at the end of this answer sheet.

Go to Question: 157

                                          ***
Answer-158: d

Explanation: Refer to the diagram at the end of this answer sheet.

Go to Question: 158

                                          ***
Answer-159: d

Explanation: In the plan cost management process, you define policy, procedures, and
guidance to manage the project cost.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 235

Go to Question: 159

                                          ***
Answer-160: b

Explanation: In the Six Sigma methodology, 99.99969% of products are supposed to be
defect free (or 0.0000034% of product can have defects).

Go to Question: 160

                                          ***
Answer-161: c

Explanation: If your experts are located in different geographical locations and you need
their input, you will create a virtual team including all these experts.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 333

Go to Question: 161

                                          ***
Answer-162: b

Explanation: You are calling her and she is receiving your call, and gets your message.
Her role is receiver.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 373

Go to Question: 162

                                           ***
Answer-163: c

Explanation: When an unidentified risk occurs, you will take prompt action to handle it.
This activity is called a workaround.

Go to Question: 163

                                           ***
Answer-164: a

Explanation: This is an example of corrective action where you act due to an error.
Preventive action is a proactive step where errors do not occur and you take action to
prevent them, while a corrective action is reactive where you take action once the
problem occurs.

The term prevent is used in the question to confuse you.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 112

Go to Question: 164

                                           ***
Answer-165: b

Explanation: Scope baseline is the output of create WBS process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 156

Go to Question: 165

                                           ***
Answer-166: b
Explanation: In the control chart, the upper and lower control limits are set based on
three Sigma around the process mean.

Go to Question: 166

                                           ***
Answer-167: b

Explanation: In benchmarking, you compare the current project parameters with past
comparable project parameters to identify the best practices and ideas for improvement.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 281

Go to Question: 167

                                           ***
Answer-168: b

Explanation: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs is as follows (from lowest to highest):
physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization.

Therefore, when your physiological and safety needs have been fulfilled, you will look
for the social needs.

Go to Question: 168

                                           ***
Answer-169: d

Explanation: The message is in French, which you don't understand. The translator is
translating the message to a language you can understand; he is decoding the message.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 371

Go to Question: 169

                                           ***
Answer-170: b

Explanation: In plan risk response process, you determine the response to each
identified risk.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 437
Go to Question: 170

                                           ***
Answer-171: b

Explanation: Validate scope is the process of formalizing the acceptance of completed
project deliverables, and once the deliverable of the previous phase is accepted you can
move on to the next phase.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 163

Go to Question: 171

                                           ***
Answer-172: b

Explanation:
Schedule Performance Index = (Earned Value) / (Planned Value)
Schedule Performance Index = 200,000 / 250,000
= 0.8

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 263

Go to Question: 172

                                           ***
Answer-173: a

Explanation:
EAC = BAC / CPI
CPI = EV / AC
= 200,000 / 250,000
= 0.8
=> EAC = BAC / CPI
= 500,000 / 0.8
= 625,000

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 264

Go to Question: 173

                                           ***
Answer-174: d

Explanation:
ETC = EAC - AC
= 625,000 - 250,000
= 375,000

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 264, 265

Go to Question: 174

                                            ***
Answer-175: b

Explanation: Since you are inspecting the deliverable with the client, this is the validate
scope process. The validate scope process is performed by the project manager with the
client after the deliverable or the product is completed. The purpose of this process is to
ensure that the client accepts the product formally.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 163

Go to Question: 175

                                            ***
Answer-176: b

Explanation: Pay raise and working conditions are hygiene condition, which do not
motivate employees; although, they are necessary. Self-growth opportunity is a
motivating factor or satisfier.

Go to Question: 176

                                            ***
Answer-177: a

Explanation: You know the risk and you did not take any action, so this is an example of
accept risk response strategy.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443

Go to Question: 177

                                            ***
Answer-178: b

Explanation: In bottom up estimation, you find the cost of each activity with the highest
degree of accuracy and add them up to reach the higher level. This is the most accurate
method of calculating the cost of a project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 244

Go to Question: 178

                                           ***
Answer-179: a

Explanation: In relational power, team members respect you because they know that you
are connected to influential people in the organization.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 63

Go to Question: 179

                                           ***
Answer-180: c

Explanation: In plan risk management process, you define the definition of risk
probability and its impact.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 407

Go to Question: 180

                                           ***
Answer-181: c

Explanation: A cost which changes according to the scale and scope of the project is
known as the Variable Cost.

Go to Question: 181

                                           ***
Answer-182: d

Explanation:
EMV = 0.75 * (100,000) + 0.25 * (-50,000)
EMV = 75,000 - 12,500
EMV = 62,500

Go to Question: 182

                                          ***
Answer-183: d

Explanation: This is an example of benchmarking.

Go to Question: 183

                                          ***
Answer-184: b

Explanation:

EMV of choice A = 0.3 * (-100) + 0.7 * (-500)
= -30 - 350
= -380

Go to Question: 184

                                          ***
Answer-185: c

Explanation: To find the better choice, we need to find the EMV of all three choices.
Since all risks are threats, the lesser the EMV, the better choice.

Since the EMV of choice A is -380 USD, now we will calculate the EMV of choice B
and C.

EMV of choice B = 0.4 * (-200) + 0.6 * (-400)
= -80 - 240
= -320 USD

EMV of choice C = 0.35 * (-150) + 0.65 * (-350)
= -52.5 - 227.5
= -280
Since the EMV of choice C is less than choice A and B, choice C is the best answer.

Go to Question: 185
                                          ***
Answer-186: b

Explanation: All these are components of the requirements management plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 137

Go to Question: 186

                                          ***
Answer-187: b

Explanation: The RAM matrix shows the connection between work packages or
activities and the team members. RAM Matrix can be used to define the responsibilities
of groups or any individual team member.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 317

Go to Question: 187

                                          ***
Answer-188: a

Explanation: You can use a SWOT analysis in two ways: matching and converting. In
converting, you change threats and weaknesses into opportunities and strengths.
Matching is used to find a competitive advantage by matching strengths to opportunities.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 415

Go to Question: 188

                                          ***
Answer-189: a

Explanation: The project budget might change as the project progresses. In this case,
you may need to inform management about the new forecasted budget, which is known
as estimate at completion (EAC).

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 264

Go to Question: 189

                                          ***
Answer-190: c

Explanation: A communication gap means some of the members did not understand the
discussion in the previous meeting or missed it. Therefore, to solve this issue you can
send all team members the recorded sessions of the meetings.

Go to Question: 190

                                           ***
Answer-191: a

Explanation: The question states that some features were added to the deliverables due
to a miscommunication and misunderstanding. A requirement traceability matrix would
connect each deliverable to its origin and, therefore, avoid misunderstandings.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 148, 149

Go to Question: 191

                                           ***
Answer-192: c

Explanation: Since the cost estimate for the project is not correct you will estimate it
again. However, this time you will use the bottom up cost estimation technique because
the project is running and now you have all the possible details for all activities.

Go to Question: 192

                                           ***
Answer-193: c

Explanation: Theory Z puts emphasis on increasing the loyalty of employees by various
means; e.g. involving them with the management.

Go to Question: 193

                                           ***
Answer-194: a

Explanation: Uncertainty is a lack of complete certainty. In uncertainty, the outcome of
any event is unknown and cannot be measured or guessed.

Go to Question: 194
                                          ***
Answer-195: a

Explanation: A Fishbone diagram, which is also known as a cause and effect diagram,
can help you find the root cause of a problem.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 293

Go to Question: 195

                                          ***
Answer-196: c

Explanation: You are in the acquire project team process. Project staff assignments is an
output of the acquire project team process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 328

Go to Question: 196

                                          ***
Answer-197: b

Explanation: Para-lingual communication is the way your words sound e.g. pitch and
tone of your voice.

Go to Question: 197

                                          ***
Answer-198: d

Explanation: You are in the monitor risks process. Besides the change log, all other
documents are updated in this process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 458

Go to Question: 198

                                          ***
Answer-199: a

Explanation: In the collect requirements process, you collect the requirements from all
project stakeholders, and according to the question it is evident that you did not collect
the requirements from this stakeholder.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 138

Go to Question: 199

                                            ***
Answer-200: c

Explanation: Tornado diagram is useful for comparing relative impacts of variables on
project objectives.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 434

Go to Question: 200

                                            ***
For answers 155 to 158
                             Answers Sheet: Set-II
Answer-201: d

Explanation: Since there is an issue regarding the understanding of common technical
terms, you will ask them to refer to the PMBOK Guide, which is a globally accepted
standard and explains various project management terms.

This will help you bring all the team members onto the same platform, reduce conflicts
and, ultimately, successfully complete the project.

Go to Question: 201

                                            ***
Answer-202: b

Explanation: The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 161

Go to Question: 202

                                            ***
Answer-203: c

Explanation: Buffers are used in the critical chain method, not in the critical path
method.

Go to Question: 203

                                            ***
Answer-204: d

Explanation: Dummy activities are used in an ADM (arrow diagrammatic technique) to
show logical relationships.

Go to Question: 204

                                            ***
Answer-205: c
Explanation: This is an example of preventive action where you make sure that
something that has happened elsewhere does not happen to you.

Go to Question: 205

                                           ***
Answer-206: c

Explanation: "Plan the solution" is made up. The remaining options are correct answers.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide 6th Edition, Page: 356

Go to Question: 206

                                           ***
Answer-207: c

Explanation: In this case, you will first review the communication plan to see if this
stakeholder is an intended recipient of the information.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 366

Go to Question: 207

                                           ***
Answer-208: d

Explanation: This is the root cause analysis where a moderator starts a discussion with a
problem statement and asks members to find ways this problem could occur.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 415

Go to Question: 208

                                           ***
Answer-209: a

Explanation: In a bidder conference, you clear the doubts raised by bidders and clarify
the terms and conditions of the contract. In a bidder conference, you do not award the
contract.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 482
Go to Question: 209

                                          ***
Answer-210: b

Explanation: Here, you are using the stakeholder analysis technique. In the stakeholder
analysis technique, you analyze the interests and impact of each stakeholder on the
project or its objective. Once you are finished, you draft your stakeholder management
strategy.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 512

Go to Question: 210

                                          ***
Answer-211: c

Explanation: Chapter 3.3.1 of PMI Code of Ethics says that, "We negotiate in good
faith."

Reference: Code of Ethics 3.3.1

Go to Question: 211

                                          ***
Answer-212: d

Explanation: The project manager is responsible for raising the change request, but the
change request is approved or rejected by the change control board or someone from the
management who has the authority to do so.

Go to Question: 212

                                          ***
Answer-213: a

Explanation: The create work breakdown structure is a process where you break down
the project work into manageable work packages and, from there, you can track the
project's progress.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 156

Go to Question: 213
                                             ***
Answer-214: b

Explanation: Free float is an amount of time that an activity can be delayed without
affecting the early start of the next activity. Total float is an amount of time that an
activity can be delayed without affecting the project completion date.

The project buffer is placed between the last task and the project completion date as a
non-activity buffer, and this buffer acts as a contingency for the critical chain activities.
Any delay on the critical chain will eat this buffer, but the project completion date will
remain unchanged.

Feeding buffers are added to the non-critical chain so that any delay on the non-critical
chain does not affect the critical chain. They are inserted between the last task on a non-
critical chain and the critical chain.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 210

Go to Question: 214

                                             ***
Answer-215: d

Explanation: In parametric estimation, you use historical data from previous projects,
such as the cost of painting or plastering per square foot, and apply it to your project to
get an estimate. This technique provides a higher level of accuracy than the analogous
technique.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 244

Go to Question: 215

                                             ***
Answer-216: d

Explanation: This is an example of the rule of seven. Here, seven consecutive test points
are found on either side of the mean. Therefore, you will find the cause for this
observation.


Go to Question: 216
                                           ***
Answer-217: d

Explanation: All options besides motivational process are included in the team charter.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 319

Go to Question: 217

                                           ***
Answer-218: a

Explanation: In email, you send information to recipients so it is a push communication.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 374

Go to Question: 218

                                           ***
Answer-219: c

Explanation: The perform quantitative risk analysis process is usually not performed in
small and unimportant projects. It depends on the project manager and the management
to decide whether or not to go for it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 428, 429

Go to Question: 219

                                           ***
Answer-220: a

Explanation: If the scope of work is well defined, you will go for the firm fixed price
contract.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 471

Go to Question: 220

                                           ***
Answer-221: c

Explanation: The responsibility of assignments is included in the responsibility
assignment matrix (RAM), not in the stakeholder register.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 514

Go to Question: 221

                                              ***
Answer-222: a

Explanation: Chapter 4.3.1 of the PMI Code of Ethics talks about the disclosure of a
conflict of interest.

Reference: Code of Ethics 4.3.1, & 4.3.2

Go to Question: 222

                                              ***
Answer-223: b

Explanation: Since the two projects are different types, you will manage them under
portfolio management.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 11, 12, 13, 15

Go to Question: 223

                                              ***
Answer-224: a

Explanation: In rolling wave planning, near term work is planned in detail while the
work performed in the future is planned at a higher level.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 159, 185

Go to Question: 224

                                              ***
Answer-225: c

Explanation: Activities with free float have maximum flexibility, and this does not
affect the early start of the next activity. On the other hand, total float is for the path, and
it is not assigned to any single activity.
Activity on a critical path does not have any float and hammock activity is a virtual
activity.

Go to Question: 225

                                           ***
Answer-226: c

Explanation: The cost baseline is the approved version of the time-phased project budget
excluding the management reserve.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 255

Go to Question: 226

                                           ***
Answer-227: d

Explanation: JIT stands for Just in Time, and is a Japanese technology which
emphasizes low inventory holdings and reduction in wastage.

Go to Question: 227

                                           ***
Answer-228: d

Explanation: In the compromise technique, you take suggestions from both sides and try
to make a compromise. Both parties involved in the conflict gain something, so this
solution partially satisfies both parties.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 349

Go to Question: 228

                                           ***
Answer-229: c

Explanation: Besides work environment, all other options are interpersonal skills.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 375

Go to Question: 229
                                            ***
Answer-230: b

Explanation: You are using the Monte Carlo Simulation, which is a perform quantitative
risk analysis process technique and helps you determine the probability of completing the
project in different scenarios.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 433

Go to Question: 230

                                            ***
Answer-231: a

Explanation: In a Firm Fixed Price contract, the buyer has a minimum risk because the
seller has to complete the project within the agreed upon price.

Go to Question: 231

                                            ***
Answer-232: b

Explanation: Involve him at the very beginning of the project so that he can be aware of
progress and minimizes the chance to request changes.

Go to Question: 232

                                            ***
Answer-233: d

Explanation: This is a case of a conflict of interest. You must disclose your relationship
to the committee.

Go to Question: 233

                                            ***
Answer-234: c

Explanation: This is an example of a transfer risk response strategy because here, you
transfer the responsibility to a third party who will provide the service to the customers.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443
Go to Question: 234

                                           ***
Answer-235: d

Explanation: In plurality, you select the choice which has the largest numbers of votes.
You use this method when the choices are more than two.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 144

Go to Question: 235

                                           ***
Answer-236: a

Explanation: In the critical path method diagram, it is assumed that the resources will be
available whenever they will be required. This technique does not consider resources as a
constraint.

Go to Question: 236

                                           ***
Answer-237: c

Explanation: This is Estimate at Completion, which is the cost of the completed work
plus the cost needed to complete the remaining work. Please note that EAC will always
be the cost of the actual work and the work to be completed regardless of whether you
perform with the same cost performance or not.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 264, 265

Go to Question: 237

                                           ***
Answer-238: b

Explanation: Precise means you are producing end-products with similar dimensions
which may or may not be near to the required dimensions. In accuracy, you must
produce products with dimensions near to the required dimension.

Go to Question: 238

                                           ***
Answer-239: a

Explanation: Since these stakeholders are important, you cannot ignore them or force a
decision. You will go for the problem solve technique, which leads to consensus and
commitment.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 349

Go to Question: 239

                                          ***
Answer-240: b

Explanation: Talking with someone on a cell phone is an example of informal verbal
communication.

Go to Question: 240

                                          ***
Answer-241: b

Explanation: Since the risk owner implemented the contingency plan it means this is a
known risk. The contingency plan and contingency reserve are used to manage known
risks.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 445

Go to Question: 241

                                          ***
Answer-242: d

Explanation: In the control procurements process, you close procurement contracts.
Close procurements is not a procurement process in the sixth edition of the PMBOK
Guide.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 492

Go to Question: 242

                                          ***
Answer-243: c
Explanation: You cannot leave any stakeholders out of your project. You must find a
way to manage them all.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 507

Go to Question: 243

                                            ***
Answer-244: d

Explanation: It is unethical and potentially illegal to hide the fact. Although you made a
mistake, when you discover it you must disclose the error and take corrective action.

Go to Question: 244

                                            ***
Answer-245: c

Explanation: You are asking for some high-level information about the project such as
the budget, project end dates, etc. All this information can be found in the project charter.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 81

Go to Question: 245

                                            ***
Answer-246: c

Explanation: Every change request should be reviewed thoroughly. Once you review the
change request you will be able to determine the impact of the change.

Go to Question: 246

                                            ***
Answer-247: b

Explanation: In the sequence activities process, you define the logical sequence of
activities to complete the work efficiently and draw the network diagram.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 187

Go to Question: 247
                                           ***
Answer-248: c

Explanation: The Management Reserve is not a part of the cost baseline. Once you add
the management reserve to the cost baseline, it becomes the project budget.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 255

Go to Question: 248

                                           ***
Answer-249: b

Explanation: An Ishikawa diagram helps you find the root cause of the problem, so in
this case, you will use an Ishikawa diagram to find the root cause of the problem in the
delivery system and then try to sort it out.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 293

Go to Question: 249

                                           ***
Answer-250: d

Explanation: In management by objective (MBO), you define the objectives in your
organization so that management and employees can understand and agree to it and then
work together to achieve these objectives.

Go to Question: 250

                                           ***
Answer-251: c

Explanation: Remove noise is not a part of the basic communication model. The
communication model consists of: encode, transmit message, decode, acknowledge, and
feedback.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 371

Go to Question: 251

                                           ***
Answer-252: b

Explanation: The risk breakdown structure is a hierarchical breakdown of risks which
helps you identify the source of the risks and helps you to look at many sources from
which project risks may arise in a risk identification exercise.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 405, 406

Go to Question: 252

                                            ***
Answer-253: a

Explanation: Since the incentive is based on the objective evaluation, it is a cost plus
incentive fee contract.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472

Go to Question: 253

                                            ***
Answer-254: a

Explanation: You need to identify stakeholders before developing the project
management plan; otherwise, you may face difficulties in later stages of your project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 507

Go to Question: 254

                                            ***
Answer-255: b

Explanation: Since it is a local custom, you will accept the gift and inform management.

Go to Question: 255

                                            ***
Answer-256: b

Explanation: If the project is very big and complex, dividing the project into phases
gives you better control. It helps you to better plan resources and implement tight control.
Go to Question: 256

                                            ***
Answer-257: d

Explanation: All information about the risks can be found in the risk register, not in the
WBS dictionary.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 162

Go to Question: 257

                                            ***
Answer-258: b

Explanation: The four types of dependencies in the Precedence Diagramming method
are: mandatory dependency, discretionary dependency, internal dependency, and external
dependency.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 191, 192

Go to Question: 258

                                            ***
Answer-259: b

Explanation:
Value of completed work = 28,000 USD
Value of the total work = 150,000 USD

Therefore, the percentage of completed work = (28,000 / 150,000) * 100
= 18.7

Go to Question: 259

                                            ***
Answer-260: d

Explanation: In a control chart, if the process goes above or below the specification
limits, you say that the process is out of control and immediate action is needed to bring
the process back on track.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 304
Go to Question: 260

                                          ***
Answer-261: c

Explanation: Since you have knowledge and skills, which is also emphasized in the
question, the correct answer is expert power.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 63

Go to Question: 261

                                          ***
Answer-262: a

Explanation: Online communication is not a communication method. Communication
methods can be broadly classified into three types: interactive communication, push
communication, and pull communication.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 374

Go to Question: 262

                                          ***
Answer-263: a

Explanation: In the plan risk management process, you define the definition of the
probabilities of risks.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 407

Go to Question: 263

                                          ***
Answer-264: a

Explanation: The procurement statement of work (SOW) describes the work in detail so
that sellers can review it and place a bid.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 477

Go to Question: 264
                                            ***
Answer-265: d

Explanation: Since you are performing all activities on your own, you are not going to
procure any contract to a third party; hence, the procurement document will be the least
required in this case.

Go to Question: 265

                                            ***
Answer-266: c

Explanation: If you see someone violating PMI copyrights, you must inform PMI. They
are the ones who will deal with their copyright violation.

Go to Question: 266

                                            ***
Answer-267: b

Explanation: This is an example of an escalate risk response strategy where you shift the
ownership of the risk to upper levels as managing the risk is beyond your authority.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443

Go to Question: 267

                                            ***
Answer-268: d

Explanation: The project charter does not include the name of business rivals.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 81

Go to Question: 268

                                            ***
Answer-269: a

Explanation: The duration of the critical path is the duration of the project, so if you
want to reduce the duration of the project you must work on the critical path.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 215

Go to Question: 269

                                            ***
Answer-270: b

Explanation: Sunk cost is the cost that has incurred, and it will not affect any decision to
be made in the future.

Go to Question: 270

                                            ***
Answer-271: a

Explanation: In the quality audit, external experts review and check if you are following
the standard procedures or not. The quality audit is a tool and technique of the manage
quality process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 294

Go to Question: 271

                                            ***
Answer-272: b

Explanation: Salary and work conditions are hygienic conditions. Ground rules defines
the behavior. Here, the most likely reason for a conflict can be personal work style.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 348

Go to Question: 272

                                            ***
Answer-273: a

Explanation: You are in the manage communication process. The project management
plan update is an output of this process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 379

Go to Question: 273
                                           ***
Answer-274: b

Explanation: In the accept risk response strategy, although you acknowledge the risk,
you did not take any action to manage it. You decide to deal with it once it happens.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443

Go to Question: 274

                                           ***
Answer-275: a

Explanation: On the pre-qualified seller list, the company has a list of sellers who are
pre-qualified to apply for the contract.

Go to Question: 275

                                           ***
Answer-276: d

Explanation: Out of these four choices, the Impact / Power grid is not mentioned in the
PMBOK Guide 6th Edition.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 512

Go to Question: 276

                                           ***
Answer-277: b

Explanation: Although your company has fired you for an act which you did not do, you
will not do anything unethical and illegal. You will maintain your professional integrity
at all times.

Go to Question: 277

                                           ***
Answer-278: d

Explanation: You are working in a projectized organization. In projectized organizations
the career growth path is not clear. Team members always live in fear that once the
project is completed they may be asked to leave.

Go to Question: 278

                                             ***
Answer-279: c

Explanation: In prototype, you produce a small-sized functional model of the real
product and demonstrate it to stakeholders.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 147

Go to Question: 279

                                             ***
Answer-280: a

Explanation: Dummy activities are used in an AOA diagram. PERT is an example of an
AOA diagram.

Go to Question: 280

                                             ***
Answer-281: b

Explanation: Estimate to Complete (ETC) is the cost required to complete the remaining
work.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 264, 265

Go to Question: 281

                                             ***
Answer-282: a

Explanation: If all data in a scatter diagram lie in a circle, there is no correlation
between them.

Go to Question: 282

                                             ***
Answer-283: d

Explanation: Salary, working conditions, and relationship with the boss are hygienic
conditions. Career growth is a motivating factor.

Go to Question: 283

                                             ***
Answer-284: c

Explanation: Every change should be processed through the change request. You cannot
make any changes to the project with only a verbal request from the client.

Go to Question: 284

                                             ***
Answer-285: c

Explanation: In a transfer risk response strategy, you transfer the ownership of risk to a
third party. Now it is their responsibility to manage the risk once it happens. Insurance is
an example of a risk transfer strategy.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443

Go to Question: 285

                                             ***
Answer-286: b

Explanation: In this case, you will select the cost plus fixed fee contract. Please note that
if you need to hire the expert, then you would have gone with the time and material
contract.

Go to Question: 286

                                             ***
Answer-287: d

Explanation: According to the PMBOK Guide, this process frequently occurs in a
project for the first time either prior to or at the same time the project charter is developed
and approved. This means you can identify stakeholders before the project charter is
signed.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 508

Go to Question: 287

                                             ***
Answer-288: a

Explanation: In no case, regardless of what may happen, can you offer a bribe. You will
find a legal process and go through it.

Go to Question: 288

                                             ***
Answer-289: c

Explanation: A project may require a change at any moment throughout the project life
cycle, so the performance integrated change control process can be performed until the
project ends.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 115

Go to Question: 289

                                             ***
Answer-290: b

Explanation: You will note down all lessons learned whether they are important or not
because a non-important lesson learned could be important for any next project.

Go to Question: 290

                                             ***
Answer-291: b

Explanation: The Early Start of activity B is 7 and the duration is 4 days; this means the
Early Finish will be 7 + 4 - 1 = 10.

Now, since the Early Finish of both activities is the same, it is a Finish to Finish type of
relationship.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 190
Go to Question: 291

                                           ***
Answer-292: a

Explanation: When the project completes, all the planned value will be earned. This
means EV = PV, i.e. SPI = 1

Go to Question: 292

                                           ***
Answer-293: b

Explanation: Although the deliverable is within the customer's specification limits, it is
outside the control limit. Therefore, you will take corrective action so as to avoid any
possible defect.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 304

Go to Question: 293

                                           ***
Answer-294: a

Explanation: In the question the stakeholder only needs to know whether the team
member is doing his assigned job or not. Once she sees it, she agree on it. This means she
saw the RACI chart. RACI stands for responsible, accountable, consult, and inform. This
is an example of the responsibility assignment matrix (RAM).

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 317

Go to Question: 294

                                           ***
Answer-295: c

Explanation: Any risk which is not previously identified and occurs during the project
execution will be managed through the workaround.

Go to Question: 295

                                           ***
Answer-296: a

Explanation: In the plan stakeholders engagement process, you define the strategies to
manage and engage stakeholders.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 516

Go to Question: 296

                                          ***
Answer-297: b

Explanation: To complete the project successfully you will have to manage the team
effectively. To manage the team effectively, you will need to have interpersonal and team
skills such as: leadership, influencing, decision making, etc.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 348, 349

Go to Question: 297

                                          ***
Answer-298: a

Explanation: The project manager performs the validate scope process with the client. In
this process, the client accepts the deliverable or the product.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 163

Go to Question: 298

                                          ***
Answer-299: d

Explanation: Monte Carlo is a simulation technique not an estimation technique.

Go to Question: 299

                                          ***
Answer-300: b

Explanation: Since this fault was caught when you have delivered the product to the
client, it will be known as an external cost.
Go to Question: 300

                                             ***
Answer-301: d

Explanation: You are doing a cost benefit analysis here.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 508

Go to Question: 301

                                             ***
Answer-302: d

Explanation: The ground rules establish the expected behavior from the team members.
Therefore, if you are facing problem regarding the team members' behavior, you will
develop ground rules and implement them.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 528

Go to Question: 302

                                             ***
Answer-303: a

Explanation: You develop the fallback plan for identified risks for which the primary
risk response strategy fails or for the accepted risks; therefore, in most cases you will use
the contingency reserve for a fallback plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 439

Go to Question: 303

                                             ***
Answer-304: d

Explanation: If you have to hire the expert where the scope of work is not clear, the time
and material contract is the best option.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 472

Go to Question: 304
                                          ***
Answer-305: b

Explanation: It is the responsibility of the whole project management team, including
the project manager, to update the lessons learned.

Go to Question: 305

                                          ***
Answer-306: d

Explanation: A resource breakdown structure can be aligned with the accounting system
to track down the project cost.

Go to Question: 306

                                          ***
Answer-307: a

Explanation: You are in the create WBS process. The scope baseline is an output of the
create WBS process, which consists of the project scope statement, the WBS, and the
WBS dictionary.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 161, 162

Go to Question: 307

                                          ***
Answer-308: a

Explanation:
In the given question:

Optimistic Estimate (to) = 5 days
Pessimistic Estimate (tp) = 10 days
Most Likely Estimate (tm) = 6 days

PERT Estimate = (to + 4tm + tp) / 6
= (10 + 4 * 6 + 5) / 6
= (10 + 24 + 5) / 6
= 39 / 6
= 6.5
Therefore, the PERT estimate for this activity is 6.5 days.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 245

Go to Question: 308

                                            ***
Answer-309: a

Explanation: Standard Deviation = (tp - to) / 6
= (10 - 5) / 6
=5/6
= 0.833

Therefore, the standard deviation for this activity is 0.833

Go to Question: 309

                                            ***
Answer-310: c

Explanation: This is a cost baseline curve which looks like an S-Curve.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 255

Go to Question: 310

                                            ***
Answer-311: a

Explanation: This is an example of gold plating where you add extra functions (which
are not mentioned in the product scope) to make a client happy.

Go to Question: 311

                                            ***
Answer-312: b

Explanation: Hollywood actors are famous and they can influence the decisions of their
fans. Therefore, here you are using referent power to influence the buyers.

Go to Question: 312
                                            ***
Answer- 313: d

Explanation: In the probability and impact matrix, you can see the probability of each
risk and its impact on the project objective.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 408

Go to Question: 313

                                            ***
Answer-314: b

Explanation: If you sign a fixed price multi-year contract with the customer, you add a
special clause which helps you adjust the price of the contract according to the inflation.
This contract type is known as a fixed price with economic price adjustment (FP-EPA).

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 471

Go to Question: 314

                                            ***
Answer-315: c

Explanation: NPV, IRR, and payback period are examples of the benefit measurement
method. Linear programming is an example of the constrained optimization project
selection method.

Go to Question: 315

                                            ***
Answer-316: c

Explanation: Corporate knowledge base is a part of organizational process assets.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 39

Go to Question: 316

                                            ***
Answer-317: d

Explanation: The project plan is developed once the project charter is signed.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 75

Go to Question: 317

                                          ***
Answer-318: c

Explanation: Here, you have brought some extra resources to bring the project on track,
so this is an example of crashing.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 215

Go to Question: 318

                                          ***
Answer-319: b

Explanation: Management is asking you to calculate the estimate at completion (EAC).
All options except EAC = AC + (BAC - PV) are correct formulas to calculate the EAC in
different scenarios.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 263, 264, & 265

Go to Question: 319

                                          ***
Answer-320: a

Explanation: ISO 9001 is the Quality Management - Requirement, ISO 9000 is Quality
management systems - Fundamentals and vocabulary, ISO 31000 is Risk management -
Principles and guidelines, and ISO 18000 is Information technology - Radio frequency
identification for item management.

Go to Question: 320

                                          ***
Answer-321: b

Explanation: Your boss monitors your activities and does not trust you. This means he is
micromanaging you, which is an example of Theory X.

Go to Question: 321
                                           ***
Answer-322: c

Explanation: If any unidentified risk occurs, you will use the management reserve to
manage it.

Go to Question: 322

                                           ***
Answer-323: d

Explanation: The procurement statement of work includes the scope of work that is
included in a particular contract.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 477

Go to Question: 323

                                           ***
Answer-324: a

Explanation: In a projectized organization, team members always live in fear of losing
their job. They know that once the project is completed and the organization does not
have any new projects, they may lose their jobs.

Go to Question: 324

                                           ***
Answer-325: a

Explanation: Lessons learned is a part of organizational process assets.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 39

Go to Question: 325

                                           ***
Answer-326: a

Explanation: In the project scope statement, you can find all the detailed information
about the project's work.
Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 154

Go to Question: 326

                                           ***
Answer-327: c

Explanation: Since you are performing two activities in parallel to save the time, this is
an example of fast tracking.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 215

Go to Question: 327

                                           ***
Answer-328: d

Explanation:
The cost overrun is due to an error and you are sure that the remaining work can be
completed as you have planned. In this scenario, you will use the following formula to
calculate the EAC:

EAC = AC + BAC - EV

Given in the question:
AC = 100,000 USD
EV = 30% of 250,000
= 0.3 * 250,000
= 75,000 USD

BAC = 250,000 USD

Therefore, EAC = 100,000 + 250,000 - 75,000
= 275,000 USD

Go to Question: 328

                                           ***
Answer-329: d

Explanation: If you are not meeting the quality requirements of the product, this means
the product is of low quality and you may be required to provide more after-sale support.
In the given question, you are reworking, however, this is not the general case.

Go to Question: 329

                                             ***
Answer-330: b

Explanation: The responsibility assignment matrix connects work packages to the
project resources. It is not used for ranking of risks.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 317

Go to Question: 330

                                             ***
Answer-331: c

Explanation: Here, you are applying the enhance risk response strategy because you are
only trying to realize the opportunity. In the exploit risk response strategy, you make sure
that the risk is realized. Mitigate is a negative risk response strategy, and in accept you do
not take any proactive action.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 444

Go to Question: 331

                                             ***
Answer-332: b

Explanation: Advertisement is tool and technique of the conduct procurement process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 482

Go to Question: 332

                                             ***
Answer-333: d

Explanation: You will always select the project with the highest NPV.

Go to Question: 333
                                           ***
Answer-334: a

Explanation: Project scope consists of scope baseline, WBS, and WBS dictionary.
Therefore, any change in the WBS will be reflected in the scope.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 161

Go to Question: 334

                                           ***
Answer-335: d

Explanation: All these documents are referred to as procurement documents.

Go to Question: 335

                                           ***
Answer-336: c

Explanation: Hammock activities are a summary of many activities which are roughly
related to each other. Hammock activities are also referred to as the summary activities.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 182

Go to Question: 336

                                           ***
Answer-337: a

Explanation: Since the first phone meets its stated requirements, you would say that this
is a high-quality product. Less functionality means lower grade.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 274

Go to Question: 337

                                           ***
Answer-338: c

Explanation: Salary is a hygienic condition. It does not help in reducing conflicts.

Go to Question: 338
                                           ***
Answer-339: a

Explanation: Sensitivity analysis helps you find which risk has the most potent impact
on the project objectives. One example of sensitivity analysis is a "Tornado Diagram".

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 434

Go to Question: 339

                                           ***
Answer-340: b

Explanation: Since you have not selected the project with NPV 10,000 USD, this will be
your opportunity cost.

Go to Question: 340

                                           ***
Answer-341: b

Explanation: You are managing two different kinds of projects, so your role is portfolio
manager.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 11, 12, 13

Go to Question: 341

                                           ***
Answer-342: b

Explanation: If there is a change which requires an update to the cost baseline, you will
raise it, get it approved, and then update the cost baseline.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 113, 115

Go to Question: 342

                                           ***
Answer-343: a
Explanation: If any constraints turn out to be false, your project may be affected
positively because constraints are limitations imposed on your project.

Go to Question: 343

                                            ***
Answer-344: b

Explanation:
SPI=EV / PV

EV= (100,000 * 0.55)
= 55,000

PV = 100,000 * 0.5
= 50,000

Therefore, SPI =55.000 / 50,000
= 1.1
Since the SPI is more than one, you are ahead of schedule.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 263

Go to Question: 344

                                            ***
Answer-345: d

Explanation:
We know that, CPI = EV / AC

So, first we will calculate the EV then we will divide it by the AC.
EV =10000 * 0.55
= 55,000
AC = 65,000

CPI = 55,000 / 65,000
=0.85

Now, EAC= BAC / CPI
= 100,000 / 0.85
= 117,647 USD

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 263, 264, 265

Go to Question: 345

                                           ***
Answer-346: c

Explanation:
Mean = (50 + 55 + 62 + 65 + 68) / 5
= 60

And, Variance = (50 - 60)2 + (55 - 60)2 + (62 - 60)2 + (65 - 60)2 + (68 - 60)2
= (100 + 25 + 4 + 25 + 64) / 5
= 43.6

We know that, Standard Deviation = square root of Variance
Therefore, Standard Deviation = square root of 43.6
= 6.6

Go to Question: 346

                                           ***
Answer-347: a

Explanation: Since you are working in a functional organization you do not have formal
power. Expert power and referent power do not help much for getting the job done.
However, you can use reward power to get the job done. Reward power does not need to
be monetary, it can be recognition or a preferred job assignment, etc.

Go to Question: 347

                                           ***
Answer-348: a

Explanation: Here, you are using the avoid risk response strategy to manage the risk. In
this strategy, you eliminate the threat by changing the project management plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 443

Go to Question: 348
                                          ***
Answer-349: a

Explanation: Completed work, actual duration, etc., are examples of work performance
data.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 95

Go to Question: 349

                                          ***
Answer-350: c

Explanation: Every change request should be reviewed thoroughly. Once you review the
change request you will be able to determine if this may cause you to spend more money
or save it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 113, 115

Go to Question: 350

                                          ***
Answer-351: c

Explanation: You are using a Monte Carlo simulation to find the chance of completing
the project within the scheduled time. You are in the develop schedule process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 213

Go to Question: 351

                                          ***
Answer-352: a

Explanation: Since no details are available on the schedule, you can safely assume that
the work is evenly distributed in each month.

In this case, the planned value will be = (200,000 / 8) * 6= 150,000 USD

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 261

Go to Question: 352
                                          ***
Answer-353: c

Explanation: Since the team members are experienced and experts, the only option left
to increase the performance is to co-locate them.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 340

Go to Question: 353

                                          ***
Answer-354: b

Explanation: This 10% limit is the stakeholder tolerance, which is an enterprise
environmental factor.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 38

Go to Question: 354

                                          ***
Answer-355: d

Explanation: If there is any change in the project's parameter, you will manage it
through change management. However, changes in product specification should be
managed through configuration change management.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 113, 115

Go to Question: 355

                                          ***
Answer-356: d

Explanation: The work authorization system does not identify the person accountable
for the activity. This you can see in the RAM matrix.

Go to Question: 356

                                          ***
Answer-357: b
Explanation: Electricity cost will be an indirect cost because it is not directly affecting
your project; however, you are using it for your office work.

Go to Question: 357

                                            ***
Answer-358: c

Explanation: Since there is no risk management plan, your first step would be to develop
a risk management plan and then get it approved.

Go to Question: 358

                                            ***
Answer-359: c

Explanation: The cost baseline, schedule baseline, and project charter cannot be updated
frequently. They can be updated only after getting approval from management; however,
the lessons learned document should be updated continuously.

Go to Question: 359

                                            ***
Answer-360: b

Explanation: The client is the sponsor of the project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 75, 76

Go to Question: 360

                                            ***
Answer-361: b

Explanation: Earned value is the budgeted value of work that has been completed.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 261

Go to Question: 361

                                            ***
Answer-362: b
Explanation: In a risk audit, it is checked if you are following the correct procedures.

On the other hand, in risk review you review the effectiveness of the risk management
plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 456, 457

Go to Question: 362

                                            ***
Answer-363: d

Explanation: If the project or phase is closed or terminated due to any reason, you will
perform the close project or close phase process regardless of the reason behind it.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 121

Go to Question: 363

                                            ***
Answer-364: a

Explanation: You must follow the law, and following the law is a legal requirement.

Go to Question: 364

                                            ***
Answer-365: a

Explanation: Opportunity cost is a value that you have lost by selecting another option.

Go to Question: 365

                                            ***
Answer-366: b

Explanation: While calculating the expected monetary value, you will consider both
types of risks. The EMV for the positive risks should be shown with a positive sign, and
the EMV of the negative risks should be shown with a negative sign.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 435

Go to Question: 366
                                             ***
Answer-367: b

Explanation: Since these two projects are of a similar type they will be managed under
the program and your role will be the program manager.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 11, 12, 13

Go to Question: 367

                                             ***
Answer-368: b

Explanation: If there is no WBS, your next step is to develop the WBS immediately.

Go to Question: 368

                                             ***
Answer-369: d

Explanation: All documents except the project management plan may be updated here
because this was an identified risk and its impact and response were already factored into
the project plan.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide 6th Edition, Page: 449

Go to Question: 369

                                             ***
Answer-370: d

Explanation:
First, look at the definition of the NPV:
"The Net Present Value (NPV) is the total cash generated by the project in today's dollar
minus the initial investment."

Now, to find the NPV, you have to convert all money to the current value, and then you
will subtract the initial investment from it.

You will receive 200,000 USD at the end of the first year.

So, let's find the present value of this 200,000.
We know the formula:
Future Value = Present Value (1 + rate / 100)time

Now,
200,000 = PV1 (1.08)1
PV1 = 200,000 / 1.08

= 185,185 USD

Now let's find the Present Value of 170,000 USD, which you will receive at the end of
the second year.

170,000 = PV2 (1.08)2
170,000 = PV2 (1.17)
PV2 = 170,000 / 1.17
= 145,299 USD

Now let's find the Present Value of 200,000 USD, which you will receive at the end of
the third year.

200,000 = PV3 (1.08)3
200,000 = PV3 (1.26)
PV3 = 200,000 / 1.26
= 158,730 USD

Now, we will add all these three values.

Present value of return = PV1 + PV2 + PV3
= 185,185 + 145,299 + 158,730
= 489,214 USD.

Therefore, profit = 489,214 - 500,000
= -10,786 USD

Therefore, the NPV of profit is negative which means you are at a loss, and you will not
select the project.

Go to Question: 370

                                            ***
Answer-371: b
Explanation: In Pareto analysis, you quantify the problem according to the source and
start solving the source which has the highest numbers of problems.

Go to Question: 371

                                           ***
Answer-372: c

Explanation: Training issues are managed in the develop project team process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 342

Go to Question: 372

                                           ***
Answer-373: c

Explanation: These are low-priority risks, and low-priority risks are kept on the watch
list for future monitoring.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 423

Go to Question: 373

                                           ***
Answer-374: c

Explanation: You are already in an agreement, so you will make the change and inform
the supplier through formal written communication.

Go to Question: 374

                                           ***
Answer-375: b

Explanation: You are using a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix, which is a tool
and technique of the plan stakeholder management process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 521

Go to Question: 375

                                           ***
Answer-376: c

Explanation: Andrew will be running the factory to produce the bicycles, where he will
be managing operations to produce cycles.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 16

Go to Question: 376

                                           ***
Answer-377: c

Explanation: In the Validate Scope process, the customer accepts the deliverables or the
product.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 166

Go to Question: 377

                                           ***
Answer-378: d

Explanation: Training issues are managed in the develop project team process, so it will
not be affected by discrepancies in the WBS dictionary.

Go to Question: 378

                                           ***
Answer-379: a

Explanation: If you see the graph for actual cost (AC), it is below the planned value
(PV), which means you were under budget in the second month.

Go to Question: 379

                                           ***
Answer-380: b

Explanation: In statistical sampling, you take a small number of samples at random from
the batch and check them to see if the products are of the right quality.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 303
Go to Question: 380
                                            ***
Answer-381: c

Explanation: The purpose of the war room is to enhance communication and the sense
of community. Colocation is sometimes referred as war room.

Go to Question: 381

                                            ***
Answer-382: a

Explanation: Since these events are mutually exclusive, the chance of any one of them
happening = 0.15 + 0.25 = 40%

Go to Question: 382

                                            ***
Answer-383: d

Explanation: If the project is closed or terminated due to any reason, you will start the
Close Project Process.

Go to Question: 383

                                            ***
Answer-384: c

Explanation: Punishment is not an interpersonal skill.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 527

Go to Question: 384

                                            ***
Answer-385: a

Explanation:
We know that,
FV = PV * (1 + r / 100)time
160,000 = 120,000(1 + r / 100)2
(1 + r / 100)2 = 4 / 3
(1 + r / 100) = 2/1.731
(1 + r / 100) = 1.155
r / 100 = 0.155
r = 15.5

Therefore, the appreciation rate is 15.5%.

Go to Question: 385

                                             ***
Answer-386: a

Explanation: Since you have managed these through the workaround using management
reserve, you will raise a change request to update the cost baseline.

Go to Question: 386

                                             ***
Answer-387: c

Explanation: This is an example of make or buy analysis.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 479

Go to Question: 387

                                             ***
Answer-388: b

Explanation: Resolving conflict is an interpersonal skill, not a management skill.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 527

Go to Question: 388

                                             ***
Answer-389: b

Explanation: Since you are adding a function to a system, this will be an example of a
project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 4

Go to Question: 389
                                              ***
Answer-390: c

Explanation: See the diagram. Activity E and G are converging to a single activity,
therefore, any one of them can have the free float. Early finish of activity E is 9, and early
start of activity F is 10, therefore activity E will not have the free float. Now, activity G is
ending on 3 and activity F is starting on 10, so the activity G will have the free float.




Go to Question: 390

                                              ***
Answer-391: a

Explanation:

Free Float = ES of next Activity - EF of current Activity - 1
Free float of activity G = ES of activity F - EF of activity G - 1
= 10 - 3 - 1
=6

Go to Question: 391

                                              ***
Answer-392: b

Explanation:
Since activity A is 100% complete,
EV of A = 5,000

Since activity B is 80% complete,
EV of B = 0.8 * 15,000
= 12,000

Since activity C is 70% completed,
EV of C = 0.7 * 18,000
= 12,600

Now,
EV of the project = 5,000 + 12,000 + 12,600
= 29,600 USD

PV of the project = 5,000 + 10,000 + 15,000
= 30,000

SPI = EV / PV
= 29,600 / 30,000
= 0.98

Therefore, the project is behind schedule.
AC = 5,500 + 11,000 + 13,000
= 29,500

CPI = EV / AC
= 29,600 / 29,500
= 1.003

Go to Question: 392

                                             ***
Answer-393: d

Explanation: TQM is an organization-wide approach to develop a system where
everyone can contribute to improving the quality of the product and hence, customer
satisfaction.

Go to Question: 393

                                             ***
Answer-394: d

Explanation: Except for exit point, all others are recognized terms for the hand-off that
happens after the phase closure.

Go to Question: 394

                                           ***
Answer-395: b

Explanation: For every conflict, first you will try to solve it in private with informal
verbal communication. If it does not yield any results, you will consider other options.

Go to Question: 395

                                           ***
Answer-396: a

Explanation: SWOT stands for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. A
SWOT analysis is used to find the strengths and weaknesses of an organization, and the
opportunities and threats for the project.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 415

Go to Question: 396

                                           ***
Answer-397: b

Explanation: In the Validate Scope process, you accept the deliverables.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 166

Go to Question: 397

                                           ***
Answer-398: c

Explanation: Issue log is an output of the manage stakeholder engagement process and
the input to monitor stakeholder engagement process.

Reference: The PMBOK Guide, 6th Edition, Page: 530
Go to Question: 398

                                             ***
Answer-399: d

Explanation: Since you need to register quickly, you will go for the express route,
although it is expensive. Please note that here you are not doing anything illegal, this is
just a legal procedure with an express route which involves a higher fee.

Go to Question: 399

                                             ***
Answer-400: b

Explanation: The target cost is 300,000 USD and you have completed the project for
270,000 USD.
This means you have saved 30,000 USD and this amount will be shared between you as
per the agreed formula.

Your share = 40% of the 30,000 USD
= 12,000 USD

Now the fee paid to you = 30,000 + 12,000
= 42,000 USD

So, is this the real fee that the client is going to pay you? No, because this amount is
exceeding the maximum fee of 40,000 USD.

Therefore, the client will pay you 40,000 USD as a fee.

Now the actual price paid to you = 270,000 + 40,000
= 310,000 USD

Go to Question: 400

                                             ###
Thank you for reading my eBook. If you enjoyed it, please take a moment to send me
your comments.

Thanks.

Regards,
M Fahad Usmani, PMP, PMI-RMP
fahad@pmstudycircle.com

************************************************************************
If you looking for more PMP sample questions, try my PMP Mock Test. This online
mock test is available at below given link:

PMP Mock Test

************************************************************************
                          Other eBooks I have authored


PMP Formula Guide

PMP Formula Guide is for professionals who are having difficulty solving the
mathematical questions for the PMP exam.

This guide explains all the mathematical formulas mentioned in the 6th edition of the
PMBOK Guide with simple examples so you can understand the formulas and apply the
concepts in the exam.

All formula-based questions are explained in every possible detail, and practice questions
are given to test your understanding.

Once you finish reading this guide, you will be well prepared for any mathematical
questions in the PMP exam.

Click here for more details

EVM for the PMP Certification Exam

If you want more in-depth knowledge on Earned Value Management, this eBook is for
you.

Based on the sixth edition of the PMBOK Guide, this eBook has more than 75 examples
and questions with detailed solutions, which help you understand the formulas, analyze
the logical interpretations, and elevate your confidence in solving earned value
management questions.

Click here for more details

PMI-RMP Question Bank

This PMI-RMP Question Bank is for professionals preparing for the PMI-RMP
certification exam.

This eBook has 170 PMI-RMP sample exam questions covering all exam areas, and is
based on the 5th edition of the PMBOK Guide. In this eBook, I give detailed
explanations of all questions and provide cross-references to the PMBOK Guide,
whenever applicable.

Although the exam syllabus is short, in the real exam you are going to see many similar
questions covering the same topic. In this eBook, I have tried to avoid similar questions,
every question will be a new opportunity for you learn a new concept.

Click here for more detail
