                   Ninth Edition




PMP
      (R)


  EXAM
     Practice Test
  and Study Guide


             Zombie_rox




      J. LeRoy Ward, PMP, PgMP
       Ginger Levin, PMP, PgMP
PMP
                    (R)

                   EXAM
  Practice Test
and Study Guide

   Ninth Edition
  ESI International Project Management Series
                             Series Editor
             J. LeRoy Ward, Executive Vice President
                 ESI International, Arlington, Virginia


    PgMP(R) Exam: Practice Test and Study Guide, Fourth Edition
     Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward * 978-1-4822-0135-2 * 2013
                      PgMP(R) Exam Challenge!
     Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward * 978-1-4822-0208-3 * 2013
     PMP(R) Exam: Practice Test and Study Guide, Ninth Edition
              Ginger Levin * 978-1-4822-0224-3 * 2013
               PMP(R) Exam Challenge! Sixth Edition
     J. LeRoy Ward and Ginger Levin * 978-1-4665-9982-6 * 2013
        Determining Project Requirements, Second Edition:
           Mastering the BABOK(R) and the CBAP(R) Exam
            Hans Jonasson * 978-1-4398-9651-8 * 2012
    Team Planning for Project Managers and Business Analysts
              Gail Levitt * 978-1-4398-5543-0 * 2012
    Practical Project Management for Building and Construction
              Hans Ottosson * 978-1-4398-9655-6 * 2012
     Project Management Concepts, Methods, and Techniques
            Claude H. Maley * 978-1-4665-0288-8 * 2012
     Program Management Complexity: A Competency Model
                Ginger Levin and J. LeRoy Ward
                  978-1-4398-5111-1 * 2011
               Project Management for Healthcare
              David Shirley * 978-1-4398-1953-1 * 2011
                     Managing Web Projects
           Edward B. Farkas * 978-1-4398-0495-7 * 2009
            Project Management Recipes for Success
            Guy L. De Furia * 978-1-4200-7824-4 * 2008
           Building a Project Work Breakdown Structure:
   Visualizing Objectives, Deliverables, Activities, and Schedules
             Dennis P. Miller * 978-1-4200-6969-3 * 2008
          A Standard for Enterprise Project Management
          Michael S. Zambruski * 978-1-4200-7245-7 * 2008
The Complete Project Management Office Handbook, Second Edition
             Gerard M. Hill * 978-1-4200-4680-9 * 2007
PMP
                                               (R)

                                     EXAM
  Practice Test
and Study Guide

          Ninth Edition




J. LeRoy Ward, PMP, PgMP
Ginger Levin, PMP, PgMP




             Boca Raton London New York

         CRC Press is an imprint of the
 Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
      AN AUERBACH BOOK
Parts of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, 2013, are reprinted with permission of the Project Management Institute, Inc., Four Campus
Boulevard, Newtown Square, Pennsylvania 19073-3299 U.S.A., a worldwide organization advancing the state of the art in project management.




"CAPM" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




"OPM3" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




"PgMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




"PMBOK" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




"PMI" is a service and trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




"PMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in the United States and other nations.




CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742

(c) 2013 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business

No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20130510

International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-0225-0 (eBook - PDF)

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and informa-
tion, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have
attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has
not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval
system, without written permission from the publishers.

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copy-
right Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.

Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without
intent to infringe.

Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com

and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
Contents

Preface.......................................................................... vii
Acknowledgments......................................................... xi
Online Practice Test.................................................... xiii
About the Authors.........................................................xv
Acronyms.................................................................... xvii
Introduction................................................................ xxi
Project Integration Management.............................................1
Project Scope Management...................................................37
Project Time Management................................................... 69
Project Cost Management.................................................. 103
Project Quality Management............................................. 137
Project Human Resource Management...............................173
Project Communications Management................................211
Project Risk Management................................................... 245
Project Procurement Management..................................... 281
Project Stakeholder Management........................................311
Practice Test....................................................................... 347
Answer Sheet............................................................... 419
Appendix: Study Matrix..............................................425
Answer Key.................................................................439
References...................................................................507

                                                                                      v
Preface

ESI International has been helping people to prepare for the
project management professional (PMP(R))* certification exam
since early 1991. Since then, it has become quite clear that
most prospective exam takers (ourselves included when we
studied for the exam many years ago) ask two questions when
they decide to earn PMP(R) certification
   "What topics are covered on the exam?" and "What are
the questions like?" Not surprisingly, some of the most
sought-after study aids are practice tests, which are helpful in
two ways: first, taking practice tests increases your knowledge
of the kinds of questions, phrases, terminology, and sentence
construction that you will encounter on the "real" exam;
and second, taking practice tests provides an opportunity for
highly concentrated study by exposing you to a breadth of
project management content generally not found in a single
reference source.
   We initiated the development of this specialty publication
with only one simple goal in mind: to help you study for,
and pass, the PMP(R) certification exam. Because the Project
Management Institute (PMI(R)) does not sell "past" exams to
prospective certification candidates for study purposes, the
best anyone can do is to develop practice test questions that

*   "PMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is
    registered in the United States and other nations.
    "PMI" is a service and trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc.,
    which is registered in the United States and other nations.

                                                                                    vii
viii        Preface


are as representative of the real questions as possible. And that
is exactly what we have done.
    As we developed this publication, we have worked hard to
make the questions difficult ones yet representative of what
you may encounter on the actual exam. Having attained the
PMP(R), we know it is a difficult exam and one that requires
study and dedicated effort.
    The result of our effort is the PMP(R) Exam: Practice Test
and Study Guide. This ninth edition--like the p    receding
eight--contains study hints, a list of exam topics, and
40 multiple-choice questions for each of the ten knowledge
areas presented in A Guide to the Project Management
Body of Knowledge Fifth Edition (2013), better known as the
PMBOK(R) Guide,* for a grand total of 400 questions.
    And as in previous editions, this edition includes a plainly
written rationale for each correct answer, along with a sup-
porting reference list. Our reference list alone took many
weeks to compile. If you had nothing but the list of exam
topics and the references, you would be well on your way to
passing the exam.
    You will find a reference to one or more of the five p rocess
groups, Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and
Controlling, or Closing at the end of each rationale. Those
references are important because they give you an understand-
ing of the types of exam questions that fall within each of
these five major project management performance domains.
    This ninth edition includes many scenario-based questions,
which comprise approximately 50 percent of the questions
found on the PMP(R) exam. It omits many of the purely defini-
tional questions; PMI(R) has gradually eliminated these types of
questions from the exam.
    We have included questions specifically related to the
PMBOK(R) Guide's ten knowledge areas and the various
*   "PMBOK" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is
    registered in the United States and other nations.
                                                  Preface     ix


inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs described in the
processes and subprocesses of those areas. Additionally, we
have reduced the length of many of our questions, to more
accurately represent the real exam. Finally, in response to a
number of requests we have included a completely original,
200-question practice test; none of these questions are found in
the other sections of this book. The online practice test is
available at http://www.ittoday.info/pmp/examhome.html.
    We have retained the helpful Study Matrix in this edition
as well. The matrix is included as an appendix. The matrix,
which is based on PMI(R)'s PMP Examination Content Outline
(July 2011), will help you to use the 200-question exam to its
full advantage. The matrix provides a way for you to assess
your strengths and weaknesses in each performance domain
and to identify areas that require further study.
    A special note to those who speak English as a second
language (ESL): Our experience in teaching project manage-
ment programs around the world has shown that most of
our ESL clients understand English well enough to pass the
PMP(R) exam as long as they know the content. Nevertheless,
in an effort to avoid adding to your frustration before taking
the exam, we have painstakingly reviewed each question
and answer in the practice test to ensure that we did not use
words, terms, or phrases that could be confusing to those who
are not fluent in English.
    Although the language issue may concern you, and right-
fully so, the only difference between you and those who
speak English as their first language is the amount of time it
takes to complete the exam. We know of only one person
who did not have enough time, and that individual was able
to complete all but two questions. We would suggest, there-
fore, that if you can grasp the content expressed in this pub-
lication, a few colloquialisms or ambiguous terms on the real
exam will not ultimately determine whether you pass or fail:
Your subject matter knowledge will do that!
x      Preface


   Earning the PMP(R) certification is a prestigious accomplish-
ment. But studying for it need not be difficult if you use the
tools available. You may want to include our companion piece,
PMP(R) Exam Challenge! in your study plan if you have not
already done so. In an easy flash-card format, it too provides
many opportunities to become thoroughly familiar and com-
fortable with the project management body of knowledge.
   Good luck on the exam!

                                                J. LeRoy Ward
                                                   New York, NY

                                                Ginger Levin
                                      Lighthouse Point, Florida
Acknowledgments

Our special thanks to our editor, John Wyzalek, our production
team including Randy Burling and Jessica Vakili who worked
under a very tight schedule, cover designer Elise Weinger, and
Christopher Manion and his team in marketing.
   We also would like to thank our friends and colleagues,
who, through the years, have participated in this p
                                                   ublication.
They include Rick Bilbro, Paul Chaney, Joe Czarnecki,
Mike Farr, Leonard Krapcha, Bill Pursch, Ben Sellers, Ron
Whitehead, Mary Saxton, Jeanne Trapani, Rosalie Lacorazza,
Nicole Peters, Kim Briggs, and Carl Pritchard. Their contribu-
tions to the various editionsof this publication were critical to
the success of this current edition, and we once again thank
them for their help and encouragement.




                                                               xi
Online Practice Test

An online test is available for download at http://www.ittoday.info/
pmp/examhome.html
   To download the test, use the six-character code above the
barcode on the book's back cover.




                                                                 xiii
About the Authors

Dr. Ginger Levin, PMP, PgMP, and a certified OPM3
Professional, is a consultant and educator in portfolio, pro-
gram, and project management. She has conducted numerous
maturity assessments in portfolio, program, and project man-
agement; business development; knowledge management; and
software over the past 20 years. She has 47 years of experience
working in the private sector, the U.S. Federal Government,
and in consulting and training. She is an Adjunct Professor
at the master's degree level in project management for the
University of Wisconsin-Platteville and at the doctoral level for
SKEMA University in Lille, France and RMIT in Melbourne,
Australia. She holds a doctorate in public administration from
The George Washington University, where she also received
the outstanding dissertation award. Dr. Levin is the editor,
author, or co-author of 14 books; is an active member of the
Project Management Institute; and is a popular speaker who
has presented at numerous PMI events since 1997.

J. LeRoy Ward, PMP, PgMP, and CSM is the Executive Vice
President of ESI International, where he is the principal execu-
tive responsible for R&D, Product Strategy, Consulting, and
Corporate Marketing ESI International is the world's largest
project-focused training company with curriculums addressing
project and program management, business analysis, c ontract
management, sourcing management, and business skills.


                                                              xv
xvi      About the Authors


A PMP(R) since 1990, Mr. Ward developed ESI's popular
PMP Exam Preparation course and taught it and other courses
to people from more than 50 countries. Along with Carl
Pritchard, he publishes The Portable PMP(R) Prep; Conversations
on Passing the PMP(R), another useful reference aid, along with
his Dictionary of Project Management Terms, now in its Third
Edition. He has almost 40 years of experience in the public
and private sectors and is a popular and dynamic speaker
in the field. He holds B.S. and M.S. degrees from Southern
Connecticut Universityand an M.S.T.M. degree with distinction
from The American University.

Dr. Levin and Mr. Ward have been helping people pre-
pare for the PMP(R) since 1996, when the first edition of this
Practice Test and Study Guide and the PMP Challenge! were
published. By attending and presenting at PMI Congresses
and to PMI Chapters around the world and reading as much
as possible in the field, they keep up with the best practices
to follow. While they each have other publications on their
own, they have collaborated on a comparable Practice Test
and Study Guide for the Program Management Professional
(PgMP(R)) exam, and a PgMP(R) Challenge. They authored
Program Management Complexity: A Competency Model,
published in 2011, and led the development of ESI's Maturity
Models: PortfolioFrameworkTM , Program FrameworkTM and
ProjectFrameworkTM. Further, they are series editors for CRC
in books on project and program management.
Acronyms

AC        actual cost
AD        activity duration
BAC       budget at completion
CAPM(R)   Certified Associate in Project Management
CEO       chief executive officer
CPI       cost performance index
CPM       critical path method
CSM       Certified Scrum Master
CV        cost variance
EAC       estimate at completion
EMV       expected monetary value
ERP       enterprise resource planning
ESL       English as a second language
ETC       estimate to complete
EV        earned value
EVA       economic value added
EVM       earned value management
ID        identification
IFB       invitation for bid
ISO       International Organization for Standardization


                                                           xvii
xviii  Acronyms



IT               information technology
LCC              life-cycle cost
MRP              material requirements planning
OBS              organizational breakdown structure
OPM3             Organizational Project Management Maturity Model
PDM              precedence diagramming method
PERT             program evaluation and review technique
PgMP(R)          Program Management Professional
PMBOK(R) Guide   A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
PMI(R)           Project Management Institute
PMIS             project management information system
PMM              Project Management Methodology
PMO              program management office
PMP(R)           Project Management Professional
PV               planned value
RACI             responsible, accountable, consult, inform
RAM              responsibility assignment matrix
RBS              resource breakdown structure
RBS              risk breakdown structure
R&D              research and development
RF               radio frequency
QA               quality assurance
RFP              request for proposal
ROI              return on investment
SD               standard deviation
SPC              statistical process control
SPI              schedule performance index
                                        Acronyms    xix



SV     schedule variance
SWOT   strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats
TCPI   to-complete performance index
VAC    variance at completion
WBS    work breakdown structure
Introduction

The PMP(R) exam contains 200 questions, of which 25 q    uestions
will not be included in the pass/fail determination. These
"pretest" items, as PMI(R) calls them, will be randomly placed
throughout the exam to gather statistical information on their
performance to determine their use for future exams. The ques-
tions on the exam are distributed as follows by process group
following the PMI PMP Examination Content Outline--July 2011

   13% relate to Initiating the Project
   24% relate to Planning the Project
   30% relate to Executing the Project
   25% relate to Monitoring and Controlling the Project
   8% relate to Closing the Project

For the practice test in this book, we provide all 200 questions
as if they were real questions, and the percentages above are
applied to the 200 questions. There are no pretest questions in
our practice exam.
   There also are not a certain number of the scored 175 ques-
tions that you must answer correctly. PMI(R) explains in its PMP
Credential Handbook--revised 12 September 2012, it generates
a pass/fail score based on proficiency levels in the answers in
each of the five process groups. This approach means that you
will learn whether you were Proficient, Moderately Proficient or
Below Proficient in each process group.


                                                              xxi
xxii  Introduction


   PMI(R) defines on page 30 of the Handbook these terms
as follows:

   Proficient--performance is above average in the process
   group
   Moderately Proficient--performance is at the average level
   in the process group
   Below Proficient--performance is below average in the
   process group

These scores are established based on a psychometric analysis
as PMI(R) uses subject matter experts throughout the world to
establish a point in which it feels a candidate for the exam
should be able to pass a question and establishes a level of
difficulty for each question. We do not know the algorithm
PMI(R) uses to establish the proficiency levels. Our practice
exam, therefore, scores each question equally, which means
you will learn the number of questions you answer correctly
in each of the five process groups. Obviously, your goal is to
be Proficient, and our goal is that this book can assist you in
your quest to attain the Proficient level.
    To use the study guide effectively, work on one section at
a time. It does not matter which one you choose first. Start
by reading the study hints. They provide useful background
on the content of the PMP(R) exam and identify the emphasis
placed on various topics. Familiarize yourself with the major
topics listed. Then answer the 40 practice questions, record-
ing your answers on the sheet provided. Finally, compare your
answers with those in the answer key. The rationales provided
should clarify any misconceptions you may have had, and the
process group designations will give you an understanding of
the types of questions you might see on the exam that relate
to those process groups. For further study and clarification,
you may want to consult the bibliographic reference.
                                           Introduction    xxiii


    After you have finished answering the questions that follow
each section, it is time to take the completely rewritten and
original, 200-question practice test. We recommend you take
the online version first. Then, once you receive your scores,
you can do some additional studying as needed and refer to
the exam in the book. Note your answers on the sheet pro-
vided, compare your answers to the answer key, and use the
Study Matrix in the Appendix to determine what areas you
need to study further.
    To make the most of this book, use it regularly. Take and
retake the practice test on line or in the book. Photocopy
the answer sheet in order to have a clean one each time you
retake the test. Our suggestion is to score at least 80% of the
questions in our practice test correctly before you take the
PMP(R) exam.
    You may want to convene a study group to compare your
answers with those of your colleagues. This method of study
is a powerful one. You will learn more from your colleagues
than you ever thought possible! Make sure you have a solid
understanding of the exam topics that are provided in each
section. Consult our extensive bibliography, or other sources
you have found useful, for further independent study. And,
most important, create a study plan and stick to it. Your
chances of success are raised dramatically when you dedicate
yourself to your goal.
Project Integration
Management


Study Hints
The Project Integration Management questions on the PMP(R)
certification exam address critical project management func-
tions that ensure coordination of the various elements of
the project. As the PMBOK(R) Guide explains the processes
focus on integration activities designed to ensure project
success; therefore, integration characteristics involve unifica-
tion, c onsolidation, communication, and integrative activities.
Project Integration Management involves making decisions
about resource use, trade-offs among competing objec-
tives and alternatives, and managing the interdependencies
between the ten knowledge areas. It addresses project initia-
tion with the development of a project charter, project plan
development, direct and manage the project work, monitoring
and controlling the project work, integrated change control,
and closing the p  roject. These six processes not only interact
with one another but also interact with processes in the other
nine knowledge areas. It is important to note PMI(R)'s view that
integration occurs in other areas as well. For example, project
scope and product scope need to be integrated, project work

                                                               1
2    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


needs to be integrated with other ongoing work of the orga-
nization, and deliverables from various technical specialties
need integration.
   The Project Integration Management questions are rela-
tively straightforward. Most people find them to be fairly
easy. But because they cover so much material, including all
five process groups, you do need to study them carefully to
become familiar with PMI(R)'s terminology and p   erspectives.
PMBOK Guide Figure 4-1 provides an overview of the
         (R)

structure of Project Integration Management. Know this
chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Integration
Management topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on
the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                            Project Integration Management    3


Major Topics
Project, program, and portfolio definitions
Project management definition
Project life cycle
Project management office
Project process groups

   Initiating
   Planning
   Executing
   Monitoring and Controlling
   Closing

Business case
Project statement of work
Develop project charter

Enterprise environmental factors
Organizational process assets
Project management information system (PMIS)
Facilitation techniques
Analytical techniques
Expert judgment
Project management plan

Direct and manage project work
Key management reviews
Corrective and preventive action
Deliverables
Work performance information
Meetings
Project baselines
Subsidiary plans
Standards and regulations
4    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Monitor and control project work
Validated changes
Forecasts

Integrated change control
Change requests
Change control meetings
Change control procedures
Change management plan
Configuration management plan
Change log
Approved change requests

Close project or phase
Administrative closure procedure
Accepted deliverables
Product, service, or result transition
Lessons learned
                           Project Integration Management     5


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. You work for a software development company that
    has followed the waterfall development model for more
    than 20 years. Lately, a number of customers have com-
    plained that your company is taking too long to complete
    its projects. You attended a class on agile development
    methods and believe that if the company used the agile
    approach, it could provide products to clients in a shorter
    time period. However, it would be a major culture
    change to switch from the waterfall methodology to the
    agile approach and to train staff members in this new
    approach. You mentioned this idea to the director of the
    PMO, and although she liked the idea, she would need
    approval from the company's portfolio review board to
    move forward with it. She suggested that you document
    this idea in a--
   a.   Business need
   b.   Product scope description
   c.   Project charter
   d.   Business case
6    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


    2. You are managing a large project with 20 key internal
       stakeholders, eight contractors, and six team leaders.
       You must devote attention to effective integrated change
       control. This means you are concerned primarily with--
      a. Reviewing, approving, and controlling changes
      b. Maintaining baseline integrity, integrating product and
         project scope, and coordinating change across knowl-
         edge areas
      c. Integrating deliverables from different functional
         specialties on the project
      d. Establishing a change control board that oversees the
         overall project changes

    3. You plan to hold a series of meeting as you execute the
       project plan. While different attendees will attend each
       meeting, a best practice to follow is to:
      a. Group stakeholders into categories to determine which
         ones should attend each meeting
      b. Not mix the types of meetings on your project
      c. Be sensitive to the fact that stakeholders often have
         very different objectives and invite them to determine
         the meeting's agenda
      d. Recognize that roles and responsibilities may
         overlap so focus on holding meetings primarily for
         decision making
                           Project Integration Management    7


4. You are the project manager in charge of developing
   a new shipping container for Globus Ocean Transport,
   which needs to withstand winds of 90 knots and swells
   of 30 meters. In determining the dimension of the con-
   tainer and the materials to be used in its fabrication, you
   convene a group of knowledgeable professionals to gather
   initial requirements, which will be included in the--
  a.   Project charter
  b.   Bill of materials
  c.   WBS
  d.   Project Statement of Work

5. You have assembled a core team to develop the project
   management plan for the next generation of fatigue fight-
   ing drugs. The science is complex, and the extended team
   of researchers, clinicians, and patients for trials exceeds
   500 people. The content of your project management plan
   will be directed primarily by two factors. They are--
  a.   Project complexity and the capability of resources
  b.   Number of resources and project schedule
  c.   Team member experience and budget
  d.   Application area and complexity

6. When you established the change control board for your
   avionics project, you established specific procedures to
   govern its operation. The procedures require all approved
   changes to baselines to be reflected in the--
  a.   Performance measurement baseline
  b.   Change management plan
  c.   Quality assurance plan
  d.   Project management plan
8    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


    7. You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual
       team located across five countries. To help avoid conflict
       in work priorities among your team members and their
       functional managers, you ask the project sponsor to
       prepare a--
     a. Memo to team members informing them that they
        work for you now
     b. Project charter
     c. Memo to the functional managers informing them that
        you have authority to direct their employees
     d. Human resource management plan

    8. The purpose of economic value added (EVA) is to--
     a. Determine the opportunity costs associated with
        the project
     b. Determine a non-time-dependent measure of profit
        or return
     c. Assess the net operating profit after taxes
     d. Evaluate the return on capital percent versus the cost
        of capital percent

    9. Facilitation techniques are used throughout project man-
       agement. Your company is embarking on a project to
       completely eliminate defects in its products. You are the
       project manager for this project, and you are developing
       your project charter. To assist you, which of the following
       facilitation techniques did you use?
     a.   Surveys
     b.   Delphi approach
     c.   Meeting management
     d.   Focus groups
                           Project Integration Management       9


10. The direct and manage project work process truly is
    important in project management. It affects many other
    key processes and uses inputs from others. Working with
    your team at its kickoff meeting, you explain the key
    benefit of this process is to--
  a. Implement approved changes
  b. Provide overall management of the project work
  c. Lead and perform activities in the project manage-
     ment plan
  d. Perform activities to accomplish project objectives

11. You are managing a project in an organization is
    characterized by with rigid rules and policies and strict
    supervisory controls. Your project, sponsored by your
    CEO who is new to the company, is to make the orga-
    nization less bureaucratic and more participative. You
    are developing your project management plan. Given
    the organization as it now is set up, as you prepare your
    plan, you can use which of the following organizational
    process assets--
  a. Guidelines and criteria
  b. Project management body of knowledge for
     your industry
  c. Organizational structure and culture
  d. The existing infrastructure
10      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


12. You are fairly new to managing a project but have been
    a team member for many years. You are pleased you
    were selected to manage your company's 2015 model line
    of hybrid vehicles. You are now planning your project
    and have been preparing the subsidiary plans as well.
    You realize some project documents also are required to
    help manage your project. An example of one that you
    believe will be especial helpful is the--
   a.   Business case
   b.   Key performance indicators
   c.   Project management information system
   d.   Project statement of work

13. You work for a telecommunications company, and when
    developing a project management plan for a new project,
    you found that you must tailor some company processes
    because the product is so different than those products
    typically produced by your company. To tailor these
    processes, you will follow--
   a.   Standardized guidelines and work instructions
   b.   Stakeholder risk tolerances
   c.   Expert judgment
   d.   Structure of your company

14. You are implementing a project management methodol-
    ogy for your company that requires you to establish a
    change control board. Which one of the following state-
    ments best describes a change control board?
   a. Recommended for use on all (large and small) projects
   b. Used to review, evaluate, approve, delay, or reject
      changes to the project
   c. Managed by the project manager, who also serves as
      its secretary
   d. Composed of key project team members
                          Project Integration Management        11


15. An automated tool, project records, performance indicators,
    data bases, and financials are examples of items in--
   a.   Organizational process assets
   b.   Project management information systems
   c.   Project management planning approaches
   d.   The tools and techniques for project plan development

16. You realize that projects represent change, and on your
    projects, you always seem to have a number of change
    requests to consider. In your current project to manage
    the safety of the nation's cheese products and the testing
    methods used, you decided to prepare a formal change
    management plan. An often overlooked type of change
    request is--
   a.   Adding new subject matter experts to your team
   b.   Updates
   c.   Work performance information
   d.   Enhancing the reviews performed by your project's
        governance board

17. You have been directed to establish a change c ontrol
    system for your company, but must convince your
    colleagues to use it. To be effective, the change control
    system must include--
   a. Procedures that define how project documents may
      be changed
   b. Specific change requests expected on the project and
      plans to respond to each one
   c. Performance reports that forecast project changes
   d. A description of the functional and physical
      characteristics of an item or system
12        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 18. You are working on the next generation of software for
     mobile phones for your telecommunications company.
     While time to market is critical, you know from your
     work on other projects that management reviews can be
     helpful and plan to use them on your project. You are
     documenting them as part of your--
     a.   Governance plan
     b.   Change management plan
     c.   Performance reviews
     d.   Project management plan

 19. Your cost control specialist has developed a budget plan
     for your project to add a second surgical center to the
     Children's Hospital. As you analyze cash flow require-
     ments, you notice that cash flow activity is greatest in the
     closing phase. You find this unusual because on most
     projects the largest portion of the budget spent during--
     a.   Initiating
     b.   Monitoring and Controlling
     c.   Controlling
     d.   Executing

 20. You are project manager for a systems integration effort
     and need to procure the hardware components from
     external sources. Your subcontracts administrator has told
     you to prepare a product description, which is referenced
     in a--
     a.   Project statement of work
     b.   Contract scope statement
     c.   Request for proposal
     d.   Contract
                          Project Integration Management        13


21. Because your project is slated to last five years, you
    believe rolling wave planning is appropriate. It provides
    information about the work to be done--
   a. Throughout all project phases
   b. For successful completion of the current project phase
   c. For successful completion of the current and subsequent
      project phases
   d. In the next project phase

22. You want to minimize the impact of changes on your
    project, yet you want to ensure that change is managed
    when and if it occurs. This can be done through each of
    the following ways EXCEPT--
   a. Rejecting requested changes
   b. Approving changes and incorporating them into a
      revised baseline
   c. Documenting the complete impact of requested changes
   d. Ensuring that project scope changes are reflected in
      changes to product scope

23. You are managing a project to introduce a new product to
    the marketplace that is expected to have a very long life.
    In this situation, the concept of being temporary, which is
    part of the definition of a project,--
   a. Does not apply because the project will have a
      lasting result
   b. Does not apply to the product to be created
   c. Recognizes that the project team will outlive the
      actual project
   d. Does not apply because the project will not be short
      in duration
14      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


24. When closing a project, it is a best practice to--
   a. Update the project documents
   b. Prepare a sustainment plan for the project's benefits
   c. Measure product scope against the project manage-
      ment plan
   d. Review the scope baseline

25. All the following are project baselines that are generally
    part of the project management plan EXCEPT--
   a.   Technical
   b.   Scope
   c.   Time
   d.   Cost

26. You are responsible for a project management training
    curriculum that is offered throughout the organization.
    In this situation, your intangible deliverables are--
   a. Employees who can apply the training effectively
   b. Training materials for each course
   c. Certificates of completion for everyone who completes
      the program
   d. The training curriculum as advertised in your catalog
                           Project Integration Management     15


27. Working on your project management training curricula
    project, you decided it would be beneficial to you to
    become an active member of the Project Management
    Institute as part of the objectives of your project is
    to ensure it is aligned with PMI(R)'s best practices. To
    complement PMI(R)'s Work Breakdown Structure Practice
    Standard, you learned PMI(R) was requesting volunteers to
    participate in development of a similar standard on the
    Scope Statement. You volunteered, and now the Standard
    is issued. This is an example of:
   a.   Improving your own competency as a project manager
   b.   Corrective action
   c.   Preventive action
   d.   A requirement for you to immediately update your
        project management plan

28. Ideally, a project manager should be selected and
    assigned at which point in the project life cycle?
   a.   During the initiating processes
   b.   During the project planning process
   c.   At the end of the concept phase of the project life cycle
   d.   Prior to the beginning of the development phase of
        the project life cycle

29. Closing a project phase should not be delayed until
    project completion because--
   a.   Useful information may be lost
   b.   The project manager may be reassigned
   c.   Project team members may be reassigned by that time
   d.   Sellers are anxious for payments
16    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 30. As you are working on your telecommunications project,
     even though you are using agile methods, you realize you
     are preparing an extensive amount of data and informa-
     tion. You regularly share data with your project team.
     Your last team meeting focused on the number of change
     requests and also the start and finish dates of activities in
     your schedule. They are examples of--
     a.   Key performance indicators
     b.   Work performance reports
     c.   Work performance data
     d.   Work performance information

 31. Project management processes describe project work,
     while product-oriented management processes specify
     the project's product. Therefore, a project management
     process and a product-oriented management process--
     a. Overlap and interact throughout the project
     b. Are defined by the project life cycle
     c. Are concerned with describing and organizing
        project work
     d. Are similar for each application area

 32. The close project or phase process addresses actions and
     activities concerning all of the following EXCEPT--
     a. Completion or exit criteria for the project or phase
        have been met
     b. Stakeholder approval that the project has meet their
        requirements
     c. Review of the project and/or phase information for
        potential future use
     d. Documentation that completed deliverables have
        been accepted
                          Project Integration Management       17


33. You are a personnel management specialist recently
    assigned to a project team working on a team-based
    reward and recognition system. The other team
    members also work in the human resources department.
    The projectcharter should be issued by--
   a.   The project manager
   b.   The client
   c.   A sponsor
   d.   A member of the PMO who has jurisdiction over
        human resources

34. Your project is proceeding according to schedule. You
    have just learned that a new regulatory requirement will
    cause a change in one of the project's performance speci-
    fications. To ensure that this change is incorporated into
    the project management plan, you should--
   a. Call a meeting of the change control board
   b. Change the WBS, project schedule, and project plan to
      reflect the new requirement
   c. Prepare a change request
   d. Immediately inform all affected stakeholders of the
      new approach to take on the project

35. Different types of project phases are used on p rojects,
    and each phase culminates in the completion of at
    least one deliverable. The high-level nature of these
    phases means they are an element of the project life
    cycle. Some phases start before others complete. If this
    approach is followed, it may result in--
   a.   An increase in the number of issues
   b.   Increasing the schedule
   c.   The need for a CCB
   d.   More rework
18        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 36. Assume your company is a leader in the market in
     production of cereal products. It has been in this m
                                                         arket
     for over 50 years. You are the project manager for a
     new product that is a derivative from the company's core
     product. As you determine a life cycle for this project,
     you believe you should follow one that is--
     a.   Incremental
     b.   Predictive
     c.   Iterative
     d.   Adaptive

 37. Oftentimes when a project is terminated, senior managers
     will replace the project manager with an individual who
     is skilled in closing out projects. If this is done, the first
     step for the termination manager should be to--
     a.   Notify all relevant stakeholders of the termination
     b.   Complete the lessons learned report
     c.   Conduct an immediate review of the work packages
     d.   Review the status of all contracts

 38. On your project you want to avoid bureaucracy, so you
     adopt an informal approach to change control. The main
     problem with this approach is--
     a. There is no "paper trail" of change activity
     b. Regular disagreements between the project manager
        and the functional manager will occur
     c. There are misunderstandings regarding what was
        agreed upon by stakeholders
     d. There is a lack of sound cost estimating to assess the
        change's impact
                           Project Integration Management     19


39. Projects are supposed to succeed, not fail. However,
    termination is an option to consider when all but which
    one of the following conditions exist?
   a.   The customer's strategy has changed.
   b.   There are new stakeholders.
   c.   Competition may make the project results obsolete.
   d.   The original purposes for the project have changed.

40. All projects involve some extent of change, because they
    involve work that is unique in some fashion. Therefore, it
    is important that a project management plan includes a--
   a. Description of the change request process
   b. Configuration management plan
   c. Methodology for preventive action to avoid the need
      for excessive changes
   d. A work authorization system
                       Project Integration Management    21


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d         21.   a    b    c    d

2.    a   b    c   d         22.   a    b    c    d

3.    a   b    c   d         23.   a    b    c    d

4.    a   b    c   d         24.   a    b    c    d

5.    a   b    c   d         25.   a    b    c    d

6.    a   b    c   d         26.   a    b    c    d

7.    a   b    c   d         27.   a    b    c    d

8.    a   b    c   d         28.   a    b    c    d

9.    a   b    c   d         29.   a    b    c    d

10.   a   b    c   d         30.   a    b    c    d

11.   a   b    c   d         31.   a    b    c    d

12.   a   b    c   d         32.   a    b    c    d

13.   a   b    c   d         33.   a    b    c    d

14.   a   b    c   d         34.   a    b    c    d

15.   a   b    c   d         35.   a    b    c    d

16.   a   b    c   d         36.   a    b    c    d

17.   a   b    c   d         37.   a    b    c    d

18.   a   b    c   d         38.   a    b    c    d

19.   a   b    c   d         39.   a    b    c    d

20.   a   b    c   d         40.   a    b    c    d
                          Project Integration Management     23


Answer Key
 1. d. Business case
       The business case is used to provide the necessary
       information to determine whether or not a project is
       worth its investment. It is used to justify the project
       and typically contains a cost-benefit analysis and a
       business need. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69

 2. a. Reviewing, approving, and controlling changes
       Performing integrated change control consists of
       coordinating and managing changes across the
       project. Activities that occur within the context of
       perform integrated change control include: validate
       scope, control scope, control schedule, control costs,
       perform quality assurance, control quality, manage
       the project team, control communications, control
       risks, conduct procurements, control procurements,
       manage stakeholder engagement, and control stake-
       holder engagement. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94-95

 3. b. Not mix the types of meetings on your project
       Meetings are a tool and technique used in direct and
       manage project work. Meetings tend to be one of
       three types: information exchange; b rainstorming,
       option evaluation, or design; or decision making.
       A best practice is to not combine the types of
       meetings and prepare for them with a well-defined
       agenda, purpose, objective, and time frame. They
       should be documented using minutes and action
       items. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 84
24    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 4. a. Project charter
        The project charter documents the business needs,
        assumptions, constraints, understanding of the cus-
        tomer needs and high-level requirements and what
        the new product, service, or result is to satisfy. It is
        the document used to formally authorize the project.
        [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71

 5. d. Application area and complexity
        The content of the project management plan is pri-
        marily influenced by the application area [in this case
        drug development] and complexity of the project.
        The size of the plan is typically commensurate with
        the size and complexity of the project. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 74

 6. d. Project management plan
        The project management plan must be updated
        changes to subsidary plans and baselines subject
        to formal change control processes. Those changes
        must be communicated to appropriate stakeholders
        in a timely manner. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 100

 7. b. Project charter
        Although the project charter cannot stop con-
        flicts from arising, it can provide a framework to
        help resolve them, because it describes the project
        manager's authority to apply organizational resources
        to project activities. [Initiating]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 228; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide,
        2013, 71-72
                          Project Integration Management    25


8. d. Evaluate the return on capital percent versus the cost
      of capital percent
       EVA quantifies the value a company provides to
       its investors and seeks to determine if a company
       is creating or destroying value to its shareholders.
       It is calculated by subtracting the expected return,
       (represented by the capital charge), from the actual
       return that a company generates, (represented by net
       operating profit after taxes). [Initiating]
       Cohen and Graham 2001, 217

 9. c. Meeting management
       Meeting management is an example of a facilitation
       technique used in developing the project charter as
       meetings may be held with key stakeholders and sub-
       ject matter experts. Other facilitation techniques used
       to guide preparation of the charter are brainstorming,
       problem solving, and conflict resolution. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71

10. b. Provide overall management of the project work
       While all of the answers apply to the direct and
       manage project work process, the key benefit is
       that it involves providing overall management of the
       work of the project, encompassing the other answers
       listed. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 79
26      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 11. b. Guidelines and criteria
          While you are managing a different type of p   roject,
          the organization has managed projects before and
          therefore may have as part of its organizational
          process assets a project management template,
          which sets forth guidelines and criteria to tailor the
          organization's processes to satisfy specific needs of
          the project. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 75

 12. d. Project statement of work
          The project statement of work is a useful document
          as it describes the products, services, or results the
          project is to deliver. It references the business need,
          product scope description, and the strategic plan.
          [Initiating and Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68, 78

 13. a. Standardized guidelines and work instructions
          Standardized guidelines and work instructions are
          an organizational process asset to consider as the
          project management plan is developed. They include
          guidelines and criteria to tailor the organization's set
          of standard processes to satisfy the specific needs of
          the project. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 75
                           Project Integration Management    27


14. b. Used to review, evaluate, approve, delay, or reject
       changes to the project
        The change control board's powers and responsi-
        bilities should be well defined and agreed upon by
        key stakeholders. On some projects, multiple change
        control boards may exist with different areas of
        responsibility. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96

15. b. Project management information systems
        The items listed are part of these systems, a tool
        and technique in both processes. [Executing and
        Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 84, 92

16. b   Updates
        Change requests may include corrective actions, pre-
        ventive actions, defect repairs, or updates. Updates
        are changes to formally controlled project documents
        or plans to reflect modified or additional content.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
28    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 17. a. Procedures that define how project documents may
        be changed
          A change control system is a collection of formal,
          documented procedures that define the process used
          to control change and approve or reject changes
          to project documents, deliverables, or baselines.
          It includes the paperwork, tracking systems, and
          approval levels necessary to authorize changes.
          [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96

 18. d. Project management plan
          The project management plan describes how the
          project will be executed and monitored and con-
          trolled. While it contains a number of subsidiary
          plans, it also contains other items including infor-
          mation on key management reviews for contents,
          their extent, and timing to address open issues and
          pending decisions. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 77

 19. d. Executing
          Executing is where the majority of the budget is
          spent because this is the process where all of the
          resources (people, material, etc.) are applied to the
          activities and tasks in the project management plan.
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 56
                           Project Integration Management       29


20. a. Project statement of work
        The project statement of work describes in a narra-
        tive form the products, services, or results that the
        project will deliver. It references the product scope
        description as well as the business needs and the
        strategic plan. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68

21. c. For successful completion of the current and subse-
       quent project phases
        Rolling wave planning provides progressive detailing
        of the work to be accomplished throughout the life
        of the project, indicating that planning and documen-
        tation are iterative and ongoing processes. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 45 and 560

22. d. Ensuring that project scope changes are reflected in
       changes to product scope
        Integrated change control requires maintaining the
        integrity of baselines by releasing only approved
        changes into project products, services, or results.
        It also ensures that changes to product scope are
        reflected in the project scope definition. This is done
        by coordinating changes across the entire project.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94 and 99-100
30  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 23. b. Does not apply to the product to be created
         A project is completed when its objectives have
         been achieved or when they are recognized as being
         unachievable and the project is terminated. In this
         case, the end will occur when the productis finished.
         Thus, the concept of temporary applies to the project
         life cycle--not the product life cycle. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 3-4

 24. d. Review the scope baseline
         In closing the project, it is necessary to ensure that
         the project work is completed, and the project has
         met its objectives. Since project scope is measured
         against the project management plan, the project
         manager then reviews the scope baseline to ensure
         completion. [Closing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101

 25. a. Technical
         Scope, time, and cost are examples of project
         baselines to be part of the project management plan.
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 76

 26. a. Employees who can apply the training effectively
         Most deliverables are tangible, such as buildings
         or roads, but intangible deliverables also can be
         provided. Work performance data are collected
         during direct and manage project work and is passed
         on to the controlling processes of each process area
         for further analysis. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 84-85
                           Project Integration Management        31


27. b. Corrective action
        When you volunteered, you signed a confidentiality
        statement so you could not disclose what was under
        way on this activity. Now the Standard has been
        issued, and to stay in alignment with PMI(R)'s best
        practices, you need to issue a change request based
        on corrective action to realign the performance of
        the work of your project with your project manage-
        ment plan. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85

28. a. During the initiating processes
        When the project manager is selected and assigned
        to the project during initiation, several of the usual
        start-up tasks for a project are simplified. In addition,
        becoming involved with project activities from the
        beginning helps the project manager to understand
        where the project fits within the organization in
        terms of its priority relative to other projects and the
        ongoing work of the organization. [Initiating]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 101; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide,
        2013, 67

29. a. Useful information may be lost
        Closure includes collecting project records, ensuring
        that the records accurately reflect final specifications,
        analyzing project or phase success and e ffectiveness,
        and archiving such information for future use. Each
        phase of the project should be properly closed
        while important project information is still available.
        [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 100-101
32      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 30. c. Work performance data
          Work performance data are the raw observations and
          measurements identified during activities performed
          to carry out the work of the project. Other examples
          are the reported percent of work physically com-
          pleted, quality and technical performance measures,
          number of defects, actual costs, and actual durations.
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 59

 31. a. Overlap and interact throughout the project
          Project management processes and product-oriented
          management processes must be integrated through-
          out the project's life cycle, given their close rela-
          tionship. In some cases, it is difficult to distinguish
          between the two. For example, knowing how the
          project will be created aids in determining the
          project's scope. However, the project life cycle is
          independent from that of the product. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 38-39
                          Project Integration Management     33


32. d. Documentation that completed deliverables have
       been accepted
       Documentation that the completed deliverables have
       been accepted is prepared as an output of validate
       scope. The close project or phase procedures pro-
       vides a listing of necessary activities, including: con-
       firmation that the project has met sponsor, customer,
       and other stakeholder requirements; satisfaction and
       validation that the completion and exit criteria have
       been met; the transfer of deliverables to the next
       phase or to production/operations has been accom-
       plished; and activities to collect, audit, and archive
       project information and gather lessons learned have
       been addressed. [Closing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 100-103

33. c. A sponsor
       The project charter should be issued by a project
       initiator or sponsor who formally authorizes the
       project and provides the project manager with the
       authority to apply organizational resources to project
       activities. The project charter should not be issued by
       the project manager, although, the project manager
       can assist in its development. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71
34      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 34. c. Prepare a change request
          The change request should detail the nature of the
          change and its effect on the project. Documentation
          is critical to provide a record of the change and who
          approved it, in case differences of opinion arise
          later. A change request is an output from the direct
          and manage project work process and an input
          to the perform integrated change control process.
          [Executing and Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85, 97

 35. d. More rework
          The question is an example of an overlapping rela-
          tionship between phases. It is used to compress the
          schedule through fast tracking as an example. By
          overlapping phases more resources may be needed,
          risks may increase, and more rework may result if a
          significant phase progresses before accurate informa-
          tion is available from the previous phase. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 42-43

 36. b. Predictive
          If the product to be delivered is well understood,
          a predictive life cycle or one that is fully plan driven
          is recommended. The project's scope, time, and cost
          to deliver it are determined in the project life cycle as
          early as possible. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 44-45
                          Project Integration Management     35


37. c. Conduct an immediate review of the work packages
       A thorough review of the work packages will pro-
       vide a complete accounting of the physical progress
       achieved on the project. This is the first step in
       attempting to improve performance. [Closing]
       Cleland and Ireland 2007, 365-375

38. c. There are misunderstandings regarding what was
       agreed upon by stakeholders
       Using a formal, documented approach to change
       management reduces the level of misunderstanding
       or uncertainty regarding the nature of the change
       and its impact on cost and schedule. For large
       projects, change control boards are recommended.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Meredith and Mantel 2012, 500

39. b. There are new stakeholders.
       As long as the new stakeholders agree with the
       project's business case, the work should c ontinue.
       However, if any of the other events occur,
       termination should be considered. [Closing]
       Cleland and Ireland 2007, 365-375

40. b. Configuration management plan
       A configuration management plan is part of a project
       management plan to document how configuration
       management will be performed on the project.
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 77
Project Scope
Management


Study Hints
The Project Scope Management questions on the PMP(R)
certification exam cover a diverse, yet fundamental, set of
project management topics. Planning scope management
activities, collecting requirements, defining requirements with
a scope statement, creating the WBS, validating the scope
with accepted deliverables, and managing scope changes are
among the topics covered.
   PMI(R) views scope management as a six-step processes that
consists of: plan scope management, collect requirements,
define scope, create WBS, validate scope, and c ontrol scope.
PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 5-1 provides an overview of the struc-
ture of Project Scope Management. Know this chart thoroughly.
   The Project Scope Management questions on the exam are
straightforward. Historically, most people have found these
questions to be relatively easy; however, do not be lulled into
a false sense of security by past results. These questions cover
a wide breadth of material, and you must be familiar with the
terminology and perspectives adopted by PMI(R).


                                                             37
38     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


   You also may wish to consult PMI(R)'s Practice Standard for
Work Breakdown Structures--Second Edition (2006) for addi-
tional information.
   Following is a list of the major Project Scope Management
topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas
most likely to appear on the exam.
                             Project Scope Management    39


Major Topics
Plan Scope Management

   Preparing a scope management plan
   Preparing a requirements management plan

Collect requirements

   Tools and techniques
   Requirements documentation
   Requirements traceability matrix

Define scope

   Product analysis
   Alternatives analysis
   Facilitated workshops
   Project scope statement

Create WBS

   Benefits
   Uses
   Development/decomposition
   WBS dictionary
   Scope baseline

Validate scope

   Inspection
   Group decision-making techniques
   Accepted deliverables
   Change requests
   Work performance information
40  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Control scope

   Variance analysis
   Work performance information
   Updates to the project management plan and to the proj-
   ect documents
                               Project Scope Management     41


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. Progressive elaboration of product characteristics on your
    project must be coordinated carefully with the--
   a.   Proper project scope definition
   b.   Project stakeholders
   c.   Scope change control system
   d.   Customer's strategic plan

 2. You are examining multiple scope change requests on a
    project you were asked to take over because the previous
    project manager decided to resign. To assess the degree
    to which the project scope will change, you need to
    compare the requests to which project document?
   a.   Preliminary scope statement
   b.   WBS
   c.   Change management plan
   d.   Scope management plan
42      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 3. You and your project team recognize the importance of
    project scope management to a project's overall success;
    therefore, you include only the work required for success-
    ful completion of the project. The first step in the Project
    Scope Management process is to--
   a. Clearly distinguish between project scope and
      product scope
   b. Prepare a scope management plan
   c. Define and document your stakeholders' needs to
      meet the project's objectives
   d. Capture and manage both project and product
      requirements

 4. An example of an organizational process asset that could
    affect how project scope is to be managed is--
   a.   Personnel administration
   b.   Marketplace conditions
   c.   Historical information
   d.   Organizational culture

 5. You are managing a complex project for a new method
    of heating and air conditioning in vehicles. You will use
    both solar and wind technologies in this project to reduce
    energy costs. Therefore, you must ensure that the work of
    your project will result in delivering the project's specified
    scope, which means that you should measure completion
    of the product scope against the--
   a.   Scope management plan
   b.   Project management plan
   c.   Product requirements
   d.   Requirements management plan
                              Project Scope Management       43


6. A key tool and technique used in define scope is--
  a.   Templates, forms, and standards
  b.   Decomposition
  c.   Expert judgment
  d.   Project management methodology

7. Alternatives generation often is useful in defining project
   scope. An example of a technique that can be used is--
  a.   Sensitivity analysis
  b.   Decision trees
  c.   Mathematical model
  d.   Lateral thinking

8. Product analysis techniques include all the following
   EXCEPT--
  a.   Value engineering
  b.   Value analysis
  c.   Systems analysis
  d.   Bill of materials

9. The baseline for evaluating whether requests for changes
   or additional work are contained within or outside the
   project's exclusion is provided by the--
  a.   Project management plan
  b.   Project scope statement
  c.   Project scope management plan
  d.   WBS dictionary
44      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


10. Rather than use a WBS, your team developed a bill of
    materials to define the project's work components. A
    customer review of this document uncovered that a scope
    change was needed, because a deliverable had not been
    defined, and a change request was written subsequently.
    This is an example of a change request that was the
    result of--
   a.   An external event
   b.   An error or omission in defining the scope of the product
   c.   A value-adding change
   d.   An error or omission in defining the scope of
        the project

11. Collecting requirements is critical in project scope man-
    agement as it becomes the foundation for the project's--
   a.   Scope management plan
   b.   WBS
   c.   Schedule
   d.   Scope change control system

12. The project scope statement addresses and documents all
    the following items EXCEPT--
   a. Project exclusions
   b. The relationship between the deliverables and the
      business need
   c. Product scope description
   d. Project management methodology (PMM)
                               Project Scope Management         45


13. The first step in collecting requirements on any project,
    large or small, is to--
   a.   Talk with the project stakeholders through interviews
   b.   Review the scope management plan
   c.   Conduct facilitated workshops with stakeholders
   d.   Prepare a requirements document template that you
        and your team can use throughout the collect require-
        ments process

14. You want to structure your project so that each project
    team member has a discrete work package to perform.
    The work package is a--
   a.   Deliverable at the lowest level of the WBS
   b.   Task with a unique identifier
   c.   Required level of reporting
   d.   Task that can be assigned to more than one organiza-
        tional unit

15. Quality function deployment is one approach for collect-
    ing requirements. Assume that you have studied the work
    of numerous quality experts, such as Deming, Juran, and
    Crosby, and your organization has a policy that states
    the importance of quality as the key constraint of all
    project constraints. You and your team have decided to
    use quality function deployment on your new project to
    manufacture turbines that use alternative fuels. The first
    step you should use is to--
   a. Determine the voice of the customer
   b. Build the house of quality
   c. Address the functional requirements and how best to
      meet them
   d. Hold a focus group of prequalified stakeholders
46     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


16. On the WBS, the first level of decomposition may be
    displayed by using all the following EXCEPT--
  a.   Phases of the project life cycle
  b.   Subcomponents
  c.   Major deliverables
  d.   Project organizational units

17. Change is inevitable on projects. Uncontrolled changes
    are often referred to as--
  a.   Rework
  b.   Scope creep
  c.   Configuration items
  d.   Emergency changes

18. Each WBS component should be assigned a unique
    identifier from a code of accounts to--
  a. Link the WBS to the bill of materials
  b. Enable the WBS to follow a similar numbering system
     to that of the organization's units as part of the
     organizational breakdown structure
  c. Sum costs, schedule, and resource information
  d. Link the WBS to the project management plan

19. In scope control it is important to determine the cause of
    any unacceptable variance relative to the scope baseline.
    This can be done through--
  a.   Root cause analysis
  b.   Control charts
  c.   Inspections
  d.   Project performance measurements
                               Project Scope Management  47


20. To assist your software development team in collecting
    requirements from potential users and to ensure that
    agreement about the stakeholders' needs exists early in
    the project, you decide to use a group creativity tech-
    nique. Numerous techniques are available, but you and
    your team choose a voting process to rank the most
    useful ideas for further prioritization. This approach is
    known as--
   a.   Brainstorming
   b.   Nominal group technique
   c.   Delphi technique
   d.   Affinity diagram

21. You have been appointed project manager for a new
    project in your organization and must prepare a project
    management plan. You decide to prepare a WBS to show
    the magnitude and complexity of the work involved.
    No WBS templates are available to help you. To prepare
    the WBS, your first step should be to--
   a. Determine the cost and duration estimates for each
      project deliverable
   b. Identify and analyze the deliverables and related work
   c. Identify the components of each project deliverable
   d. Determine the key tasks to be performed

22. Assume that you are a major subcontractor doing work
    for a prime contractor on a major project. Your change
    control system should--
   a. Be identical to that of the prime contractor
   b. Follow the rigor of international configuration
      management standards
   c. Comply with relevant contractual provisions
   d. Only consider approved change requests
48  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 23. You are leading a project team to identify potential new
     products for your organization. One idea was rejected by
     management because it would not fit with the organiza-
     tion's core competencies. You need to recommend other
     products using management's guideline as--
    a.   An assumption
    b.   A risk
    c.   A specification
    d.   A technical requirement

 24. Validate scope--
    a. Improves cost and schedule accuracy, particularly on
       projects using innovative techniques or technology
    b. Is the last activity performed on a project before
       handoff to the customer
    c. Documents the characteristics of the product or service
       that the project was undertaken to create
    d. Differs from perform quality control in that validate
       scope is concerned with the acceptance--not the
       correctness--of the work results

 25. Any step recommended to bring expected future
     performance in line with the project management plan
     is called--
    a.   Performance evaluation
    b.   Corrective action
    c.   Preventive action
    d.   Defect repair
                               Project Scope Management      49


26. Written change requests should be required on--
   a. All projects, large and small
   b. Only large projects
   c. Projects with a formal configuration management
      system in place
   d. Projects for which the cost of a change control system
      can be justified

27. Updates of organizational process assets that are an output
    of control scope include all the following EXCEPT--
   a.   Causes of variations
   b.   Lessons learned
   c.   Work authorization system
   d.   Reasons certain corrective actions were chosen

28. Work performance information includes all the following
    EXCEPT--
   a.   Started deliverables
   b.   Costs authorized and incurred
   c.   Progress of deliverables
   d.   Completed deliverables

29. Your project is now under way, and you are working with
    your team to prepare your requirements management
    plan. Which of the following strongly influences how
    requirements are managed?
   a. The phase-to-phase relationship
   b. A set of procedures by which project scope and
      product scope may be changed
   c. Requirements traceability matrix
   d. Requirements documentation
50      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


30. You are project manager on a systems engineering
    project designed to last six years and to develop the
    next-generation corvette for use in military operations.
    You and your team recognize that requirements may
    change as new technologies, especially in sonar systems,
    are developed. You are concerned that these new tech-
    nologies may lead to changes in the scope of your
    product, which then will affect the scope of your project.
    Therefore your requirements traceability matrix should
    include tracing requirements to all the following project
    elements EXCEPT--
   a.   Business needs
   b.   Product design
   c.   Product development
   d.   Project verification

31. Your customer signed off on the requirements d  ocument
    and scope statement of your video game project last
    month. Today she stated she would like to make it an
    interactive game that can be played on a television and
    on a computer. This represents a requested scope change
    that, at a minimum--
   a. Should be reviewed according to the perform
      integrated change control process
   b. Results in a change to all project baselines
   c. Requires adjustments to cost, time, quality, and
      other objectives
   d. Results in a lesson learned
                                Project Scope Management       51


32. The key inputs to the validate scope process include all
    the below items EXCEPT--
   a. The project management plan (scope management
      plan and scope baseline)
   b. Change requests
   c. Validated deliverables
   d. Requirements traceability matrix

33. Modifications may be needed to the WBS and WBS
    dictionary because of approved change requests, which
    shows that--
   a.   Replanning is an output of control scope
   b.   Scope creep is common on projects
   c.   Rebaselining will be necessary
   d.   Variance is relative to the scope baseline

34. You and your team are documenting requirements on you
    project to control fatigue as people need to work more
    hours to keep up with the competition. You decided to
    set up components for the requirements on your project.
    Acceptance criteria are an example of--
   a.   Stakeholder requirements
   b.   Transition requirements
   c.   Project requirements
   d.   Business requirements

35. Which following item is NOT an input to control scope?
   a.   Requirements traceability matrix
   b.   Work performance data
   c.   Deliverables
   d.   Scope management plan
52  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 36. You are the project manager for a subcontractor on a
     major contract. The prime contractor has asked that you
     manage your work in a detailed manner. Your first step
     is to--
    a. Follow the WBS that the prime contractor developed
       for the project and use the work packages you
       identified during the proposal
    b. Develop a subproject WBS for the work package that
       is your company's responsibility
    c. Establish a similar coding structure to the prime
       contractor's to facilitate use of a common project
       management information system
    d. Develop a WBS dictionary to show specific staff
       assignments

 37. The project scope statement is important in scope control
     because it--
    a. Is a critical component of the scope baseline
    b. Provides information on project performance
    c. Alerts the project team to issues that may cause
       problems in the future
    d. Is expected to change throughout the project

 38. The product scope description is documented as part of
     the project's scope statement. It is important to include it
     because it--
    a.   Facilitates the project acceptance process
    b.   Describes specific constraints associated with the project
    c.   Progressively elaborates characteristics
    d.   Shows various alternatives considered
                                  Project Scope Management      53


39. How is a context diagram used?
   a.   To   depict product scope
   b.   To   trace requirements as part of the traceability matrix
   c.   To   develop the scope management plan
   d.   To   develop the requirements management plan

40. You are establishing a PMO that will have a project
    management information system that will be an online
    repository of all program data. You will collect descrip-
    tions of all work components for each project under the
    PMO's jurisdiction. This information will form an integral
    part of the--
   a.   Chart of accounts
   b.   WBS dictionary
   c.   WBS structure template
   d.   Earned value management reports
                       Project Scope Management    55


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d     21.   a   b    c    d

2.    a   b    c   d     22.   a   b    c    d

3.    a   b    c   d     23.   a   b    c    d

4.    a   b    c   d     24.   a   b    c    d

5.    a   b    c   d     25.   a   b    c    d

6.    a   b    c   d     26.   a   b    c    d

7.    a   b    c   d     27.   a   b    c    d

8.    a   b    c   d     28.   a   b    c    d

9.    a   b    c   d     29.   a   b    c    d

10.   a   b    c   d     30.   a   b    c    d

11.   a   b    c   d     31.   a   b    c    d

12.   a   b    c   d     32.   a   b    c    d

13.   a   b    c   d     33.   a   b    c    d

14.   a   b    c   d     34.   a   b    c    d

15.   a   b    c   d     35.   a   b    c    d

16.   a   b    c   d     36.   a   b    c    d

17.   a   b    c   d     37.   a   b    c    d

18.   a   b    c   d     38.   a   b    c    d

19.   a   b    c   d     39.   a   b    c    d

20.   a   b    c   d     40.   a   b    c    d
                               Project Scope Management      57


Answer Key
 1. a. Proper project scope definition
       Progressive elaboration of a project's specification
       must be coordinated carefully with proper scope
       definition, particularly when the project is p
                                                     erformed
       under contract. When properly defined, the project
       scope--the work to be done--should remain
       constant even when the product characteristics are
       elaborated progressively. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 6, 107-108

 2. b. WBS
       The WBS, along with the detailed scope statement
       and the WBS dictionary, defines the project's scope
       baseline, which provides the basis for any changes
       that may occur on the project. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131-132

 3. b. Prepare a scope management plan
       The work involved in the six Project Scope
       Management processes begins by preparing a scope
       management plan, which is a subsidiary plan for the
       project management plan. It describes the Project
       Scope Management processes from definition to
       control. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 109-110
58    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 4. c. Historical information
        Organizational process assets that can influence plan
        scope management include formal and informal
        policies, procedures, and guidelines impacting
        project scope management. Historical information
        and the lessons learned knowledge base are other
        examples. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 109

 5. c. Product requirements
        Completion of the project scope is measured against
        the project management plan, and completion of the
        product scope is measured against the requirements.
        In the project context, product scope consists of
        features and functions that characterize the product,
        service, or result. Project scope is the work that must
        be done to deliver the product, service, or result with
        specified features and functions. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 106

 6. c. Expert judgment
        Expert judgment is used to analyze the information
        needed to develop a project scope statement. It is
        applied to any technical details. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 122

 7. d. Lateral thinking
        Lateral thinking, brainstorming, and analysis of alter-
        natives are examples of alternatives generation that
        can be used to develop as many potential options as
        possible to execute and perform the project's work.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123
                               Project Scope Management        59


8. d. Bill of materials
       Product analysis techniques vary by application area,
       and each application area generally has accepted
       methods to translate project objectives into tangible
       deliverables and requirements. Other product a nalysis
       techniques include product breakdown, requirements
       analysis, and systems engineering. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 122

 9. b. Project scope statement
       Project exclusion identifies generally what is included
       within the project, and state explicitly what is
       excluded from the project, if a stakeholder might
       assume that a particular product, service, or result
       could be a project component. Project boundaries
       are described as part of the detailed project scope
       statement. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123-124

10. b. An error or omission in defining the scope of
       the product
       The bill of materials provides a hierarchical view of
       the physical assemblies, subassemblies, and com-
       ponents needed to build a manufactured product,
       whereas the WBS is a deliverable-oriented grouping
       of project components used to define the total scope
       of the project, providing a structured vision of what
       has to be delivered. Using a bill of materials where
       a WBS would be more appropriate may result in an
       ill-defined scope and subsequent change requests.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 125, 140; Ward 2008, 40
60    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


11. b. WBS
        Collecting requirements provides the basis for
        defining project scope and product scope. It also
        involves determining, documenting, and managing
        stakeholder needs to meet project objectives. The
        requirements become the foundation for the WBS;
        moreover, cost, schedule, and quality planning are
        built upon the requirements. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 110, 127

12. d. Project management methodology (PMM)
        The PMM is an organization-approved approach for
        project management that is used on every p    roject.
        It is not part of the project scope statement, which
        describes the project scope, major d  eliverables,
        assumptions, and constraints. It describes the
        project's deliverables and the work required to
        complete them. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123-124

13. b. Review the scope management plan
        The scope management plan is reviewed first as
        it provides clarity as to how the project team will
        determine which requirements need to be collected
        on the project. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 113

14. a. Deliverable at the lowest level of the WBS
        A work package is the lowest or smallest unit of
        work division in a project or WBS. The work pack-
        age can be scheduled, cost estimated, monitored,
        and controlled. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 126
                               Project Scope Management      61


15. a. Determine the voice of the customer
       Quality function deployment is an example of a
       facilitated workshop used in the manufacturing
       industry as a tool and technique to collect require-
       ments. It helps to determine the critical characteristics
       for new product development and starts by collecting
       customer needs, known as the voice of the customer.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 114

16. d. Project organizational units
       The WBS includes all work needed to be done to
       complete the project. The organizational breakdown
       structure (OBS) includes the organizational units
       responsible for completing the work. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 126, 548

17. b. Scope creep
       Project scope creep is typically the result of uncon-
       trolled changes. Scope control works to control the
       impact of any project scope changes. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 137

18. c. Sum costs, schedule, and resource information
       The key document generated from the create WBS
       process is the actual WBS. Each WBS component is
       assigned a unique identifier to provide a structure
       for hierarchical summation of costs, schedule, and
       resource information. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 132
62    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


19. d. Project performance measurements
        Variance analysis is a tool and technique for control
        scope. Project performance measurements are used
        to assess the magnitude of variance, to determine the
        cause of the variance, and to decide whether correc-
        tive or preventive action is required. [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 139

20. b. Nominal group technique
        The nominal group technique enhances brainstorm-
        ing with a voting process, which is used to rank the
        most useful ideas for further brainstorming or for
        prioritization. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 115

21. b. Identify and analyze the deliverables and
       related work
        Identifying and analyzing the deliverables and related
        work is the first step in the decomposition of a
        project. The deliverables should be defined in terms
        of how the project will be organized. For example,
        the major project deliverables may be used as the
        second level. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 128-129

22. c. Comply with relevant contractual provisions
        In addition to complying with any relevant contractual
        provisions, scope change control must be integrated
        with the project's overall change control system and
        with any systems in place to control project and
        product scope. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96, 137
                                Project Scope Management       63


23. a. An assumption
        Assumptions are factors that, for planning purposes,
        are considered to be true, real, or certain without
        proof or demonstration. They are listed in the project
        scope statement. [Planning]
        Ward 2008, 24; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 124 and 529

24. d. Differs from perform quality control in that validate
       scope is concerned with the acceptance--not the
       correctness--of the work results
        Documentation that the customer has accepted
        completed deliverables is an output of validate scope.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 134

25. b. Corrective action
        Recommended corrective action is an output from
        control scope. In addition to bringing expected
        future performance in line with the project manage-
        ment plan, it also serves to bring expected future
        performance in line with the project scope statement.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 140, 534

26. a. All projects, large and small
        A system is needed for careful monitoring of changes
        made to the requirements. Use of written change
        requests encourages the individuals asking for
        changes to take responsibility for their requests and
        reduces frivolous requests that may adversely affect
        the project. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94-97 140
64  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 27. c. Work authorization system
         The work authorization system is not used in control
         scope. The others are examples of organizational
         process assets that may require update as a result of
         scope control. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 140

 28. b. Costs authorized and incurred
         Work performance information is an output of vali-
         date scope. It emphasizes deliverables--whether or
         not they have started, their progress, and ones that
         have finished or have been accepted. [Monitoring
         and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 136

 29. a. Phase-to-phase relationship
         The requirements management plan defines how
         requirements will be analyzed, documented,
         and managed. It is strongly influenced by the
         phase-to-phase relationship. The project manager
         selects the most effective relationship for the project
         and documents it in the plan. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 42-44, 110

 30. d. Project verification
         The requirements traceability matrix is an output of
         the collect requirements process. It includes tracing
         requirements to business needs, opportunities, and
         objectives; project objectives; project scope: WBS
         deliverables; product design; product development;
         test strategy and scenarios; as well as high-level
         requirements to more detailed requirements. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 118-119
                                Project Scope Management     65


31. a. Should be reviewed according to the perform
       integrated change control process
        A requested change is an output from the control
        scope process. Such a change should be handled
        according to the integrated change control process
        and may result in an update to the scope baseline or
        other components of the project management plan.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 140

32. b. Change request
        The change requests are not an input of the validate
        scope process but are an output. The other items are
        all inputs to help the project manager validate the
        scope of the project. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2008, 124-125

33. d. Variance is relative to the scope baseline
        Approved change requests will most likely impact and
        cause updates to the WBS, WBS dictionary, and project
        scope statement. In other words, they will cause vari-
        ance to the scope baseline. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 139-140

34. c. Project requirements
        Various components of requirements documentation
        can be used. Examples are: business requirements,
        stakeholder requirements, solution requirements,
        project requirements, and requirements assumptions,
        dependencies, and constraints. Project requirements
        consist of acceptance criteria and levels of service
        performance, safety, and compliance. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 117-118
66    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


35. c. Deliverables
        Verified deliverables that are completed and
        checked for correctness are inputs to validate scope.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 135, 138-139

36. b. Develop a subproject WBS for the work package that
       is your company's responsibility
        Work packages are items at the lowest level of the
        WBS. A subproject is a smaller portion of the original
        project when a project is subdivided into more man-
        ageable components or pieces. A subproject WBS
        then breaks down work packages into greater detail.
        A subproject WBS generally is used when the project
        manager assigns a scope of work to another organi-
        zation, and the project manager at that organization
        must plan and manage the scope of work in greater
        detail. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 129, 564

37. a. Is a critical component of the scope baseline
        The project scope statement, along with the WBS
        and WBS dictionary, is a key input to scope control.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 138
                                Project Scope Management      67


38. c. Progressively elaborates characteristics
        The project scope statement describes the deliver-
        ables and the work required to create them. It also
        provides a common understanding of the scope
        among stakeholders. The product scope statement is
        a key component as it progressively elaborates the
        characteristics of the product, service, or result in
        the project charter and requirements documentation.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123-124

39. a. To depict product scope
        It is a tool and technique in collect requirements
        and is an example of a scope model. The context
        diagram visually depicts the product scope as it
        shows a business system (process, equipment, or
        computer, etc.) and how people and other systems
        (actors) interact with it. The diagram shows inputs
        to the business system, the actor(s) providing the
        input, outputs from the business system, and actor(s)
        receiving the output. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 117

40. b. WBS dictionary
        The WBS dictionary typically includes a code of
        accounts identifier, a statement of work, responsible
        organization, a list of schedule milestones, associated
        schedule activities, required resources, cost estimates,
        quality requirements, acceptance criteria, technical
        references, and agreement information. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 132
Project Time Management


Study Hints
The Project Time Management questions on the PMP(R) certi-
fication exam focus heavily on the program evaluation and
review technique (PERT), the critical path method (CPM),
the precedence diagramming method (PDM), and the critical
chain method; the differences between these four techniques;
and the appropriate circumstances for their use. The exam
tests your knowledge of how PERT/CPM networks are con-
structed, how schedules are computed, what the critical path
is, and how networks are used to analyze and solve project
scheduling, and resource allocation and leveling issues. There
is a good chance that you will be presented with a network
diagram that will be the subject of five or more questions.
Therefore, detailed knowledge of network scheduling is
essential. There also seems to be a focus on fast tracking as a
method to accelerate the project schedule. You must know the
advantages offered by networks over bar charts and network
diagrams. You also should understand the concept of float
(or slack) and how it presents challenges and opportunities to
project schedulers.
    Because a thorough understanding of networks and
scheduling is required to successfully answer questions on


                                     Zombie_rox              69
70     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Project Time Management, you should take a course relating
to that topic. If you cannot take a course, you may want to
consult the user's manual for one of the more popular desk-
top software project management packages. Typically, you
will find plenty of illustrations and short, easy-to-understand
scheduling exercises at the level of detail required to correctly
answer the exam questions. Another useful reference is PMI(R)'s
Practice Exam for Scheduling--Second Edition (2011).
   The PMBOK(R) Guide separates the function of Project Time
Management into seven processes: plan schedule manage-
ment, define activities, sequence activities, estimate activity
resources, estimate activity durations, develop schedule, and
control schedule. Review PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 6-1 before
taking the practice test. Know this chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Time Management
topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas
most likely to appear on the exam.
                              Project Time Management    71


Major Topics
Schedule management plan
Define activities

   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Milestone list

Sequence activities

   PDM
   Dependencies
   Leads and lags
   Project schedule network diagrams

Estimate activity resources
   Expert judgment
   Alternative analysis
   Published estimating data
   Bottom-up estimating
   Activity resource requirements
   Resource breakdown structure
   Resource calendars

Estimate activity durations

   Expert judgment
   Analogous estimating
   Parametric estimates
   Three-point estimates
   Reserve analysis
   Group decision-making techniques
   Activity duration estimates
72       PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Develop schedule

      Schedule network analysis
      Critical path method
      Critical chain method
      Resource optimization techniques
      Leads and lags
      Crashing and fast-tracking
      Project schedule
      Schedule baseline
      Project calendars

Control schedule

      Performance reviews
      Work performance information
      Change requests
      Updates
      Project management plan
      Project documents
                                  Project Time Management        73


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

   Use the following network diagram to answer
   questions 1 through 4. Activity names and duration
   are provided.


         A        C           D         E
         2        4           1         3



         B                F                          I
         6                1                          2



                      G                     H
                      5                     1



 1. What is the duration of the critical path in this network?
   a.   10
   b.   12
   c.   14
   d.   15

 2. What is the float for Activity G?
   a.   -2
   b.   0
   c.   1
   d.   4
74          PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


     3. If a project planner imposes a finish time of 14 on
        the project with no change in the start date or activity
        durations, what is the total float of Activity E?
       a.   -1
       b.   0
       c.   2
       d.   Cannot be determined

     4. If the imposed finish time in question 3 above is removed
        and reset to 16 and the duration of Activity H is changed
        to 3, what is the late finish for Activity G?
       a.   -11
       b.   11
       c.   -13
       d.   13

     5. Your company, which operates one of the region's largest
        chemical processing plants, has been convicted of illegally
        dumping toxic substances into the local river. The court
        has mandated that the required cleanup activities be
        completed by February 15. This date is an example of--
       a.   A key event
       b.   A milestone
       c.   A discretionary dependency
       d.   An external dependency
                                   Project Time Management     75


6. You are managing a construction project for a new city
   water system. The contract requires you to use special
   titanium piping equipment that is guaranteed not to
   corrode. The titanium pipe must be resting in the ground
   a total of 10 days before connectors can be installed.
   In this example, the 10-day period is defined as--
  a.   Lag
  b.   Lead
  c.   Float
  d.   Slack

7. Of the following tools and techniques, which one is NOT
   used for schedule control?
  a.   Fast tracking
  b.   What-if scenario analysis
  c.   Three-point estimates
  d.   Adjusting leads and lags

8. You are planning to conduct the team-building p     ortion
   of your new project management training c urriculum
   out-of-doors in the local park. You are limited to s cheduling
   the course at certain times of the year, and the best time
   for the course to begin is mid-July. One of the more
   common date constraints to use as you develop the
   project schedule is--
  a.   "Start no earlier than"
  b.   "Finish no earlier than"
  c.   "Fixed late start"
  d.   "Fixed early finish"
76          PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


     9. Project schedule development is an iterative process.
        If the start and finish dates are not realistic, the project
        probably will not finish as planned. You are w     orking
        with your team to define how to manage schedule
        changes. You documented your decisions in which of
        the following?
       a.   Schedule change control procedures
       b.   Schedule management plan
       c.   Schedule risk plan
       d.   Service-level agreement

 10. If, when developing your project schedule, you want to
     define a distribution of probable results for each schedule
     activity and use that distribution to calculate another
     distribution of probable results for the total project,
     the most common technique to use is--
       a.   PERT
       b.   Monte Carlo analysis
       c.   Linear programming
       d.   Concurrent engineering

 11. Your lead engineer estimates that a work package will
     most likely require 50 weeks to complete. It could be
     completed in 40 weeks if all goes well, but it could take
     180 weeks in the worst case. What is the PERT estimate
     for the expected duration of the work package?
       a.   45 weeks
       b.   70 weeks
       c.   90 weeks
       d.   140 weeks
                                 Project Time Management  77


12. Your customer wants the project to be completed six
    months earlier than planned. You believe you can meet
    this target by overlapping project activities. The approach
    you plan to use is known as--
   a.   Critical chain
   b.   Fast tracking
   c.   Leveling
   d.   Crashing

13. Activity A has a duration of three days and begins on the
    morning of Monday the 4th. The successor activity, B,
    has a finish-to-start relationship with A. The finish-to-start
    relationship has three days of lag, and activity B has a
    duration of four days. Sunday is a nonworkday. Such data
    can help to determine--
   a. The total duration of both activities is 8 days
   b. Calendar time between the start of A to the finish of B
      is 11 days
   c. The finish date of B is Wednesday the 13th
   d. Calendar time between the start of A to the finish of B
      is 14 days

14. You can use various estimating approaches to determine
    activity durations. When you have a limited amount of
    information available about your project, especially when
    in the early phases, the best approach to use is--
   a.   Bottom-up estimating
   b.   Analogous estimating
   c.   Reserve analysis
   d.   Parametric analysis
78  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 15. "I cannot test the software until I code the software."
     This expression describes which of the following
     dependencies?
    a.   Discretionary
    b.   Rational
    c.   Preferential
    d.   Mandatory or hard

 16. Working with your team to provide the basis for
     measuringand reporting schedule progress, you agree to
     use the--
    a.   Schedule management plan
    b.   Network diagram
    c.   Project schedule
    d.   Technical baseline

 17. Your approved project schedule was based on resource
     leveling because of a scarcity of resources. Management
     has now mandated that the project be completed as soon
     as possible. Which of the following methods will you use
     to recalculate the schedule?
    a.   Resource manipulation
    b.   Reverse resource allocation
    c.   Critical chain scheduling
    d.   Resource reallocation
                                      Project Time Management            79


18. Review the following network diagram and table. Of the
    various activities, which ones would you crash and in
    what order?

                             B         D
                             6         2

                     A                               G
                     4                               6
                             C         E
                             2         7


                                       F
   Letter = Activity                   12
   Number = Duration
             Time Required, Weeks           Cost $       Crashing Cost
  Activity    Normal     Crash      Normal       Crash   Per Weeks, $
     A           4         2         10,000     14,000        2,000
     B           6         5         30,000     42,500       12,500
     C           2         1          8,000      9,500        1,500
    D            2         1         12,000     18,000        6,000
     E           7         5         40,000     52,000        6,000
     F          12         3         20,000     29,000        3,000
    G            6         2          5,000     30,000        6,000


  a.   A,    C,   E, and F
  b.   A,    B,   D, and F
  c.   A,    B,   E, and F
  d.   C,    A,   F, and G

19. You are remodeling your kitchen and decide to prepare
    a network diagram for this project. Your appliances
    must be purchased and available for installation by
    the time the cabinets are completed. In this example,
    these relationships are--
  a.   Start-to-finish
  b.   Finish-to-start
  c.   Start-to-start
  d.   Finish-to-finish
80    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


20. Decomposition is a technique used for both WBS devel-
    opment and activity definition. Which following statement
    best describes the role decomposition plays in activity
    definition as compared to creating the WBS?
   a. Final output is described in terms of work packages in
      the WBS.
   b. Final output is described as deliverables or tangible items.
   c. Final output is described as schedule activities.
   d. Decomposition is used the same way in scope
      definition and activity definition.

21. When sequencing project activities in the schedule, all the
    following are true EXCEPT--
   a. There may be scheduled dates for specific milestones
   b. Every activity is connected to at least one predecessor
      and at least one successor
   c. Lead or lag time may be required
   d. Necessary sequencing of events may be described by
      the activity attributes

22. A schedule performance index of less than 1.0 indicates
    that the--
   a. Project is running behind the monetary value of the
      work it planned to accomplish
   b. Earned value physically accomplished thus far is 100%
   c. Project has experienced a permanent loss of time
   d. Project may not be on schedule, but the project
      manager need not be concerned
                                 Project Time Management           81


23. Various tools and techniques are available to sequence
    activities, and several factors can help to determine which
    tool or technique to select. When a project manager
    decides to include sub-networks or a fragment network
    as part of his or her scheduling technique, what does this
    decision say about the project?
   a. The work is unique requiring special network dia-
      grams at various stages.
   b. Software that manages resources is available over an
      existing electronic network.
   c. Several identical or nearly identical series of activities
      are repeated throughout the project.
   d. Multiple critical paths exist in the project.

24. To meet regulatory requirements, you need to crash your
    project schedule. Your first step is to compute--
   a. The cost and time slope for each critical activity that
      can be expedited
   b. The cost of additional resources to be added to the
      project's critical path
   c. The time saved in the overall schedule when tasks are
      expedited on the critical path
   d. Three probabilistic time estimates of PERT for each
      critical path activity

25. Which one of the following is a key input to the define
    activities process?
   a.   Project   management plan
   b.   Project   scope statement
   c.   Project   scope baseline
   d.   Project   charter
82    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 26. Unlike bar charts, milestone charts show--
     a. Scheduled start or completion of major deliverables
        and key external interfaces
     b. Activity start and end dates of critical tasks
     c. Expected durations of the critical path
     d. Dependencies between complementary projects

 27. Project managers should pay attention to c ritical
     and subcritical activities when evaluating project
     time performance. One way to do this is to analyze
     10 subcriticalpaths in order of ascending float. This
     approach is part of--
     a.   Variance analysis
     b.   Simulation
     c.   Earned value management
     d.   Trend analysis

 28. An activity has an early start date of the 10th and a late
     start date of the 19th. The activity has a duration of four
     days. There are no nonworkdays. From the information
     given, what can be concluded about the activity?
     a. Total float for the activity is nine days.
     b. The early finish date of the activity is the end of the
        day on the 14th.
     c. The late finish date is the 25th.
     d. The activity can be completed in two days if the
        resources devoted to it are doubled.
                                  Project Time Management         83


29. In project development, schedule information such as who
    will perform the work, where the work will be performed,
    activity type, and WBS classification are examples of--
   a.   Activity attributes
   b.   Constraints
   c.   Data in the WBS repository
   d.   Refinements

30. Which of the following is a key input to define activities?
   a.   Project management plan
   b.   Project scope management plan
   c.   Schedule management plan
   d.   Project management software

31. The purpose of using what-if analysis in schedule control
    is to--
   a. Review scenarios to bring the schedule in line with
      the plan
   b. Document requested changes
   c. Provide additional details as to when the schedule
      baseline should be updated
   d. Update the activity attributes

32. Several types of float are found in project networks. Float
    that is used by a particular activity and does NOT affect
    the float in later activities is called--
   a.   Extra float
   b.   Free float
   c.   Total float
   d.   Expected float
84        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 33. All the following statements regarding critical chain
     method are true EXCEPT--
     a. It modifies the schedule to account for limited resources
     b. The first step is to use conservative estimates for
        activity durations
     c. Duration buffers are added on the critical path
     d. It focuses on managing buffer activity durations

 34. You are managing a new technology project designed to
     improve the removal of hazardous waste from your city.
     You are in the planning phase of this project and have
     prepared your network diagram. Your next step is to--
     a. Describe any unusual sequencing in the network
     b. State the number resources required to complete
        each activity
     c. Establish a project calendar and link it to individual
        resource calendar
     d. Determine which schedule compression technique is
        the most appropriate, because your customer requests
        that the project be completed as soon as possible

 35. The risk register may need to be updated as an output of
     which following process:
     a.   Define activities
     b.   Sequence activities
     c.   Estimate activity resources
     d.   Control schedule
                                 Project Time Management  85


36. You are managing a project that will use a virtual team
    with team members on three different continents. Your
    company is looking to use the virtual team to provide
    a lower cost product by using resources in countries
    that have a favorable exchange rate to that of your
    country. To assist in this process as you estimate resource
    requirements, it is helpful to consider--
   a.   Bottom-up estimating
   b.   Published estimating data
   c.   Analogous estimating
   d.   Reserve analysis

37. Activity A has a pessimistic (P) estimate of 36 days, a
    most likely (ML) estimate of 21 days, and an optimistic
    (O) estimate of 6 days. What is the probability that activity
    A will be completed in 16 to 26 days?
   a.   55.70 percent
   b.   68.26 percent
   c.   95.46 percent
   d.   99.73 percent

38. You are managing a project to redesign a retail store
    layout to improve customer throughput and efficiency.
    Much project work must be done on site and will require
    the active participation of store employees who are
    lifelong members of a powerful union with a reputation
    for labor unrest. One important component of your
    schedule must be--
   a.   A resource capabilities matrix
   b.   Buffers and reserves
   c.   A resource calendar
   d.   A resource histogram
86      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


39. To account for uncertainty in a schedule, reserve analysis
    may be used. All the following are examples of contin-
    gency reserves EXCEPT--
   a.   Fixed number of work periods
   b.   Percent of the estimated activity duration
   c.   Buffers
   d.   Productivity metrics

40. The reason that the schedule performance index (SPI) is
    shown as a ratio is to--
   a. Enable a detailed analysis of the schedule regardless of
      the value of the schedule variance
   b. Distinguish between critical path and noncritical path
      work packages
   c. Provide the ability to show performance for a specified
      time period for trend analysis
   d. Measure the actual time to complete the project
                       Project Time Management    87


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d    21.   a   b    c    d

2.    a   b    c   d    22.   a   b    c    d

3.    a   b    c   d    23.   a   b    c    d

4.    a   b    c   d    24.   a   b    c    d

5.    a   b    c   d    25.   a   b    c    d

6.    a   b    c   d    26.   a   b    c    d

7.    a   b    c   d    27.   a   b    c    d

8.    a   b    c   d    28.   a   b    c    d

9.    a   b    c   d    29.   a   b    c    d

10.   a   b    c   d    30.   a   b    c    d

11.   a   b    c   d    31.   a   b    c    d

12.   a   b    c   d    32.   a   b    c    d

13.   a   b    c   d    33.   a   b    c    d

14.   a   b    c   d    34.   a   b    c    d

15.   a   b    c   d    35.   a   b    c    d

16.   a   b    c   d    36.   a   b    c    d

17.   a   b    c   d    37.   a   b    c    d

18.   a   b    c   d    38.   a   b    c    d

19.   a   b    c   d    39.   a   b    c    d

20.   a   b    c   d    40.   a   b    c    d
                                       Project Time Management            89


Answer Key
 1. d. 15
       The total duration for the path B-C-D-E-I is 15.
       The duration of any other path in the network is less
       than 15. [Planning]
       Meredith and Mantel 2012, Chapter 8
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 176-177

 2. c. 1
       Float = (late finish - early finish) or
               (late start - early start)                  ES    EF
       Activity G     LF = 12 (12 - 11) = (1)
                      EF = 11                     Legend
                      LS = 7 (7 - 6) = (1)
                      ES = 6
                                                           LS    LF

       0        2   6    10        10 11         10 13
            A           C              D           E
            2           4              1           3
       4        6   6    10        10 11         10 13
       0        6             6      7                            13 15
            B                      F                                 I
            6                      1                                 2
       0        6             11 12                               13 15
                        6     11                   11 12
                         G                             H
                          5                            1
                        7 12                       12 13
                                                                [Planning]

       Meredith and Mantel 2012, Chapter 8
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 176-177
90        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


     3. a. -1
              The imposed finish date becomes the late finish for
              Activity I. The late dates for each activity need to be
              recalculated. The dates for Activity E become--
      ES = 10
      EF = 13
      LS = 9
      LF = 12
 Total float = LS - ES or 9 - 10 = (-1) or
               LS - EF or 12 - 13 = (-1)

 0        2     6       10        10 11            10 13
      A             C                     D            E
      2             4                     1            3
 3        5     5       9         9           10   9   12
 0        6                  6        7                         13 15
      B                           F                                I
      6                           1                                2
 -1       5                  10 11                              12 14
                                                                        imposed
                    6        11                        11 12            finish
                                                                        time
                         G                                 H
                         5                                 1
                    6        11                        11 12
                                                               [Planning]

              Meredith and Mantel 2012, Chapter 8
              PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 176-177
                                         Project Time Management     91


4. b. 11
      The late dates for all activities need to be recalculated
      given the changed duration. Activity G's revised late
      dates are--

      LF = 11
      LS = 6

      0        2   6       10        10 11    10 13
           A           C                 D       E
           2           4                 1       3
      5        7   7       11        11 12    11 14
      0        6                6      7                     14 16
           B                         F                          I
           6                         1                          2
      0        6                10 11                        14 16
                       6        11               11 14
                            G                        H
                            5                        3
                       6        11               11 14
                                                           [Planning]

      Meredith and Mantel 2012, Chapter 8
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 176-177

5. b. A milestone
      A milestone is a significant point or event in the
      project. Milestones may be required by the project
      sponsor, customer, or other external factors for the
      completion of certain deliverables. They are s imilar
      to schedule activities, with the same structure and
      objectives, but they have zero duration as they
      represent a moment in time. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 153
92    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 6. a. Lag
        For example, in a finish-to-start dependency with a
        20-day lag, the successor activity cannot start until
        20 days after the predecessor has finished. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 158-159

 7. c. Three-point estimates
        Three-point estimates are used to determine the
        estimates that go into the schedule. [Planning and
        Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 170-171, 188-190

 8. a. "Start no earlier than"
        Imposed dates on schedule activity starts of finishes
        can be used to restrict the start of finish to occur
        either no earlier than a specified date or no later than
        a specified date. Although all four date constraints
        typically are available in project management soft-
        ware, "start no earlier than" and "finish no later than"
        constraints are more commonly used. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 543

 9. b. Schedule management plan
        The schedule management plan is part of the overall
        project management plan and defines, among other
        things, how schedule changes will be managed.
        Whether it is formal or informal, highly detailed or
        broadly framed, it generally is based on specific
        project needs. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 148-149
                                 Project Time Management         93


10. b. Monte Carlo analysis
       What-if scenarios (simulation) is a tool and technique
       for developing schedules by which multiple project
       durations with different sets of activity assumptions
       are calculated. Monte Carlo analysis is the most
       commonly used simulation technique. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180

11. b. 70 weeks
                 Optimistic + (4 x Most likely) + Pessimistiic
        E(t) =
                                     6
                 40 + 200 + 180   420
            =                   =     = 70 weeks
                        6          6
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 170-171

12. b. Fast tracking
       Fast tracking is a way to accelerate the project schedule.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 181, 190, and 540
94      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 13. b. Calendar time between the start of A to the finish of
        B is 11 days
          The duration of A, which is three, is added to the
          duration of B, which is four, for a total of seven.
          The three days between the activities is lag and not
          duration. The lag is a constraint and must be taken
          into account as part of the network calculations,
          but it does not consume resources. The total time by
          the calendar is 11 days as counted from the morning
          of Monday the 4th. The lag occurs over Thursday,
          Friday, and Saturday. Sunday is a nonworkday, so
          activity B does not start until Monday the 11th.
          Therefore, the calendar time is 11 days, and activity
          B ends on Thursday the 14th. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 156, 158-159, and 180

 14. b. Analogous estimating
          Although limitations exist with all estimating approach,
          analogous estimating is often used when there is a
          limited amount of information for the project. It uses
          historical information and expert judgment. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 169

 15. d. Mandatory or hard
          Mandatory dependencies may be required contractu-
          ally or be inherent in the nature of the project work.
          They describe a relationship in which the s uccessor
          activity cannot be started because of p hysical
          constraints until the predecessor activity has been
          finished. For example, software cannot be tested
          until it has been developed (or coded). They should
          not be confused with assigning schedule constraints
          in the scheduling tool. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 157
                                Project Time Management         95


16. c. Project schedule
       The approved project schedule is a key input to
       schedule control. It is the schedule baseline, as it
       is the approved version of a schedule model, and
       it provides the basis for measuring and reporting
       schedule performance. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 181,187

17. d. Resource reallocation
       While resource leveling will often result in a project
       duration that is longer than the preliminary schedule
       as the original critical path probably will change and
       increase, it can also be used to get a schedule back
       on track by reassigning activities from noncritical to
       critical path activities. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 179

18. d. C, A, F, and G
       First, it is necessary to determine the critical path,
       which is A, C, F, and G. To determine the lowest
       weekly crashing cost, start with C at $1,500 per
       week. The next activity is A, followed by F and G.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180; Kerzner 2009, 516-519

19. d. Finish-to-finish
       The completion of the work of the successor activity
       depends upon the completion of the work of the
       predecessor activity. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 156
96  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 20. c. Final output is described as schedule activities.
         In the create WBS process, final output is described
         as deliverables or tangible items. In the define
         activities process, final output is described as
         activities. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 151

 21. b. Every activity is connected to at least one predecessor
        and at least one successor
         The sequence activity process involves identifying
         and documenting relationships among the project
         activities. However, the last activity or milestone are
         not connected to at least one successor. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 156

 22. a. Project is running behind the monetary value of the
        work it planned to accomplish
         The SPI represents how much of the originally
         scheduled work has been accomplished at a given
         period in time, thus providing the project team with
         insight as to whether the project is on schedule.
         [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 189-190, 224
                                 Project Time Management         97


23. c. Several identical or nearly identical series of activities
       are repeated throughout the project.
        When identical network descriptions are repeated
        throughout a project, templates of those activities can
        be developed. If those series of tasks are repeated
        several times, the template can be updated several
        times. Software can be used with the templates to
        facilitate documenting and adapting them for future
        use. The sub-network or fragment tends to represent
        a sub-project or a work package and is often used
        to illustrate or study some potential or proposed
        schedule condition, such as a change in preferential
        schedule logic or the scope of the project. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 564

24. a. The cost and time slope for each critical activity that
       can be expedited
        Slope = (Crash cost - Normal cost)/(Crash time -
        Normal time). This calculation shows the cost per
        day of crashing the project. The slope is negative to
        indicate that as the time required for a project or task
        decreases, the cost increases. If the costs and times
        are the same regardless of whether they are crashed
        or normal, the activity cannot be expedited. [Planning]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 390; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide,
        2013, 181

25. c. Project scope baseline
        The scope baseline--made up of the scope state-
        ment, WBS, and WBS dictionary--is a key input to
        the define activities process and are used to develop
        the activity list that subsequently will help to create
        the schedule. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 151
98      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 26. a. Scheduled start or completion of major deliverables
        and key external interfaces
          Milestones are singular points in time, such as the
          start or completion of a significant activity or group
          of activities. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 182

 27. a. Variance analysis
          Performance of variance analysis during the schedule
          monitoring process is a key element of time control.
          Float variance is an essential planning component for
          evaluating project time performance. [Monitoring and
          Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 189

 28. a. Total float for the activity is nine days.
          Total float or slack is computed by subtracting the
          early start date from the late start date, or 19 - 10 = 9.
          To compute the early finish date given a duration of 4,
          we would start counting the activity on the morning
          of the 10th; therefore, the activity would be com-
          pleted at the end of day 13, not 14 (10, 11, 12, 13).
          If we started the activity on its late start date on the
          morning of the 19th, we would finish at the end of
          day 22, not 25. Insufficient information is provided to
          determine whether this activity can be completed in
          2 days if the resources are doubled. [Planning]
          Meredith and Mantel 2012, 352-353; PMI(R), PMBOK(R)
          Guide, 2013, 177
                                 Project Time Management         99


29. a. Activity attributes
        Identifying activity attributes is helpful for further
        selection and sorting of planned activities. They
        are used for schedule development and for report
        formatting purposes. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 153

30. c. Schedule management plan
        While there are a number of inputs to define
        activities, the schedule management plan is a
        key input. It shows the level of detail necessary to
        manage the work. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 150

31. a. Review scenarios to bring the schedule in line with
       the plan
        A corrective action is anything that is done to bring
        expected future schedule performance in line with
        the schedule baseline. Regarding the project sched-
        ule, it usually means taking action to speed up the
        project. One way to determine why the schedule
        performance is not in line with the plan is what-if
        analysis, which may address schedule activities and
        other scenarios other than the activity that is actually
        causing the variance. It evaluates scenarios in order to
        predict their effect on the project's outcomes, either
        positive or negative. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180, 186

32. b. Free float
        Free float is defined as the amount of time an a ctivity
        can be delayed without delaying the early start of
        any immediately succeeding activities. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 177
100    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


33. b. The first step is to use conservative estimates for
       activity durations
        When using critical chain techniques, the initial
        project schedule is developed using duration
        estimates with required dependencies and defined
        constraints as inputs. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178

34. a. Describe any unusual sequencing in the network
        A summary narrative can accompany the schedule
        network diagram and describe the approach used to
        sequence the activities in the network. This narrative
        also should describe any unusual sequences in the
        network. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 159

35. b. Sequence activities
        The risk register may require updates in both the
        sequence activities and develop schedule processes.
        In the sequence activity process, the activity lists
        and activity attributes may need updates as well.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 160, 185

36. b. Published estimating data
        In estimating activity resources, published estimating
        data is a tool and technique that is used as many
        companies routinely publish updated production rates
        and unit costs of resources. This includes labor trades,
        material, and equipment for different countries and
        geographic locations in these countries. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 164
                               Project Time Management       101


37. b. 68.26 percent
       First, compute the standard deviation:

            P -O    36 - 6
       =         or        = 5 days
              6       6

       Next, compute PERT expected time:

        P + 4( ML ) + O    36 + 4(21) + 6
                        or                = 21 days
               6                 6

       Finally, determine range of outcomes using 1:

       21-5 = 16 days, and 21+5 = 26 days

       Simply defined, 1 is the amount on either side of
       the mean of a normal distribution that will c ontain
       approximately 68.26 percent of the population.
       [Planning]
       Meredith and Mantel 2012, 348-350

38. c. A resource calendar
       Project and resource calendars identify periods
       when work is allowed. Project calendars affect
       all resources. Resource calendars affect a specific
       resource or a resource category, such as a labor
       contract that requires certain workers to work on
       certain days of the week. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 163, 184, and 558
102    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


39. d. Productivity metrics
        Duration estimates may include contingency reserves,
        and contingency should be identified clearly in
        schedule documentation. They are built into the
        overall project schedule to account for uncertainty.
        They also may be developed using quantitative
        analysis methods. When more information is known
        about the project, the contingency reserve may be
        used, reduced, or eliminated. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 171

40. c. Provide the ability to show performance for a
       specified time period for trend analysis
        Because schedule performance index (SPI) and cost
        performance index (CPI) are expressed as ratios,
        they can be used to show performance for a s pecific
        time period or trends over a long-time horizon.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 650-652
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190, 219, and 224
Project Cost Management


Study Hints
You do not need to be a certified public accountant to suc-
cessfully answer the Project Cost Management questions on
the PMP(R) certification exam. PMI(R) addresses cost management
from a project manager's perspective, which is much more
general than that of an accountant. However, these questions
are not easy. Far from it! Exam takers find the Project Cost
Management questions more difficult than most of the o    thers
because they address such a broad range of cost issues
(for example, cost estimating, earned value, and creating and
interpreting Scurves) and require a significant amount of
study time.
   You may find questions relating to contract cost manage-
ment. Because cost considerations are heavily affected by
contract type, and Project Procurement Management is one
of the ten PMBOK(R) Guide areas on which you will be tested,
time spent studying that area will help to prepare you for the
cost questions on the exam and vice versa.
   The exam may include several questions that require you
to know and solve specific, albeit simple, formulas. You must
have a thorough knowledge of earned value--what it is and
how it is computed. Study Table 7-1 as it provides information

                                                           103
104     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


on the formulas, how to calculate them, and how to interpret
the results.
    For additional information on project estimating, you may
wish to review PMI(R)'s Practice Standard for Project Estimating,
2011. For additional information on earned value analysis
from a PMI(R) perspective, you may also wish to consult PMI(R)'s
Practice Standard for Earned Value Management--Second
Edition, 2011.
    PMI(R) views Project Cost Management as a four-step process
comprising plan cost management, estimate costs, determine
budgets, and control costs. See PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 7-1 for
an overview of this structure. Know this chart thoroughly.
    Important: PMI(R) allows the use of standard six-function
(+, -, x, /, ,%) business calculators. These calculators must
be silent and have a self-contained power source. They are
NOT to include a printing mechanism or a full alphabetic
character set. Programmable calculators, which are instru-
ments that can store mathematical formulas, are prohibited.
The testing center will provide calculators for your use during
the exam.
    Following is a list of the major Project Cost Management
topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas
most likely to appear on the exam.
                              Project Cost Management    105


Major Topics
Project cost management
Life-cycle cost (LCC)
Cost management plan
Estimate costs

   Scope baseline
   Human resource plan
   Project schedule
   Risk register
   Cost estimating methods
   Analogous estimating
   Parametric modeling
   Bottom-up estimating
   Three-point estimates
   Vendor bid analysis
   Reserve analysis
   Cost of quality
   Accuracy of estimates
   Order of magnitude
   Budget
   Definitive
   Direct versus indirect costs
   Contingency/management reserve
   Activity cost estimates
   Basis of estimates

Cost risk and contract type
Determine budgets

   Cost aggregation
   Reserve analysis
   Funding limit reconciliation

Cost baseline
106     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Control costs

   Performance reviews
   Variance analysis
   Forecasting

Earned value management (EVM)
The most rudimentary building blocks

   Cost variance (CV)
   Schedule variance (SV)
   Cost performance index (CPI)
   Forecasting
   Schedule performance index (SPI)
   Budget at completion (BAC)
   Variance at completion (VAC)
   Estimate to complete (ETC)
   Estimate at completion (EAC)
   To-complete performance index (TCPI)

Earned value measurement techniques

   Weighted milestones
   Fixed formula
   Percent complete

Work performance measurements
                                Project Cost Management        107


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

   You are using earned value progress reporting for
   your current project in an effort to teach your software
   developers the benefits of earned value. You plan to
   display project results on the cafeteria bulletin board
   so that the team knows how the project is p   rogressing.
   Use the current status, listed below, to answer
   questions 1 through 4:

         PV    =   $2,200
         EV    =   $2,000
         AC    =   $2,500
         BAC   =   $10,000

 1. According to earned value analysis, the SV and status of
    the project described above is--
   a.   -$300; the project is ahead of schedule
   b.   +$8,000; the project is on schedule
   c.   +$200; the project is ahead of schedule
   d.   -$200; the project is behind schedule

 2. What is the CPI for this project, and what does it tell us
    about cost performance thus far?
   a.   0.20; actual costs are exactly as planned
   b.   0.80; actual costs have exceeded planned costs
   c.   0.80; actual costs are less than planned costs
   d.   1.25; actual costs have exceeded planned costs
108     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 3. The CV for this project is--
   a.   300
   b.   -$300
   c.   500
   d.   -$500

 4. What is the EAC for this project, and what does it represent?
   a. $12,500; the revised estimate for total project cost
      (based on performance thus far)
   b. $10,000; the revised estimate for total project cost
      (based on performance thus far)
   c. $12,500; the original project budget
   d. $10,000; the original project budget

 5. You have now prepared your cost management plan
    so now you are preparing your project's cost estimate.
    You decided to use analogous estimating. Which of the
    following is NOT characteristic of analogous estimating?
   a.   Supports top-down estimating
   b.   Is a form of expert judgment
   c.   Has an accuracy rate of 10% of actual costs
   d.   Involves using the cost of a previous, similar project as
        the basis for estimating current project cost

 6. All the following are outputs of the estimate cost process
    EXCEPT--
   a.   Activity cost estimates
   b.   Basis of estimates
   c.   Documented constraints
   d.   Cost baseline
                              Project Cost Management       109


7. You must consider direct costs, indirect costs, overhead
   costs, and general and administrative costs during cost
   estimating. Which of the following is NOT an example of
   a direct cost?
  a.   Salary of the project manager
  b.   Subcontractor expenses
  c.   Materials used by the project
  d.   Electricity

8. If the cost variance is the same as the schedule variance
   and both numbers are greater than zero, then--
  a.   The cost variance is due to the schedule variance
  b.   The variance is favorable to the project
  c.   The schedule variance can be easily corrected
  d.   Labor rates have escalated since the project began

9. You are responsible for preparing a cost estimate for
   a large World Bank project. You decide to prepare a
   bottom-up estimate because your estimate needs to be
   as accurate as possible. Your first step is to--
  a. Locate a computerized tool to assist in the process
  b. Use the cost estimate from a previous project to help
     you prepare this estimate
  c. Identify and estimate the cost for each work package
     or activity
  d. Consult with subject matter experts and use their
     suggestions as the basis for your estimate
110     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


10. Management has grown weary of the many surprises,
    mostly negative, that occur on your projects. In an effort
    to provide stakeholders with an effective performance
    metric, you will use the to-complete performance index
    (TCPI). Its purpose is to--
   a. Determine the schedule and cost performance needed
      to complete the remaining work within management's
      financial goal for the project
   b. Determine the cost performance needed to complete
      the remaining work within management's financial
      goal for the project
   c. Predict final project costs
   d. Predict final project schedule and costs

11. If operations on a work package were estimated to cost
    $1,500 and finish today but, instead, have cost $1,350 and
    are only two-thirds complete, the cost variance is--
   a.   $150
   b.   -$150
   c.   -$350
   d.   -$500

12. When you review cost performance data on your p     roject,
    different responses will be required depending on
    the degree of variance or control thresholds from the
    baseline. For example, a variance of 10 percent might
    not require immediate action, whereas a variance of
    100 percentwill require investigation. A description
    of how you plan to manage cost variances should be
    included in the--
   a.   Cost management plan
   b.   Change management plan
   c.   Performance measurement plan
   d.   Variance management plan
                                   Project Cost Management  111


13. As of the fourth month on the Acme project, cumulative
    planned expenditures were $100,000. Actual expenditures
    totaled $120,000. How is the Acme project doing?
   a.   It is ahead of schedule.
   b.   It is in trouble because of a cost overrun.
   c.   It will finish within the original budget.
   d.   The information is insufficient to make an assessment.

14. On your project, you need to assign costs to the time
    period in which they are incurred. To do this, you should--
   a. Identify the project components so that costs can be
      allocated
   b. Use the project schedule as an input to determine budget
   c. Prepare a detailed and accurate cost estimate
   d. Prepare a cost performance plan

15. You have a number of costs to track and manage because
    your project is technically very complex. They include
    direct costs and indirect (overhead) costs. You have found
    that managing overhead costs is particularly difficult
    because they--
   a. Are handled on a project-by-project basis
   b. Represent only direct labor costs
   c. Represent only equipment and materials needed for
      the project
   d. Are usually beyond the project manager's control

16. If you want to calculate the ETC based on your expecta-
    tions that similar variances to those noted to date will not
    occur, you should use which of the following formulas?
   a.   ETC   =   BAC - EV
   b.   ETC   =   (BAC - EV)/CPI
   c.   ETC   =   AC + EAC
   d.   ETC   =   AC + BAC - EV
112     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 17. You receive a frantic phone call from your vice president
     who says she is going to meet with a prospective c lient
     in 15 minutes to discuss a large and complex project. She
     asks you how much the project will cost. You quickly
     think of some similar past projects, factor in a few
     unknowns, and give her a number. What type of estimate
     did you just provide?
   a.   Definitive
   b.   Budget
   c.   Order-of-magnitude
   d.   Detailed

18. Your approved cost baseline has changed because of
    a major scope change on your project. Your next step
    should be to--
   a.   Estimate the magnitude of the scope change
   b.   Issue a change request
   c.   Document lessons learned
   d.   Execute the approved scope change

19. Which of the following is a tool for analyzing a design,
    determining its functions, and assessing how to provide
    those functions' cost effectively?
   a.   Pareto diagram
   b.   Value analysis
   c.   Configuration management
   d.   Value engineering

20. The cumulative CPI has been shown to be relatively
    stable after what percentage of project completion?
   a.   5% to 10%
   b.   15% to 20%
   c.   25% to 35%
   d.   50% to 75%
                                Project Cost Management       113


21. The undistributed budget is part of the--
   a.   Management reserve
   b.   Performance measurement baseline
   c.   Level-of-effort cost accounts
   d.   General and administrative accounts

22. It is expensive to lease office space in cities around
    the world. Office space can cost approximately USD
    $80 per square foot in Tampa, Florida. And it can cost
    approximately 50,000 per square meter in Tokyo.
    These "averages" can help a person to determine how
    much it will cost to lease office space in these cities
    based on the amount of space leased. These estimates
    are examples of--
   a.   Variance analysis
   b.   Parametric estimating
   c.   Bottom-up estimating
   d.   Reserve analysis

23. Your project manager has requested that you provide him
    with a forecast of project costs for the next 12 months.
    He needs this information to determine if the budget
    should be increased or decreased on this major construc-
    tion project. In addition to the usual information sources,
    which of the following should you also consider?
   a.   Cost estimates from similar projects
   b.   WBS
   c.   Project schedule
   d.   Costs that have been authorized and incurred
114     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


24. There are a number of different earned value manage-
    ment rules of performance measurement that can be
    established as part of the cost management plan. Which
    one of the following is NOT an example of such a rule?
   a.   Code of accounts allocation provision
   b.   Formulas to determine the ETC
   c.   Earned value credit criteria
   d.   Definition of the WBS level

25. Which of the following calculations CANNOT be used to
    determine EAC?
   a. EV to date plus the remaining project budget
   b. Accepts actual costs and predicts future ETC work
      will be done at the budgeted rate
   c. Assumes what the program has experienced can be
      expected to continue
   d. ETC will be performed at an efficiency rate consider-
      ing both the CPI and SPI

26. Typically, the statement "no one likes to estimate, because
    they know their estimate will be proven incorrect" is true.
    However, you have been given the challenge of estimating
    the costs for your nuclear reactor project. A basic assump-
    tion that you need to make early in this process is--
   a. How direct and indirect costs will be handled
   b. Whether or not experts will be available to assist you
      in this process
   c. If there will be a multiyear project budget
   d. Whether the project has required delivery dates
                               Project Cost Management  115


27. By reviewing cumulative cost curves, the project manager
    can monitor--
   a.   EV
   b.   PV
   c.   CVs
   d.   CPI

28. Control accounts--
   a.   Are charge accounts for personnel time management
   b.   Summarize project costs at level 2 of the WBS
   c.   Identify and track management reserves
   d.   Represent the basic level at which project performance
        is measured and reported

29. Performance review meetings are held to assess s chedule
    activity and work packages over-running or under-running
    the budget and to determine any estimated funds needed
    to complete work in progress. Typically, if EV is being
    used, all but which of the following information is
    determined?
   a.   Variance analysis
   b.   Trend analysis
   c.   Time reporting systems
   d.   Earned value performance

30. Overall cost estimates must be allocated to individual
    activities to establish the cost performance baseline.
    In an ideal situation, a project manager would prefer to
    prepare estimates--
   a. Before the budget is complete
   b. After the budget is approved by management
   c. Using a parametric estimating technique and model
      specific for that project type
   d. Using a bottom-up estimating technique
116  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 31. According to learning curve theory, when many items are
     produced repetitively--
    a. Unit costs decrease geometrically as production rates
       increase linearly
    b. Unit costs decrease as production rates increase
    c. Unit costs decrease in a regular pattern as more units
       are produced
    d. Costs of training increase as the level of automation
       increases

 32. The method of calculating the EAC by assuming the
     ETC work will be performed at the same cumulative CPI
     incurred by the project to date is used most often when--
    a. Current variances are viewed as atypical ones
    b. Original estimating assumptions are no longer reliable
       because conditions have changed
    c. Current variances are viewed as typical of future
       variances
    d. Original estimating assumptions are considered to be
       fundamentally flawed

 33. Increased attention to return on investment (ROI)
     now requires you to complete a financial analysis of
     the p
          ayback period on your project. Such an analysis
     identifies the--
    a.   Ratio of discounted revenues over discounted costs
    b.   Future value of money invested today
    c.   Amount of time before net cash flow becomes positive
    d.   Point in time where costs exceed profit
                                Project Cost Management       117


34. A revised cost baseline may be required in cost control
    when--
   a. CVs are severe, and a realistic measure of performance
      is needed
   b. Updated cost estimates are prepared and distributed
      to stakeholders
   c. Corrective action must be taken to bring expected
      future performance in line with the project plan
   d. EAC shows that additional funds are needed to com-
      plete the project even if a scope change is not needed

35. As project manager, you identified a number of accept-
    able tolerances as part of your earned value management
    system. During execution, some "unacceptable" variances
    occurred. After each "unacceptable" variance occurred,
    you did which one of the following first?
   a.   Updated the budget
   b.   Prepared a revised cost estimate
   c.   Adjusted the project plan
   d.   Documented lessons learned

36. Assume that the project cost estimates have been pre-
    pared for each activity and the basis of these estimates
    has been determined. Now, as the project manager for
    your nutrition awareness program in your hospital, you
    are preparing your budget. Because you have estimates
    for more than 1,200 separate activities, you have decided
    to first--
   a. Aggregate these estimates by work packages
   b. Aggregate these estimates by control accounts to
      facilitate the use of earned value management
   c. Use the results of previous projects to predict total costs
   d. Set your cost performance baseline
118     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


37. The cumulative cost curve for planned and actual
    expenditures--
   a.   Helps to monitor project performance at a glance
   b.   Is used for calculating the CPI
   c.   Is also known as a histogram
   d.   Forecasts total project expenditures

38. The reason that the cost performance index (CPI) is
    shown as a ratio is to--
   a. Enable a detailed analysis of the schedule regardless of
      the value of the schedule variance
   b. Distinguish between critical path and noncritical path
      work packages
   c. Provide the ability to show performance for a specified
      time period for trend analysis
   d. Measure the actual time to complete the project

39. Assume that your actual costs are $800; your planned
    value is $1,200; and your earned value is $1,000. Based
    on these data, what can be determined regarding your
    schedule variance?
   a. At +$200, the situation is favorable as physical progress
      is being accomplished ahead of your plan.
   b. At -$200, the physical progress is being accomplished
      at a slower rate than is planned, indicating an unfavor-
      able situation.
   c. At +$400, the situation is favorable as physical progress is
      being accomplished at a lower cost than was forecasted.
   d. At -$200, you have a behind-schedule condition, and
      your critical path has slipped.
                               Project Cost Management      119


40. The CPI on your project is 0.84. This means that you
    should--
   a. Place emphasis on improving the timeliness of the
      physical progress
   b. Reassess the life-cycle costs of your product, including
      the length of the life-cycle phase
   c. Recognize that your original estimates were fundamen-
      tally flawed, and your project is in an atypical situation
   d. Place emphasis on improving the productivity by
      which work was being performed
                       Project Cost Management    121


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d    21.   a    b    c   d

2.    a   b    c   d    22.   a    b    c   d

3.    a   b    c   d    23.   a    b    c   d

4.    a   b    c   d    24.   a    b    c   d

5.    a   b    c   d    25.   a    b    c   d

6.    a   b    c   d    26.   a    b    c   d

7.    a   b    c   d    27.   a    b    c   d

8.    a   b    c   d    28.   a    b    c   d

9.    a   b    c   d    29.   a    b    c   d

10.   a   b    c   d    30.   a    b    c   d

11.   a   b    c   d    31.   a    b    c   d

12.   a   b    c   d    32.   a    b    c   d

13.   a   b    c   d    33.   a    b    c   d

14.   a   b    c   d    34.   a    b    c   d

15.   a   b    c   d    35.   a    b    c   d

16.   a   b    c   d    36.   a    b    c   d

17.   a   b    c   d    37.   a    b    c   d

18.   a   b    c   d    38.   a    b    c   d

19.   a   b    c   d    39.   a    b    c   d

20.   a   b    c   d    40.   a    b    c   d
                               Project Cost Management       123


Answer Key
 1. d. -$200; the project is behind schedule
       SV is calculated as EV - PV (in this case, $2,000 -
       $2,200). A negative variance means that the work
       completed is less than what was planned for at that
       point in the project. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

 2. b. 0.80; actual costs have exceeded planned costs
       CPI is calculated as EV/AC (in this case,
       $2,000/$2,500). EV measures the budgeted dollar
       value of the work that has actually been accom-
       plished, whereas AC measures the actual cost of
       getting that work done. If the two numbers are the
       same, work on the project is being accomplished for
       exactly the budgeted amount of money (and the ratio
       will be equal to 1.0). If actual costs exceed budgeted
       costs (as in this example), AC will be larger than
       EV, and the ratio will be less than 1.0. CPI is also an
       index of efficiency. In this example, an index of 0.80
       (or 80 percent) means that for every dollar spent on
       the project only 80 cents worth of work is actually
       accomplished. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

 3. d. -$500
       CV is calculated as EV - AC (in this case, $2,000 -
       $2,500). A negative CV means that a ccomplishing
       work on the project is costing more than was
       budgeted. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
124      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  4. a. $12,500; the revised estimate for total project cost
        (based on performance thus far)
          EAC is calculated as BAC/CPI (in this case,
          $10,000/0.80). It is now known that the project will
          cost more than the original estimate of $10,000. The
          project has been getting only 80 cents worth of work
          done for every dollar spent (CPI), and this informa-
          tion has been used to forecast total project costs.
          This approach assumes that performance for the
          remainder of the project will also be based on a CPI
          of 0.80. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

  5. c. Has an accuracy rate of 10% of actual costs
          A frequently used method of estimate costs, the
          analogous technique relies on experience and knowl-
          edge gained to predict future events. This technique
          provides planners with some idea of the m  agnitude
          of project costs but generally not within 10%.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 204-205

  6. d. Cost baseline
          Cost baseline is an output from the determine budget
          process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 212-213
                               Project Cost Management     125


7. d. Electricity
       Direct costs are incurred for the exclusive benefit of
       a project (for example, salary of the project manager,
       materials used by the project, and subcontractor
       expenses). Indirect costs, also called overhead costs,
       are allocated to a project by its performing organiza-
       tion as a cost of doing business. These costs cannot
       be traced to a specific project and are a ccumulated
       and allocated equitably over multiple projects
       (for example, security guards, fringe benefits, and
       electricity). [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202

8. b. The variance is favorable to the project
       A positive schedule variance indicates that the
       project is ahead of schedule. A positive cost variance
       indicates that the project has incurred less cost than
       estimated for the work accomplished; therefore, the
       project is under budget. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

9. c. Identify and estimate the cost for each work package
      or activity
       Bottom-up estimating is derived by first estimating
       the cost of the project's elemental tasks at the lower
       levels of the WBS or for an activity and then aggre-
       gating those estimates at successively higher levels
       of the WBS for subsequent reporting and tracking
       purposes. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 205
126      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 10. b. Determine the cost performance needed to complete
        the remaining work within management's financial
        goal for the project
          The TCPI takes the value of work remaining and
          divides it by the value of funds remaining to obtain
          the cost performance factor needed to complete all
          remaining work according to a financial goal set by
          management. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

 11. c. -$350
          CV is calculated by EV - AC, or $1,500(2/3) - $1,350 =
          -$350. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

 12. a. Cost management plan
          The management and control of costs focuses on
          variance thresholds. Certain variances are accept-
          able, and others, usually those falling outside a
          particular range, are unacceptable. They are typically
          expressed as percentage deviations from the baseline
          plan. The actions taken by the project manager for
          variances are described in the cost management
          plan. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199
                               Project Cost Management  127


13. d. The information is insufficient to make an
       assessment.
       The information provided tells us that, as of the
       fourth month, more money has been spent than was
       planned. However, we need to know how much
       work has been completed to determine how the
       project is performing. In earned value terms, we are
       missing the EV. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 218

14. b. Use the project schedule as an input to determine
       budget
       Accurate project performance measurement depends
       on accurate cost and schedule information. The
       project schedule includes planned start and fi  nish
       dates for all activities tied to work packages and
       control accounts. This information is used to
       aggregate costs to the calendar period for which the
       costs are planned to be incurred. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 210

15. d. Are usually beyond the project manager's control
       Overhead includes costs such as rent, insurance,
       or heating, that pertain to the project as a whole
       and cannot be attributed to a particular work item.
       The amount of overhead to be added to the project
       is frequently decided by the performing organization
       and is beyond the control of the project manager.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Meredith and Mantel 2012, 301
128      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 16. a. ETC = BAC - EV
          This formula assumes that the estimate to complete is
          based on the same cost efficiency level. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          Meredith and Mantel, 454

 17. c. Order-of-magnitude
          An order-of-magnitude estimate, which is referred
          to also as a ballpark estimate, has an accuracy range
          of -25% to 75% and is made without detailed data.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 201; Ward 2008, 295

 18. b. Issue a change request
          Before a revised cost baseline leading to a budget
          update can be prepared, it is necessary to issue
          a change request, which may include preventive
          or corrective action. These change requests then
          are reviewed and processed through the Perform
          Integrated Change Control process. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 225

 19. d. Value engineering
          Value engineering considers possible cost trade-offs
          as a design evolves. The technique entails identifying
          the functions that are needed and analyzing the cost
          effectiveness of the alternatives available for providing
          them. It helps optimize project life cycle costs, save
          time, increase profits, improve quality, increase market
          share, solve problems, and contribute toward more
          effective resource use [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 566
                               Project Cost Management     129


20. b. 15% to 20%
       The CPI has been proven to be an accurate and
       reliable forecasting tool. Researchers have found that
       the cumulative CPI does not change by more than
       10% once a project is approximately 20% complete.
       The CPI provides a quick statistical forecast of final
       projectcosts. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Fleming and Koppelman 2000, 134

21. b. Performance measurement baseline
       The undistributed budget is applied to project work
       that has not yet been linked to WBS elements at or
       below the lowest level of reporting. It is, therefore,
       part of the performance measurement baseline and
       is expected to be used in the performance of project
       work. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Fleming and Koppelman 2000, 169, 206
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 205, 549

22. b. Parametric estimating
       Parametric estimating involves using statistical rela-
       tionships between historical data and other variables
       to calculate or estimate for activity parameters, such
       as cost, budget, or duration. The example is repre-
       sentative of a simple parametric model. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 205
130    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 23. d. Costs that have been authorized and incurred
          These costs are part of work performance data about
          project progress. In addition data include information
          about project progress such as which activities have
          started, their progress, and which deliverables have
          finished Updating the budget requires knowledge
          about the actual costs spent to date, and any budget
          changes are approved according to the Perform
          Integrated Change Control process. [Monitoring and
          Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 216-217

 24. a. Code of accounts allocation provision
          Rules of earned value performance measurement
          are part of the cost management plan and may
          (1) define the points in the WBS where measurement
          of control accounts will be performed; (2) establish
          the EV measurement techniques such as weighted
          milestones, fixed-formula, percent complete, etc., to
          be used; and (3) specific tracking methods and EV
          equations for calculating the EAC forecasts to provide
          a validity check on the bottom-up EAC. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199

 25. a. EV to date plus the remaining project budget
          EAC is a forecast of the most likely total value based
          on project performance and risk quantification.
          To calculate EAC, the AC of a project must be
          known and used in the calculation. Any calculation
          that relies solely on the EV will not yield an accurate
          measure of cost performance. [Monitoring and
          Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 220-221
                                Project Cost Management      131


26. a. How direct and indirect costs will be handled
        The scope statement, as part of the scope baseline,
        is a key input in the estimate costs process and
        should be reviewed. It provides the project descrip-
        tion, acceptance criteria, key deliverables, boundaries,
        assumptions, and constraints about the project. It also
        notes one basic assumption that must be made as
        costs are estimated is whether the estimates will be
        limited only to direct project costs or whether they
        also will include indirect project costs. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202

27. c. CVs
        Cumulative cost curves, or S-curves, enable
        the p
             roject manager to monitor cost variances
        at a glance. The difference in height between
        the planned-expenditure curve and the
        actual-expenditure curve represents the monetary
        value of variances at any given time. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219

28. d. Represent the basic level at which project performance
       is measured and reported
        Control accounts represent a management control
        point where scope, budget (resource plans), actual
        costs, and schedule are integrated and compared
        to earned value for performance measurement.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 132, 199, and 533
132    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 29. c. Time reporting systems
          Variance analysis focuses on cost and schedule to
          help explain the cause, issue, and corrective action.
          Trend analysis examines project performance over
          time to determine performance status. Earned
          value performance compares the performance
          measurement baseline to actual schedule and cost
          performance. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 222-223

 30. a. Before the budget is complete
          Often project cost estimates are prepared after
          budgetary approval is provided. However, activity
          cost estimates should be prepared before the budget
          is complete. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 210

 31. c. Unit costs decrease in a regular pattern as more units
        are produced
          Learning curve theory indicates that human perfor-
          mance usually improves when a task is repeated.
          Specifically, each time output doubles, worker
          hours per unit decrease by a fixed percentage.
          This percentageis called the learning rate. [Planning]
          Meredith and Mantel 2012, 301-303
                                Project Cost Management       133


32. c. Current variances are viewed as typical of future
       variances
        Past performance is indicative of future perfor-
        mance; therefore, EAC = BAC/CPI. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 201

33. c. Amount of time before net cash flow becomes
       positive
        Payback period analysis determines the time required
        for a project to recover the investment in it and
        become profitable. A weakness of this approach is a
        lack of emphasis on the magnitude of the profitability.
        [Planning]
        Kerzner 2009, 614-615; PMI(R) PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 195;
        Ward 2008, 305

34. a. CVs are severe, and a realistic measure of performance
       is needed
        After the CVs exceed certain ranges, the original
        project budget may be questioned and changed
        as a result of new information. [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 226
134    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 35. d. Documented lessons learned
          Lessons learned but not documented are "lessons
          lost." The lessons learned knowledge database will
          help current project members, as well as people on
          future projects, make better decisions. Accordingly,
          the reasons for the variance, the rationale
          supporting the corrective action, and other related
          informationmust be documented. They require
          updates as part of updates to organizational process
          assets as an output of control costs in terms of
          correctiveactions taken and why they wre selected.
          [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 226

 36. a. Aggregate these estimates by work packages
          The WBS provides the relationship among all the
          project deliverables and their components and should
          be reviewed before the budget is developed. As
          the budget is determined, the cost estimates for the
          activities should be aggregated by the work packages
          in the WBS. Then, later, they are aggregated for the
          control accounts and finally for the entire project.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 213

 37. a. Helps to monitor project performance at a glance
          Cost curves for planned and actual expenditures are
          created by adding each month's costs to the p
                                                       revious
          reporting period's expenditures. By doing so, one
          can quickly see how the project is performing.
          [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219
                                 Project Cost Management     135


38. c. Provide the ability to show performance for a speci-
       fied time period for trend analysis
        Because schedule performance index (SPI) and cost
        performance index (CPI) are expressed as ratios,
        they can be used to show performance for a s pecific
        time period or trends over a long-time horizon.
        Additionally, there is no need to disclose c onfidential
        financial data to convey the project's status to one's
        customers; they should not have a need to know
        such information, unless there is a contractual
        requirement to do so. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 665-666
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219

39. b. At -$200, the physical progress is being a ccomplished
       at a slower rate than is planned, indicating an
       unfavorable situation.
        Schedule variance is calculated: EV - PV or $1,000 -
        $1,200 = -$200. Because the SV is negative, physical
        progress is being accomplished at a slower rate than
        planned. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 648-649
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 218, 224

40. d. Place emphasis on improving the productivity by
       which work was being performed
        CPI = EV/AC and measures the efficiency of the physi-
        cal progress accomplished compared to the baseline.
        A CPI of 0.84 means that for every dollar spent, you're
        only receiving 84 cents of progress. Therefore, you
        should focus on improving the productivity by which
        work is being performed. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 650-652
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 219, 224
Project Quality
Management


Study Hints
The Project Quality Management questions on the PMP(R)
certification exam are straightforward--especially if you know
definitions of terms and understand statistical process control.
You are not required to solve quantitative problems, but
there are questions on statistical methods of measuring and
controlling quality.
   The exam is likely to reflect a heavy emphasis on customer
satisfaction and continuous improvement through the use
of quality tools such as Pareto analysis and cause-and-effect
diagrams. You must also know the differences among plan
quality management, perform quality assurance, and perform
quality control.
   The PMBOK(R) Guide includes all quality-related activities
under the term Project Quality Management, which com-
prises the three quality processes mentioned above. Review
PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 8-1 for an overview of the Project
Quality Management structure before taking the practice test.
Know this chart thoroughly.


                                                             137
138    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


   Following is a list of the major Project Quality Management
topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas
most likely to appear on the exam.
                           Project Quality Management    139


Major Topics
Key PMBOK(R) Guide concepts
Quality defined
Quality management
Quality policy
Quality and grade
Accuracy and precision
Customer satisfaction
Prevention over inspection
Continuous improvement
SIPOC model
Management responsibility
Seven basic quality tools

   Cause-and-effect diagrams
   Flowcharts
   Checksheets
   Pareto diagrams
   Histograms
   Control charts
   Scatter diagrams

Plan quality management tools

   Cost-benefit analysis
   Benchmarking
   Design of experiments
   Cost of quality
   Statistical sampling
   Brainstorming
   Force field analysis
   Nominal group technique
140  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Key quality planning documents

   Quality management plan
   Quality metrics
   Quality checklists
   Process improvement plan

Quality control measurements
Quality management and control tools

   Affinity diagrams
   Process decision program charts
   Interrelationship diagraphs
   Tree diagrams
   Prioritization matrices
   Activity network diagrams
   Matrix diagrams

Quality audits
Process analysis
Quality control

   Variable sampling
   Attribute sampling
   Tolerances and control limits
   Prevention
   Probability
   Standard deviation
   Validated changes
   Verified deliverables

Approved change requests review
Impact of motivation on quality
Priority of quality versus cost and schedule
Design and quality
                             Project Quality Management      141


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. Quality is very important to your company. Each project
    has a quality statement that is consistent with the orga-
    nization's vision and mission. Both internal and external
    quality assurance are provided on all projects to--
   a. Ensure confidence that the project will satisfy relevant
      quality standards
   b. Monitor specific project results to note whether they
      comply with relevant quality standards
   c. Identify ways to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory results
   d. Use inspection to keep errors out of the process

 2. Benchmarking is a technique used in--
   a.   Inspections
   b.   Root cause analysis
   c.   Plan quality management
   d.   Perform quality control

 3. In quality management, the practice "rework" is--
   a. Acceptable under certain circumstances
   b. An adjustment made that is based on quality control
      measurements
   c. Action taken to bring a defective or nonconforming
      component into compliance
   d. Not a concern if errors are detected early
142     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 4. The quality function deployment process is used to--
   a. Provide better product definition and product
      development
   b. Help products to succeed in the marketplace
   c. Improve the functional characteristics of a product
   d. Support production planning and the just-in-time
      approach

 5. As it applies to quality, the law of diminishing returns
    says that--
   a. 100% quality is unattainable
   b. 100% inspection is not cost effective
   c. Beyond a certain point, additional investment in
      quality has a negative ROI
   d. Providing quality products will stop, or at least dimin-
      ish, the number of returned items

 6. You are leading a research project that will require
    between 10 and 20 aerospace engineers. Some
    senior-level aerospace engineers are available. They are
    more productive than junior-level engineers, who cost less
    and who are available as well. You want to determine the
    optimal combination of senior- and junior-level personnel.
    In this situation, the appropriate technique to use is to--
   a.   Conduct a design of experiments
   b.   Use the Ishikawa diagram to pinpoint the problem
   c.   Prepare a control chart
   d.   Analyze the process using a Pareto diagram
                           Project Quality Management     143


7. The purpose of the Taguchi method is to--
  a. Manage the flow of material for better visibility and
     control
  b. Use statistical techniques to compute a "loss function"
     to determine the cost of producing products that fail to
     achieve a target value
  c. Design, group, and manage production operations as
     self-contained flexible cells capable of start-to-finish
     processing of a family of items
  d. Regulate coordination and communication among
     process stages

8. Quality assurance promotes quality improvement. A
   "breakthrough" is the accomplishment of any improve-
   ment that takes the organization to unprecedented levels
   of performance by attacking--
  a.   Special causes of variation
  b.   Common causes of variation
  c.   Inspection over prevention
  d.   Specific tolerances

9. Which of the following statements best describes attribute
   sampling versus variables sampling?
  a. Attribute sampling is concerned with prevention,
     whereas variables sampling is concerned with inspection.
  b. Attribute sampling is concerned with conformance,
     whereas variables sampling is concerned with the
     degree of conformity.
  c. Attribute sampling is concerned with special causes,
     whereas variables sampling is concerned with any causes.
  d. Both are the same concept.
144     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


10. Your project scheduler has just started working with your
    project and has produced defective reports for the past
    two accounting cycles. If this continues, these d  efective
    reports could provide the potential for customer dis
    satisfaction and lost productivity that is due to rework.
    You discovered that the project scheduler needs addi-
    tional training on using the scheduling tool that is used
    on your project. The cost of training falls under which
    one of the following categories?
   a.   Overhead costs
   b.   Failure costs
   c.   Prevention costs
   d.   Indirect costs

11. When a process is within acceptable limits, it--
   a. Should not be adjusted
   b. May not be changed to provide improvements
   c. Shows differences caused by expected events or
      normal causes
   d. Should not be inspected or reworked for any reason

12. The project team should have a working knowledge of
    statistical process control to help evaluate control quality
    outputs. Of all the topics involved, which of the following
    is the most important for the team to understand?
   a.   Sampling and probability
   b.   Attribute sampling and variables sampling
   c.   Tolerances and control limits
   d.   Special causes and random causes
                             Project Quality Management     145


13. Rank ordering of defects should be used to guide
    corrective action. This is the underlying principle behind--
   a.   Trend analysis
   b.   Inspections
   c.   Control charts
   d.   Pareto diagrams

14. Project quality management was once thought to include
    only inspection or quality control. In recent years, the
    concept of project quality management has broadened.
    Which statement is NOT representative of the new defini-
    tion of quality management?
   a. Quality is designed into the product or service, not
      inspected into it.
   b. Quality is the concern of the quality assurance staff.
   c. Customers require a documented and, in some cases,
      registered quality assurance system.
   d. National and international standards and guidelines for
      quality assurance systems are available.

15. Assume you wish to provide a process to be more
    creative in problem solving as on your project you have
    a somewhat complex scenario that possesses intertwined
    logical relationships for up to 50 items. The best approach
    is to--
   a.   Design an experiment
   b.   Use an interrelationship diagraph
   c.   Conduct a Monte Carlo analysis
   d.   Use a process decision program chart
146     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


16. Your quality assurance department recently performed
    a quality audit of your project and identified a number
    of findings and recommendations. One recommendation
    seems critical and should be implemented because
    it affects successful delivery of the product to your
    customer. Your next step should be to--
   a. Call a meeting of your project team to see who is
      responsible for the problem
   b. Reassign the team member who had responsibility for
      oversight of the problem
   c. Perform product rework immediately
   d. Issue a change request to implement the needed
      corrective action

 17. Six sigma refers to the aim of setting tolerance limits
     at six standard deviations from the mean, whereas the
     normally expected deviation of a process is--
   a.   One standard deviation
   b.   Two standard deviations
   c.   Three standard deviations
   d.   Undeterminable because of the unique nature of
        every process

18. You recognize the importance of quality control on your
    project. However, you also know that quality control has
    costs associated with it and that the project has a limited
    budget. One way to reduce the cost of quality control
    is to--
   a. Work to ensure that the overall quality program is
      ISO compliant
   b. Use statistical sampling
   c. Conduct inspections throughout the process
   d. Use trend analysis
                               Project Quality Management    147


19. Deming's Fourteen Points provide a way for an orga-
    nization to create and sustain a culture of continuous
    improvement. As such it should be directed by--
   a.   The project manager
   b.   Top management
   c.   Employees participating in quality circles
   d.   Stakeholders

20. Quality inspections also may be called--
   a.   Control tests
   b.   Walkthroughs
   c.   Statistical sampling
   d.   Checklists

21. Your management has prescribed that a quality audit be
    conducted at the end of every phase in a project. This
    audit is part of the organization's--
   a.   Quality assurance process
   b.   Quality control process
   c.   Quality improvement program
   d.   Process adjustment program

22. You are managing a major international project, and your
    contract requires you to prepare both a project plan and
    a quality management plan. Your core team is preparing
    a project quality management plan. Your first step in
    developing this plan is to--
   a. Determine specific metrics to use in the quality
      management process
   b. Identify the quality standards for the project
   c. Develop a quality policy for the project
   d. Identify specific quality management roles and
      responsibilities for the project
148  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 23. Recently your company introduced a new set of
     "metal woods" to its established line of golfing e quipment.
     However, in the past weeks many of the clubs have been
     returned because of quality problems. You decide to
     conduct a failure mode and criticality analysis to--
    a. Analyze the product development cycle after product
       release to determine strengths and weaknesses
    b. Evaluate failure modes and causes associated with the
       design and manufacture of this product
    c. Evaluate failure modes and causes a ssociated
       with the design and manufacture of a new
       product to replace the clubs
    d. Help management set priorities in its existing
       manufacturing processes to avoid failures

 24. The "rule of seven" as applied to statistical process control
     charts means that--
    a. Seven rejects typically occur per thousand inspections
    b. Seven consecutive points are above or below the mean
    c. At least seven inspectors should be in place for every
       thousand employees
    d. A process is not out of control even though seven
       measurements fall outside the lower and upper
       control limits

 25. Long-term contracting is an important aspect of project
     quality management because it--
    a. Provides incentives to vendors to make quality
       commitments
    b. Improves quality through the use of benefit-cost ratio
    c. Usually results in lower costs and increased profitability
    d. Provides for periodic, yet mandatory quality audits
                                Project Quality Management    149


26. Even though your project is vastly different from a manu-
    facturing operation, you believe the principles of kaizen
    will work well. The kaizen approach to continuous
    improvement emphasizes--
   a.   The greater importance of customer satisfaction over cost
   b.   Radical changes in operating practices
   c.   Incremental improvement
   d.   The use of quality circles to improve morale

27. Results of quality control measurements are used--
   a.   As   an input to plan quality management
   b.   To   prepare an operational definition
   c.   To   prepare a control chart
   d.   As   an input to perform quality assurance

28. The control chart is a tool used primarily to help--
   a.   Monitor process variation over time
   b.   Measure the degree of conformance
   c.   Determine whether results conform
   d.   Determine whether results conform to requirements

29. The area where the project manager can have the greatest
    impact on the quality of his or her project is in--
   a.   Quality   planning
   b.   Quality   assurance
   c.   Quality   control
   d.   Quality   improvement
150    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 30. You are a project manager for residential construction.
     As a project manager, you must be especially concerned
     with building codes--particularly in the plan quality man-
     agement process. You must ensure that building codes are
     reflected in your project plans because--
      a. Standards and regulations are an input to plan
         quality management
      b. Quality audits serve to ensure there is compliance
         with regulations
      c. They are a cost associated with quality initiatives
      d. Compliance with standards is the primary objective of
         perform quality control

 31. You work as a project manager in the largest hospital in
     the region. Studies have shown that patients have to wait
     for long periods before being treated. To assist in iden-
     tifying the factors contributing to this problem, you and
     your team have decided to use which of the following
     techniques?
      a.   Cause-and-effect diagrams
      b.   Pareto analysis
      c.   Scatter diagrams
      d.   Control charts

 32. The ISO 9000 standards provide--
      a.   A description of how products should be produced
      b.   Specifics for the implementation of quality systems
      c.   A framework for quality systems
      d.   The maximum process requirements necessary to
           ensure that customers receive a good product
                             Project Quality Management        151


33. All of the following are objectives of a quality audit--
   a.   Defect repairs have been implemented
   b.   Improvement opportunities are identified
   c.   Good practices can be introduced elsewhere
   d.   Root cause analysis has been performed as part of
        process analysis

34. There are three uses and types of Pareto analysis. If you
    wish to provide a measure of significance to factors that
    at first may not appear to be significant at all, you should
    use a--
   a.   Basic Pareto analysis
   b.   Comparative Pareto analysis
   c.   Weighted Pareto analysis
   d.   Trend Pareto analysis

35. Constancy of purpose is a core concept for continuous
    improvement. An organization displaying constancy of
    purpose must have all the following elements EXCEPT--
   a. Documented and well-disseminated statements of
      purpose and vision
   b. A set of strategic and tactical plans
   c. An awareness by all members of the organization of
      the purpose, vision, goals, and objectives and their
      roles in achieving them
   d. Separate quality assurance and quality control
      departments reporting to senior management

36. Quality objectives of the project are recorded in--
   a.   Process improvement plan
   b.   Quality management plan
   c.   Quality baseline
   d.   Quality metrics
152             PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


37. The below Pareto chart indicates defects in areas associ-
    ated with billing a client for project services. Based on
    this Pareto analysis, which area, or areas, indicate the
    greatest opportunity for improvement?

                       100
                        90
       Number of Defects




                        80
                        70
                        60
                        50
                        40
                        30
                        20
                        10
                         0




                                            e N te
                      r

                    te

                    de




                                                         s

                                                        e


                                                        e

                                                       nt




                                                         r
                                                        e

                                                      es




                                                     be
                   be




                                                      at
                                                    am




                                                    od
                  Ra




                                                     a
                                                   ou
                 Co




                                                   dr

                                                 tD




                                                  lD
               um




                                                um
                                                  C
                                                 N




                                                m
               ly




                                              Ad
             ge




                                               C




                                               ai
                                              ip
          tN




                                              A
            ai




                                           PV




                                            M
                                            ce
          ar
          D




                                           nt
        un




                                         on
       Ch




                                         Re




                                        ou
      co




                                     Ph
                                    isc
    Ac




                                  D


                                    Defect Type


   a. The account number, because if it is incorrect, the
      invoice may be sent to the wrong client.
   b. The daily rate, because if it is incorrect, the total
      amount of the invoice will be wrong, which impacts
      the cash flow.
   c. The charge code, name, address, receipt date, pvc
      code, discount amount, mail date, and phone number,
      because they are fairly easy to confirm and correct,
      thereby significantly reducing the types of defects.
   d. The account number and daily rate, because they
      account for 80 percent of all defects.

38. You have decided to use a fishbone diagram to identify
    the relationship between an effect and its causes. To
    begin, you should first--
   a. Select an interdisciplinary team who has used the
      technique before to help brainstorm the problem
   b. Determine the major categories of defects
   c. Set up a process analysis using HIPO charts
   d. Identify the problem
                           Project Quality Management     153


39. Assume that your project in the food service industry
    involves the need for the presence of the required food
    label as specified by the Food and Drug Administration.
    In this situation, you plan to use control charts as a
    qualitycontrol tool, so you should prepare a(n)--
   a.   Variables chart
   b.   Attribute chart
   c.   Trend chart
   d.   Run chart

40. The quality management plan describes all the following
    EXCEPT the--
   a. Method for implementing the quality policy
   b. Methods the team will use to meet the project's
      quality requirements
   c. Efforts at the front end of a project to ensure that
      decisionsare based on accurate information
   d. Procedures used to conduct trade-off analyses among
      cost, schedule, and quality
                       Project Quality Management    155


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d       21.   a   b     c   d

2.    a   b    c   d       22.   a   b     c   d

3.    a   b    c   d       23.   a   b     c   d

4.    a   b    c   d       24.   a   b     c   d

5.    a   b    c   d       25.   a   b     c   d

6.    a   b    c   d       26.   a   b     c   d

7.    a   b    c   d       27.   a   b     c   d

8.    a   b    c   d       28.   a   b     c   d

9.    a   b    c   d       29.   a   b     c   d

10.   a   b    c   d       30.   a   b     c   d

11.   a   b    c   d       31.   a   b     c   d

12.   a   b    c   d       32.   a   b     c   d

13.   a   b    c   d       33.   a   b     c   d

14.   a   b    c   d       34.   a   b     c   d

15.   a   b    c   d       35.   a   b     c   d

16.   a   b    c   d       36.   a   b     c   d

17.   a   b    c   d       37.   a   b     c   d

18.   a   b    c   d       38.   a   b     c   d

19.   a   b    c   d       39.   a   b     c   d

20.   a   b    c   d       40.   a   b     c   d
                            Project Quality Management    157


Answer Key
 1. a. Ensure confidence that the project will satisfy
       relevant quality standards
       Quality assurance increases project effectiveness
       and efficiency and provides added benefits to
       project stakeholders. It includes all the planned
       and systematic quality activities to ensure that the
       project uses all the processes to meet requirements.
       Quality assuranceshould be performed throughout
       the p
            roject. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 227, 242-244

 2. c. Plan quality management
       Benchmarking involves comparing actual or planned
       practices to those practices of comparable projects
       to identify best practices, to note ideas for improve-
       ment, and to provide a way to measure performance.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 239

 3. c. Action taken to bring a defective or nonconforming
       component into compliance
       Rework is a frequent cause of project overruns.
       The project team must make every reasonable effort
       to control and minimize rework so that defective
       or nonconforming components are brought into
       compliance with requirements or specifications.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 559
158    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  4. a. Provide better product definition and product
        development
          Quality function deployment helps a design team to
          define, design, manufacture, and deliver a product or
          service to meet or exceed customer needs. Its main
          features are to capture the customer's requirements,
          ensure cross-functional teamwork, and link the main
          phases of product development--product planning,
          part deployment, process planning, and production
          planning. [Planning]
          Evans and Lindsay 2005, 568-569
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 556

  5. c. Beyond a certain point, additional investment in
        quality has a negative ROI
          If a company has paid $100,000 to gain 98% quality
          and it would cost an additional $25,000 to gain the
          other 2%, this is known as the law of diminishing
          returns. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          Ward 2008, 240
                           Project Quality Management      159


6. a. Conduct a design of experiments
      This technique is used to identify which variables
      have the most influence. It is a statistical method to
      identify the factors that may influence specific vari-
      ables of a product or process under development or
      in production. For example, roller blade d   esigners
      might want to determine which combination of
      number of wheels and titanium ball bearings would
      produce the most desirable "ride" characteristics at
      a reasonable cost. This technique, however, can be
      applied to project management issues such as cost
      and schedule trade-offs. An appropriately designed
      "experiment" often will help project managers to
      find an optimal solution from a relatively limited
      number of options, and often it help to determine
      the n
           umber and type of tests to use and their impact
      on quality. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 239-240

7. b. Use statistical techniques to compute a "loss function"
      to determine the cost of producing products that fail
      to achieve a target value
      The Taguchi method is used to estimate the loss
      associated with controlling or failing to control
      process variability. It is based on the principle that
      by carefully selecting design parameters to p  roduce
      robust designs, an organization can produce p    roducts
      that are more forgiving and tolerant. The tool
      helps determine the value or break-even point of
      improving a process to reduce variability. [Monitoring
      and Controlling]
      Ward 2008, 432
160      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  8. b. Common causes of variation
          Quality improvement includes action taken to increase
          project effectiveness and efficiency in order to provide
          added benefits to stakeholders. A breakthrough attacks
          chronic losses, or in Deming's terminology, common
          causes of variation. [Executing]
          Evans and Lindsay 2005, 486

  9. b. Attribute sampling is concerned with conformance,
        whereas variables sampling is concerned with the
        degree of conformity.
          Attribute sampling determines whether a result does
          or does not conform. Variables sampling rates a
          result on a continuous scale to measure the degree of
          conformity. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 250

 10. c. Prevention costs
          Prevention costs include any expenditure directed
          toward ensuring that quality is achieved the first
          time. [Planning]
          Rose 2005 8-9
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 235

 11. a. Should not be adjusted
          Processes should be changed only through estab-
          lished change procedures. If the process is outside
          acceptable limits, it should be adjusted. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252-253
                              Project Quality Management    161


12. a. Sampling and probability
        Sampling and probability form the basis of statistical
        process control, which helps the team monitor
        project results for compliance with relevant quality
        standards so that methods can be identified
        to e liminate causes of unsatisfactory results.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 240, 252

13. d. Pareto diagrams
        Pareto diagrams are histograms, ordered by fre-
        quency of occurrence, that show how many results
        were generated by type or category of identified
        cause. The project team should take action to fix the
        problems that are causing the greatest number of
        defects first. Pareto diagrams are based on Pareto's
        Law, which holds that a relatively small number of
        causes will typically produce a large majority of
        defects, also called the "solzo rule." [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 237,252

14. b. Quality is the concern of the quality assurance staff.
        Quality concerns all levels of management and staff.
        Its success requires participation from all members
        of the project team with management providing the
        needed resources to succeed. [Planning, Executing,
        and Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 227-229
162      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 15. b. Use an interrelationship diagraph
          In perform quality assurance, the interrelationship
          diagraph can be used as a quality management and
          control tool. It may be developed from data gen-
          erated by other quality tools such as the affinity
          diagram, the tree diagram, or the cause-and-effect
          diagram. It is an adoption of relationship diagrams.
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245

 16. d. Issue a change request to implement the needed
        corrective action
          The information obtained from a quality audit can be
          used to improve quality systems and performance.
          In most cases, implementing quality improvements
          requires preparation of change requests. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247

 17. c. Three standard deviations
          When the results of a sample of items measured falls
          within three standard deviations and that sample
          is representative of the entire population, you can
          assume that more than 99% of all items fall within
          that range. This generally accepted range of results
          has been used by quality control professionals
          through the years. Six sigma is a program started by
          Motorola that, from a statistical standpoint, indicates
          a quality +standard of only 3.4 defects per million.
          [Planning and Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252
          Kerzner, 2009, 902
                             Project Quality Management      163


18. b. Use statistical sampling
        Statistical sampling uses part of a population to
        draw conclusions about the total population. It is
        a well-proven technique that can significantly
        reduce the cost of quality control. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]+
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 240, 252

19. b. Top management
        Deming is known as a quality pioneer. His approach
        to quality is not only statistically based but focuses
        on what management's responsibilities should be
        with respect to quality. His Fourteen Points for
        management are goals of quality for transforming
        business. [Executing]
        Rose 2005, 28-29

20. b. Walkthroughs
        Inspections comprise an examination of a work
        product to determine if it conforms to standards.
        Additional names for inspections are audits, reviews,
        or peer reviews (in some application areas, these
        terms may have narrow and specific meanings).
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 252
164      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 21. a. Quality assurance process
          Quality assurance is a managerial function that
          establishes processes or procedures in an o   rganization
          or project to assist in determining whether quality
          standards and operational definitions are being met.
          It is the application of planned, systematic quality
          activities to ensure that the project will use all pro-
          cesses needed to meet requirements and is performed
          throughout the life of the project. Quality audits are a
          tool and technique to use. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242-243

 22. c. Develop a quality policy for the project
          The quality policy includes the overall intentions and
          direction of the organization with regard to quality,
          as formally expressed by top management. If the
          performing organization lacks a formal quality policy
          or if the project involves multiple performing organi-
          zations, as in a joint venture, the project management
          team must develop a quality policy for the project.
          The quality management plan then describes how
          the quality policies will be implemented. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 234, 241
                            Project Quality Management        165


23. c. Evaluate failure modes and causes associated with
       the design and manufacture of a new product to
       replace these clubs
       This technique is a method of analyzing design reli-
       ability. A list of potential failure modes is developed for
       each element, and then each mode is given a numeric
       rating for frequency of occurrence, criticality, and prob-
       ability of detection. These data are used to assign a risk
       priority number for prioritizing problems and guiding
       the design effort. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Evans and Lindsay 2005, 582-594

24. b. Seven consecutive measurements are above or below
       the mean
       Consecutive points on a control chart that are above
       or below the mean or if a point exceeds a control
       limit indicate an abnormal trend in the process and
       must be investigated. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 228, 252

25. a. Provides incentives to vendors to make quality
       commitments
       Vendors that have long-term relationships with
       buyers are generally more inclined to invest in
       process and quality improvement, because they
       have a higher probability of recovering their costs.
       The stability provided through longer-term contracts
       permits better planning and encourages better com-
       munication and partnering between the buyer and
       the seller. Long-term contracting with fewer v endors
       also reduces buyer-related costs by simplifying
       accounting, collections, and other administrative
       tasks. [Planning]
       Rose 2005, 87-88
166      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 26. c. Incremental improvement
          Imai, a Japanese engineer, coined the word kaizen to
          describe an approach to quality that means making
          small improvements every time a process is repeated.
          [Executing]
          Evans and Lindsay 2005, 347--348

 27. d. As an input to perform quality assurance
          Quality control activities result in measurements that
          are used as inputs to the QA process. Such q  uality
          control measurements are used to evaluate and
          analyze the quality of the processes of the project
          against the organization's standards or specific
          requirements. They also compare processes used to
          create the measurements and validate actual mea-
          surements to determine their level of correctness.
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 244

 28. a. Monitor process variation over time
          Used to monitor process variation and to detect
          and correct changes in process performance, the
          control chart helps people understand and control
          their processes and work. It enables the project
          manager, along with appropriate stakeholders, to
          identify points where corrective action can be taken
          to prevent unnatural performance. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238, 252
                            Project Quality Management      167


29. b. Quality assurance
       Quality assurance is the management section of
       quality management. It is the collective term for
       the formal activities and managerial processes that
       attempt to ensure that products and services meet
       the required quality level. The project manager
       should establish administrative processes and proce-
       dures necessary to ensure and often prove that the
       scope statement conforms to the customer's actual
       requirements, to determine which processes will be
       used to ensure that stakeholders have confidence that
       the quality activities will be properly performed, and
       to ensure that all legal and regulatory requirements
       will be met. [Executing]
       Kerzner 2009, 888

30. a. Standards and regulations are an input to plan
       quality management
       During the plan quality management process,
       the project management team must consider any
       application area-specific standards, regulations, rules,
       and guidelines that may affect the project as part of
       the enterprise environmental factors. Building codes
       are an example of regulations. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 28-29 and 234
168      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 31. a. Cause-and-effect diagrams
          Cause-and-effect diagrams, also called Ishikawa
          diagrams or fishbone diagrams, are used to illus-
          trate how various causes and subcauses interact to
          create a special effect. It is named for its developer,
          Kaoru Ishikawa. These diagrams are useful in link-
          ing the undesirable effects seen as special variation
          to the assigned cause, enabling project teams to
          implement corrective actions to eliminate the special
          variation shown in a control chart. [Monitoring and
          Controlling]
          Ward 2008, 226
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236, 252

 32. c. A framework for quality systems
          ISO 9000 provides a basic set of requirements for a
          quality system, without specifying the particulars for
          implementation. [Planning]
          Evans and Lindsay 2005, 128-132
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 228-229

 33. d. Root cause analysis has been performed as part of
        process analysis
          The purpose of the quality audit is to determine if
          project activities comply with organizational policies,
          procedures, and processes. The quality audit has
          a number of objectives associated with it, but root
          cause analysis is part of process analysis to identify
          needed improvements in the process improvement
          plan. [Executing]
          Kerzner 2009, 479
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
                            Project Quality Management      169


34. c. Weighted Pareto analysis
       The weighted Pareto analysis gives a measure of
       significance to factors that may not appear s ignificant
       at first, using such additional factors as cost, time,
       and criticality. A basic Pareto analysis identifies the
       vital few contributors that account for most q   uality
       problems, and the comparative Pareto a nalysis
       focuses on any number of program options or
       actions. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Kerzner 2009, 897-898

35. d. Separate quality assurance and quality control
       departments reporting to senior management
       Top management should provide constancy of
       purpose so that it can be infused throughout the
       organization. Constancy of purpose also requires
       a shared belief among organization members that
       management's behavior clearly signals its commit-
       ment to and support of achievement of the vision.
       Quality assurance and control are functions that must
       be performed by everyone, not just those assigned to
       specific departments. [Executing]
       Rose 2005, 29

36. b. Quality management plan
       The quality management plan describes how the
       team will implement the quality policy, which
       describes the objectives of the project regarding
       quality management. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 241, 557
170      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 37. d. The account number and daily rate, because they
        account for 80 percent of all defects.
          Pareto analysis focuses on what Joseph Juran called
          the vital few. Named after Vilfredo Pareto, an Italian
          economist whose studies showed that 80 percent of
          the wealth was held by 20 percent of the population,
          quality analysis typically shows that 80 percent of the
          all problems (defects) are found in 20 percent of the
          items or areas studied.
          Rose 2005, 86-87
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 237, 548

 38. d. Identify the problem
          The first and most important is to identify the
          problem as a gap to be closed or as an objective to
          be achieved. Causes then are found by looking at the
          problem statement and asking why until a root cause
          has been identified for which action can be taken
          or the reasonable possibilities on the diagram have
          been exhausted. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236, 252
          Kerzner 2009, 895-898

 39. b. Attribute chart
          There are two types of control charts: variable charts,
          which are used with continuous data, and attribute
          charts, for use with discrete data. Attribute data
          have only two values (conforming/nonconforming,
          pass/fail, go/no-go, or present/absent). In this situation,
          you are looking for the presence of the required food
          label. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          Kerzner 2009, 905
                            Project Quality Management    171


40. d. Procedures used to conduct trade-off analyses among
       cost, schedule, and quality
       A part of the overall project management plan, the
       quality management plan should address all aspects
       of how quality management will be implemented
       on the project and how the project team will imple-
       ment the quality policy. Trade-off analyses are busi-
       ness judgments and, as such, are not procedural
       steps to be included in the quality management plan.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 241
Project Human
Resource Management


Study Hints
The Project Human Resource Management questions on the
PMP(R) certification exam focus heavily on organizational struc-
tures, roles and responsibilities of the project manager, team
building, and conflict resolution. Many of the questions are taken
from the PMBOK(R) Guide and the following PMI(R) handbooks,
which have been consolidated into one publication available
from PMI(R) entitled Principles of Project Management (1997).

   Conflict Management for Project Managers by John R. Adams
   and Nicki S. Kirchof
   Organizing for Project Management by Dwayne P. Cable
   and John R. Adams
   Roles and Responsibilities of the Project Manager by
   John R. Adams and Brian W. Campbell
   Team Building for Project Managers by Linn C.
   Stuckenbruck and David Marshall
   The Project Manager's Work Environment: Coping with
   Time and Stress by Paul C. Dinsmore, Martin Dean Martin,
   and Gary T. Huettel

                                                               173
174      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


   Appendix X3 PMBOK(R) Guide also should be reviewed
along with six other publications it mentions:

   Essential People Skills for Project Managers by Ginger Levin
   and Steven Flannes
   Organizing Projects for Success, vol. 1 of The Human
   Aspects of Project Management by Vijay K. Verma
   Human Factors in Project Management (Revised Edition)
   by Paul C. Dinsmore
   Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, vol. 2 of
   The Human Aspects of Project Management by Vijay K. Verma
   Managing the Project Team, vol. 3 of The Human Aspects
   of Project Management by Vijay K. Verma
   Seven Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen R. Covey

    In contrast to other areas of the PMBOK(R) Guide in which
commonly known terms are used, some terminology devel-
oped for Project Human Resource Management appears to
be peculiar to PMI(R). (In fact, much of the terminology has
been used in project management literature for many years,
but that literature has not always been widely disseminated.)
For example, in the area of project organizational structures,
some experts with years of experience in the field have not
encountered such terms or concepts as project expeditor or
weak matrix. Accordingly, committing to memory PMI(R)'s
definition and classification of the following subject areas
is imperative:

   Project organizational structures
   Stages of team development
   Decision-making guidelines
   Influencing guidelines
   Negotiation skills
   Conflict management concepts
                    Project Human Resource Management      175


In spite of the unfamiliarity of some of the terminology, most
exam takers do not find the human resource questions on the
exam difficult.
   PMI(R) views Project Human Resource Management as having
four elements: plan human resource management, acquire
project team, develop project team, and manage project
team. See PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 9-1 for an overview of this
structure. Know it cold!
   Following is a list of the major Project Human Resource
Management topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on
the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                    Project Human Resource Management      177


Major Topics
Forms of organization

   Functional
   Project expeditor
   Project coordinator
   Weak matrix
   Strong matrix
   Balanced matrix
   Projectized
   Composite

Plan human resource management plan tools and techniques

   Organization chart and position descriptions
   Hierarchical-type charts
   Matrix-based charts
   Text-oriented formats
   Networking
   Organizational theory
   Expert judgment

Develop human resource management plan outputs

   Human resource management plan
   Roles and responsibilities
   Staffing management plan
   Project organization charts

Acquire project team
Project manager roles and responsibilities

   Functions
   Roles
   Negotiation
178      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Types of power
Acquisition
Multi-criteria decision analysis
Virtual teams
Project staff assignments
Resource calendars
Develop project team objectives
Interpersonal skills

   Communication skills
   Emotional intelligence
   Conflict resolution
   Negotiation
   Influence
   Team building
   Group facilitation

Training
Team-building activities

   Approaches
   Stages of team development
   Goals and results of project team building
   Symptoms of poor teamwork
   Ground rules for project team building
   The team-building process

Ground rules
Motivation theories

   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
   McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
   Herzberg's Theory of Motivation
   Expectancy Theory
   McClelland Needs Theory
                     Project Human Resource Management      179


Collocation
Reward and recognition systems
Performance assessment tools
Team performance assessment
Manage Project Team

   Project conflict
   Why conflict is unavoidable on projects
   Seven sources of conflict in project environments
   Conflict and the project life cycle
   Conflict management
   Problem solving or collaborating
   Compromising or reconciling
   Smoothing or accommodating
   Withdrawal or avoiding
   Forcing or directing

Observation and conversation
Project performance appraisals
Interpersonal skills

   Leadership
   Influencing
   Effective decision making

Political and cultural awareness
Trust building
Coaching
Change requests
                    Project Human Resource Management        181


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. You have been assigned as project manager on what
    could be a "bet the company" project. You realize that
    to be successful you need to exercise maximum control
    over project resources. Which form of project organization
    should you establish for this project?
   a.   Strong matrix
   b.   Projectized
   c.   Project coordinator
   d.   Weak matrix

 2. Which of the following is a ground rule for project
    team building?
   a. Perform frequent performance appraisals
   b. Ensure that each team member reports to his or her
      functional manager in addition to the project manager
   c. Start early
   d. Try to solve team political problems
182        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  3. Project A is being administered using a matrix form of
     organization. The project manager reports to a senior
     vice president who provides visible support to the project.
     In this scenario, which of the following statements best
     describes the relative power of the project manager?
      a. The project manager will probably not be challenged
         by project stakeholders.
      b. In this strong matrix, the balance of power is shifted
         to the functional line managers.
      c. In this tight matrix, the balance of power is shifted to
         the project manager.
      d. In this strong matrix, the balance of power is shifted
         to the project manager.

  4. You are leading a team to recommend an equitable
     reward and recognition system for project managers.
     Before finalizing the plan, you want to ensure that
     executivesunderstand the basic objective of reward
     systems. This objective is to--
      a. Be comparable with the award system established for
         functional managers to indicate parity and to show the
         importance of project management to the company
      b. Make the link between project performance and
         reward clear, explicit, and achievable
      c. Motivate project managers to work toward common
         objectives and goals as defined by the company
      d. Attract people to join the organization's project
         management career path

  5. Which of the following factors contributes the most to
     team communication?
      a.   External feedback
      b.   Performance appraisals
      c.   Smoothing over of team conflicts by the project manager
      d.   Collection
                   Project Human Resource Management         183


6. You are managing a virtual team. The project has been
   under way for several months, and you believe your team
   members do not view themselves as a team or a unified
   group. To help rectify this situation, you should--
  a. Ensure that every member of the project team uses
     e-mail as a form of communication
  b. Mandate that the team follow the vision and mission
     statement of his or her organization
  c. Enhance communications planning
  d. Provide team members with the latest in communica-
     tions technology and mandate its use

7. Major difficulties arise when multiple projects need to
   be managed in the functional organizational structure
   because of--
  a. The level of authority of the project manager
  b. Conflicts over the relative priorities of different projects
     in competition for limited resources
  c. Project team members who are focused on their func-
     tional specialty rather than on the project
  d. The need for the project manager to use interpersonal
     skills to resolve conflicts informally

8. The team you have organized for your new project con-
   sists of three people who will work full-time and five
   people who will support the project on a part-time basis.
   All team members know one another and have worked
   together in the past. To ensure a successful project
   start-up, your first step should be to--
  a. Meet with each team member individually to discuss
     assignments
  b. Prepare a responsibility assignment matrix and
     distribute it to each team member
  c. Distribute the project plan and WBS to the team
  d. Hold a project kickoff meeting
184        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  9. Your organization is characterized by hierarchical organi-
     zational structures with rigid rules and policies and strict
     supervisory controls. Individual team members are not
     expected to engage in problem solving or use creative
     approaches to plan and execute work; management does
     that. Your organization is characterized by which one of
     the following theories?
      a.   Ouchi's Theory
      b.   McGregor's Theory X
      c.   Maslow's self-esteem level
      d.   Vroom's Expectancy Theory

 10. As you prepare your human resource plan, you need to
     determine the skill and capacity required to complete
     the activities in the project. This should be documented
     in the--
      a.   Roles and responsibilities section
      b.   Staffing management plan
      c.   Staff acquisition section
      d.   Compliance section

 11. The primary result of effective team development is--
      a. Improved project performance
      b. An effective, smoothly running team
      c. An understanding by project team members that
         the project manager is ultimately responsible for
         project performance
      d. Enhancement of the ability of stakeholders to
         contribute as individuals and team members
                   Project Human Resource Management        185


12. The team members on your project have been complain-
    ing that they do not have any sense of identity as a team
    because they are located in different areas of the building.
    To remedy this situation, you developed a project logo
    and had it printed on T-shirts to promote the project,
    but this action has not worked. Your next step is to--
   a.   Initiate a newsletter
   b.   Create an air of mystery about the project
   c.   Establish a "team meeting room"
   d.   Issue guidelines on how team members should interact
        with other stakeholders

13. The project team directory is an output from which of the
    following processes?
   a.   Develop project team
   b.   Acquire project team
   c.   Develop human resource management plan
   d.   Manage project team

14. You realize that leadership without management or
    management without leadership probably will produce
    poor project results. Which one of the following key
    responsibilities best represents project leadership?
   a. Developing a vision and strategy, and motivating
      people to achieve them
   b. Getting things done through other people
   c. Using charismatic power to motivate others even if
      they do not like the work
   d. Using all types of power, as appropriate, as
      motivational tools
186        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 15. Given that you are neighbors, you and the CEO of your
     company have established a friendly personal relationship.
     Recently your company appointed you project manager
     for a new project that is crucial to achieving next year's
     financial targets. Which type of power available to project
     managers might you be able to rely upon?
      a.   Referent
      b.   Reward
      c.   Formal
      d.   Expert

 16. You have been a project manager for seven years. You
     now are managing the construction of a new facility that
     must comply with the government's newly issued environ
     mental standards. You want to ensure that your team
     members are able to select methods to complete various
     activities on the project without needing to involve you
     in each situation. As you prepare your human resource
     management plan, you should document this information
     in which of the following--
      a.   Roles and responsibilities section
      b.   Resource assignment matrix
      c.   Resource breakdown structure
      d.   Staffing management plan
                    Project Human Resource Management        187


17. It is important on all projects to determine when and
    how human resources will be met. Assume that you are
    managing a project to assess methods for streamlining
    the regulatory approval process for new medical devices
    in your government agency. Because the agency has
    undergone downsizing during the past three years, sub-
    ject matter experts are in short supply. You must deter-
    mine whether the needed subject matter experts can be
    acquired from inside the agency or whether you must
    use contractors. This information should be documented
    in the--
   a. Make-or-buy decisions in the procurement
      management plan
   b. Contracts management plan
   c. Staffing management plan
   d. Resource management plan

18. In both the weak and strong matrix organizational
    structures, the primary condition leading to conflict is--
   a.   Communication barriers
   b.   Conflicting interests
   c.   Need for consensus
   d.   Ambiguous jurisdictions
188        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 19. As project manager, you are primarily responsible for
     implementing the project management plan by authoriz-
     ing the execution of project activities. Because you do
     not work in a projectized organization, you do not have
     direct access to human resource administrative activities.
     Therefore you need to--
      a. Outsource these functions
      b. Prepare a project team charter that is signed off by
         a member of the human resources department to
         delineate responsibilities
      c. Ensure that your team is sufficiently aware of
         administrative requirements to ensure compliance
      d. Ask the head of human resources to approve your
         project human resource plan personally

 20. Constant bickering, absenteeism, and substandard perfor-
     mance have characterized the behavior of certain members
     of your team. You have planned an off-site retreat for the
     team to engage in a variety of activities. Your primary
     objective for investing time and money in this event is to
     improve--
      a.   Team performance
      b.   Morale
      c.   Quality
      d.   Individual performance

 21. Two team members on your project often disagree.
     You need a conflict resolution method that provides a
     long-term resolution. You decide to use which one of the
     following approaches?
      a.   Confronting
      b.   Problem solving
      c.   Collaborating
      d.   Smoothing
                    Project Human Resource Management     189


22. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental
    factor that may influence the development of the human
    resource management plan?
   a. The organizational structure of the performing
      organization
   b. Poor communication among team members
   c. Ambiguous staffing requirements
   d. Team morale

23. As a project manager, you believe in using a "personal
    touch" to further team development. One approach that
    has proven effective toward this goal is--
   a.   Creating a team name
   b.   Providing flexible work time
   c.   Issuing a project charter
   d.   Celebrating special occasions

24. Your project has been under way for some time, but
    indicators show that it is in trouble. You have observed all
    the following symptoms of poor teamwork in your project
    team EXCEPT--
   a.   Frustration
   b.   Excessive meetings
   c.   Lack of trust or confidence in the project manager
   d.   Unproductive meetings
190     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


25. You are the project manager for a two-year project that
    is now beginning its second year. The mix of team mem-
    bers has changed, and there is confusion as to roles and
    responsibilities. In addition, several of the completed
    work packages have not received the required sign-offs,
    and three work packages are five weeks behind schedule.
    To gain control of this project, you need to--
   a. Rebaseline your original human resource plan with
      current resource requirements
   b. Change to a projectized organizational structure for
      maximum control over resource assignments
   c. Work with your team to prepare a responsibility
      assignment matrix
   d. Create a new division of labor by assigning technical
      leads to the most critical activities

26. You are part of a team that is working to develop a
    new medical implant device. Your project manager is an
    expert in medical implantation devices, yet he continually
    seeks opinions from the team about a wide variety of
    project and product issues. Team members often run
    project meetings while he sits silently at the head of the
    table. Which one of the following best characterizes his
    leadership style?
   a.   Laissez-faire
   b.   Team directed
   c.   Collaborative
   d.   Shared leadership
                     Project Human Resource Management           191


27. The major difference between the project coordinator and
    project expeditor forms of organization is that--
   a. Strong commitment to the project usually does not
      exist in the project expeditor form of organization
   b. The project coordinator cannot personally make or
      enforce decisions
   c. The project expeditor acts only as an intermediary
      between management and the project team
   d. The project coordinator reports to a higher-level
      manager in the organization

28. Which one of the following represents a constraint on the
    acquire project team process?
   a.   Preassignment of staff to the project
   b.   Recruitment practices of the organizations involved
   c.   Use of outsourcing
   d.   Team member training requirements

29. According to Herzberg's Motivator-Hygiene Theory, when
    achievement, recognition, responsibility, and advancement,
    or promotion, are not present, employees will--
   a. Become alienated with the organization and leave
   b. Lack motivation but will not be dissatisfied with
      their work
   c. Lack motivation and become dissatisfied with their work
   d. Become dissatisfied only if they do not receive
      salary increases

30. Objectives for conducting performance appraisals during the
    course of a project can include all the following EXCEPT--
   a.   Initial establishment of roles and responsibilities
   b.   Discovery of unknown and unresolved issues
   c.   Development of individual training plans
   d.   Establishment of goals for future time periods
192    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 31. Your organization is adopting a project-based approach to
     business, which has been difficult. Although project teams
     have been created, they are little more than a collection
     of functional and technical experts who focus on their
     specialties. You are managing the company's most impor-
     tant project. As you begin this project, you must place a
     high priority on--
      a. Creating an effective team
      b. Identifying the resources needed to finish the project
         on time
      c. The best way to communicate status to the CEO
      d. Establishing firm project requirements

 32. In organizing a project, a project manager must deal
     with conflict. Which statement is TRUE regarding conflict
     in projects?
      a. A matrix form of organization can produce a lack of
         clear role definitions and lead to ambiguous jurisdic-
         tions between and among functional leaders and
         project managers
      b. Sources of conflict include project priorities, PERT/CPM
         schedules, contract administrative procedures, and
         type of contract
      c. Conflict is to be avoided whenever possible
      d. Strong matrix project managers have few human
         resource conflicts, because they can dictate their needs
         to functional managers

 33. The chances for successful completion of a multidisciplinary
     project are increased if project team members are--
      a.   Problem oriented
      b.   Politically sensitive to top management's needs
      c.   Focused on individual project activities
      d.   Focused on customer demands
                   Project Human Resource Management         193


34. The terms strong matrix, balanced matrix, and weak
    matrix when applied to the matrix structure in project
    organization refer to the--
   a. Ability of the organization to achieve its goals
   b. Physical proximity of project team members to one
      another and to the project manager
   c. Degree of the project manager's authority
   d. Degree to which team members bond together

35. The key way for a project manager to promote optimum
    team performance in project teams whose members are
    not collocated is to--
   a. Build trust
   b. Establish a reward and recognition system
   c. Obtain the support of the functional managers in the
      other locations
   d. Exercise his or her right to control all aspects of
      the project

36. Hierarchical-type charts are a tool and technique for use
    in human resource planning. Which one of the following
    is helpful in tracking project costs and can be aligned
    with the organization's accounting system?
   a.   RACI
   b.   RAM
   c.   RBS
   d.   OBS
194     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


37. When choosing the most appropriate form of project
    organization, the first step is to--
   a. Create the WBS and let it determine the project
      organizational structure
   b. Produce a project management plan and determine the
      functional areas responsible for each task
   c. Refer to the project charter developed by top
      management
   d. Develop a project schedule, including a top-down
      flowchart, and identify the functional areas to perform
      each task

38. Conflicts in which following three areas represent the
    majority of all project conflicts?
   a. Personalities, cost objectives, and schedules
   b. Cost objectives, administrative procedures, and
      scarce resources
   c. Scarce resources, scheduling priorities, and personal
      work styles
   d. Personal work styles, project priorities, and cost
      objectives

39. Which of the following qualifications is the most
    important for a project manager?
   a.   Supervisory experience
   b.   Negotiation skill
   c.   Education in a technical field
   d.   Ability to work well with others

40. Determining the method and the timing of releasing team
    members should be included in the--
   a.   Staff acquisition plan
   b.   Human resource plan
   c.   Staffing management plan
   d.   Project training plan
                   Project Human Resource Management       195


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c     d         21.   a    b    c       d

2.    a   b    c     d         22.   a    b    c       d

3.    a   b    c     d         23.   a    b    c       d

4.    a   b    c     d         24.   a    b    c       d

5.    a   b    c     d         25.   a    b    c       d

6.    a   b    c     d         26.   a    b    c       d

7.    a   b    c     d         27.   a    b    c       d

8.    a   b    c     d         28.   a    b    c       d

9.    a   b    c     d         29.   a    b    c       d

10.   a   b    c     d         30.   a    b    c       d

11.   a   b    c     d         31.   a    b    c       d

12.   a   b    c     d         32.   a    b    c       d

13.   a   b    c     d         33.   a    b    c       d

14.   a   b    c     d         34.   a    b    c       d

15.   a   b    c     d         35.   a    b    c       d

16.   a   b    c     d         36.   a    b    c       d

17.   a   b    c     d         37.   a    b    c       d

18.   a   b    c     d         38.   a    b    c       d

19.   a   b    c     d         39.   a    b    c       d

20.   a   b    c     d         40.   a    b    c       d
                     Project Human Resource Management      197


Answer Key
 1. b. Projectized
        In a projectized organizational structure, all project
        team members report directly and solely to the
        project manager. He or she has complete control
        over these resources and, therefore, exercises more
        authority over them than when in any other project
        organizational structure. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 25

 2. c. Start early
        Starting the team-building process early in the project
        is crucial for setting the right tone and preventing
        bad habits and patterns from developing. [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 137
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 514

 3. d. In this strong matrix, the balance of power is shifted
       to the project manager.
        The project manager's ability to influence project
        decisions increases the higher up he or she--and
        the person to whom he or she reports--is placed in
        the organization. In the strong matrix, the project
        manager's authority ranges from moderate to high.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22
        Verma 1995, 156-157
198    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 4. b. Make the link between project performance and
       reward clear, explicit, and achievable
        Reward and recognition systems are formal manage-
        ment actions that provide an incentive to behave in
        a particular way, usually with respect to achieving
        certain goals. Such systems are described in the staff-
        ing management plan. A best practice is to give the
        team recognition throughout the life cycle [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266 and 277

 5. d. Collocation
        Collocation is the placement of team members in
        the same physical location to enhance their ability
        to perform as a team, primarily through increased
        communication as well as improved working
        relationships and productivity. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277, 532

 6. c. Enhance communications planning
        Because the dispersed project team does not share
        the same physical space each day, the possibility for
        misunderstandings, isolationism, difficulty in sharing
        information, and the cost of technology can be key
        issues. The project manager must enhance commu-
        nications planning in the virtual team as it requires
        even more communication than collocated teams.
        Additional time also may be needed to set expecta-
        tions, determine how best to resolve conflicts, involve
        people in making decisions, understand cultural dif-
        ferences, and share credit for success.[Executing]
        Kostner 1994, 53-54 and 170
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271
                   Project Human Resource Management         199


7. b. Conflicts over the relative priorities of different
      projects in competition for limited resources
       When a finite group of resources must be distributed
       across multiple projects, conflicts in work a ssignments
       will occur. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282-283, 518

8. d. Hold a project kickoff meeting
       An indispensable tool in project management, the
       kickoff or launch meeting is held at the outset of the
       project and is designed to get the project rolling. The
       meeting provides the opportunity not only to present
       the project charter and discuss the project's goals and
       objectives but also to establish rapport among team
       members. [Executing]
       Kerzner, 2009, 421-422
       Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 224-225

9. b. McGregor's Theory X
       McGregor observed two types of managers and
       classified them by their perceptions of workers.
       Theory X managers thought that workers were lazy,
       needed to be watched and supervised closely, and
       were irresponsible. Theory Y managers thought
       that, given the correct conditions, workers could be
       trusted to seek responsibility and work hard at their
       jobs. [Executing]
       McGregor 1960, 33-35
       Verma 1996, 70-71
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 263
200    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 10. a. Roles and responsibilities section
          Roles and responsibilities are listed in the human
          resource plan. This section describes roles and
          authority, responsibility, and competency or the skill
          and capacity required to complete project a ctivities.
          When team members do not have the required
          competencies, project performance may be jeopar-
          dized and the project manager must have proactive
          responses to handle these situations. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264

 11. a. Improved project performance
          Improved project performance not only increases
          the likelihood of meeting project objectives, it also
          creates a positive team experience contributing to
          the enhancement of team capabilities. It results in
          improved teamwork, enhanced people skills and
          competencies, motivated employees, reduced staff
          turnover rates, and improved overall team perfor-
          mance. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 273

 12. c. Establish a "team meeting room"
          Collocating team members, even on a temporary
          basis, enhances communications, thereby contribut-
          ing to improved project performance. In addition,
          the "team meeting room" (often called a `war room')
          provides a sense of identity to the project team and
          raises the visibility of the project within the organiza-
          tion. Creating a newsletter is simply applying another
          organizational process asset, which typically has
          proven ineffective. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277
                   Project Human Resource Management      201


13. b. Acquire project team
       The project team directory is part of project staff
       assignments, an output from the acquire project team
       process. Other outputs are resource calendars and
       updates to the project management plan. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 272

14. d. Developing a vision and strategy, and motivating
       people to achieve them
       Leadership involves developing a vision of the future
       and strategies to achieve that vision, positioning
       people to carry out the vision, and helping people
       energize themselves to overcome any barriers to
       change. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 284, 513-514

15. a. Referent
       Referent power is based on a less powerful person's
       identification with a more powerful person. This type
       of power is useful in terms of persuasion and helps
       the project manager exert influence over individuals
       from whom he or she needs support. [Planning]
       Adams et al., 1997, 174-180
       Levin, 2010, 162-163
202    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


16. a. Roles and responsibilities section
        Authority refers to the right to apply project
        resources, make decisions, and sign approvals.
        Examples include selecting methods to complete
        activities, quality acceptance, and responding to
        variances in the project. The individual authority of
        each team member should match their individual
        responsibilities. This is documented in the roles and
        responsibilities section in the human resource man-
        agement plan. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264

 17. c. Staffing management plan
        The staffing management plan is part of the human
        resource management plan. One section of it
        involves staff acquisition. Among other things, this
        section includes whether the human resources will
        come from within the organization or from external,
        contracted sources. These data then help to plan the
        acquisition of project team members. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 265

18. d. Ambiguous jurisdictions
        Ambiguous jurisdictions exist when two or more
        parties have related responsibilities, but their work
        boundaries and role definitions are unclear. This
        situation is found frequently in weak and strong
        matrix organizations because of the "two-boss"
        concept. [Executing]
        Filley 1975, 9
        Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 148-151
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 23
                   Project Human Resource Management        203


19. c. Ensure that your team is sufficiently aware of admin-
       istrative requirements to ensure compliance
       A projectized work environment is unusual because
       project managers rarely have every function under
       their control. But compliance with administrative
       requirements, government regulations, union contract
       provisions, and other constraints is a consideration in
       human resource management. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22, 267

20. a. Team performance
       Team development leads to improved team perfor-
       mance, which ultimately results in improved project
       performance. Improvements in team performance
       can come from many sources and can affect many
       areas of project performance. For example, improved
       individual skill levels such as enhanced technical
       competence may enable team members to perform
       their assigned activities more effectively. Team devel-
       opment efforts have greater benefit when conducted
       early but should take place throughout the project
       life cycle. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 274, 278

21. c. Collaborating
       Collaborating or problem solving is an effective tech-
       nique for managing conflict when a project is too
       important to be compromised. It involves incorporat-
       ing multiple ideas and viewpoints from people with
       different perspectives and offers a good opportunity
       to learn from others. It provides a long-term resolution.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283, 518
       Verma 1996, 119-120
204      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 22. a. The organizational structure of the performing
        organization
          Enterprise environmental factors can influence the
          develop human resource management plan process.
          The organizational structure of the performing orga-
          nization determines whether the project manager's
          role is a strong one (as in a strong matrix) or a weak
          one (as in a weak matrix). Other examples of enter-
          prise environmental factors are the organization's
          culture, geographic dispersion of team members,
          existing human resources, personnel administration
          functions, and marketplace conditions. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 260

 23. d. Celebrating special occasions
          Project managers can show interest in their team
          members by celebrating occasions such as birthdays,
          anniversaries with the organization, and special
          achievements. Other approaches include being sup-
          portive, being clear, learning some information about
          each team member, and being accessible. Through
          observation and conversation, the project management
          team monitors indicators such as progress toward
          project deliverables, accomplishments that are a
          source of pride for team members, and interpersonal
          issues. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277, 282, 514
                   Project Human Resource Management    205


24. b. Excessive meetings
       The problem is not too many meetings, but unpro-
       ductive ones. The purpose of project meetings is to
       focus the skills and resources of the project team on
       project performance. Meetings that are considered
       "gripe sessions" or a time for the project manager
       to "lay down the law" are demoralizing to the team.
       [Executing]
       Adams et al. 1997, 131
       Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 448-449

25. c. Work with your team to prepare a responsibility
       assignment matrix
       The responsibility assignment matrix defines project
       roles and responsibilities in terms of work p
                                                    ackages
       and activities. It can be used to show who is a
       participant, who is accountable, who handles review,
       who provides input, and who must sign off on
       specific work packages or project phases. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 262

26. d. Shared leadership
       Shared leadership is more than participatory manage-
       ment or collaboration; it involves letting the project
       team take over as much of the leadership role as it
       will accept. [Executing]
       Verma 1997, 159
       Kerzner, 2009, 224
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 294, 513-514
206      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 27. d. The project coordinator reports to a higher-level
        manager in the organization
          The relative position of the project coordinator in the
          organization is thought to lead to an increased level
          of authority and responsibility. [Executing]
          Adams et al. 1997, 15-17
          Verma 1995, 153-156
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 23

 28. b. Recruitment practices of the organizations involved
          Staff assignments in organizations are governed by
          the policies, procedures, or guidelines of individual
          components. These policies will constrain the project
          manager's actions in acquiring a project team. The
          more familiar the project manager is with such
          policies, the easier it will be for him/her to assemble
          a team. Such recruitment practices are examples of
          personnel administration policies; an enterprise envi-
          ronmental factor, which is an input to acquire project
          team. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 268
                    Project Human Resource Management        207


29. c. Lack motivation and become dissatisfied with
       their work
        Herzberg advanced the theory that hygiene factors,
        such as the poor attitude of a supervisor, lead to dis
        satisfaction but not usually to decreased motivation.
        When motivators, such as responsibility and recog-
        nition, are lacking, they lead to job dissatisfaction,
        but when such motivators are present, they tend to
        motivate a person in the performance of his or her
        work. [Executing]
        Verma 1996, 64-65
        Kerzner, 2009, 196
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 263

30. a. Initial establishment of roles and responsibilities
        Project performance appraisals are a tool and tech-
        nique for the manage project team process and
        are used, among other objectives, to reclarify roles
        and responsibilities. It is critical that team members
        receive positive feedback in what might otherwise be
        a hectic environment. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282

31. a. Creating an effective team
        An effective team is critical to project success, but
        such a team is not born spontaneously. In early
        project phases, it is vitally important for the project
        manager to place a high priority on initiating and
        implementing the team-building process. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 273-274
        Verma 1997, 137
208      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 32. a. A matrix form of organization can produce a lack of
        clear role definitions and lead to ambiguous jurisdic-
        tions between and among functional leaders and
        project managers
          Matrix management is useful but complex, involving
          difficult communication because of the use of
          borrowed and often part-time resources who are
          spread throughout the organization. [Executing]
          Adams et al. 1997, 189-194
          PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22-23

 33. a. Problem oriented
          Problem-oriented people tend to learn and use
          whatever problem-solving techniques appear h      elpful.
          Although the project manager must be politically
          sensitive, team members need not have d     eveloped
          this skill to the extent required of the project
          manager; and rather than focusing on individual
          activities, team members should take a systems
          approach focusing on the entire project. [Executing]
          Meredith and Mantel 2012, 102-103

 34. c. Degree of the project manager's authority
          In a strong matrix organization, the balance of power
          shifts toward the project manager. In a weak matrix
          organization, the balance of power shifts toward the
          functional or line manager. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 22
                     Project Human Resource Management      209


35. a. Build trust
       Team members who are physically separate from one
       another tend not to know each other well. They have
       few opportunities to develop trust in the traditional
       way, and they tend to communicate poorly with one
       another. Trust then must become the foundation
       upon which all team-building activities are built.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 271, 517-518

36. c. RBS
       The resource breakdown structure (RBS) is a varia-
       tion of the organizational breakdown structure
       (OBS) and is used to show which work elements are
       assigned to individuals and other resource categories.
       As an example, it can show all crane operators and
       cranes even though they may be scattered through-
       out the OBS and WBS, which can help to track
       project costs. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 261

37. b. Produce a project management plan and determine
       the functional areas responsible for each task
       All effort on a project starts from the project man-
       agement plan, which details the work that must
       be accomplished. It is a key input as the human
       resource management plan is developed [Planning]
       Meredith and Mantel 2012, 221-224
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 259
210  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 38. c. Scarce resources, scheduling priorities, and personal
        work styles
         Although all areas listed contain potential conflicts,
         the majority of all conflict in a project environment is
         caused by scarce resources, scheduling priorities, and
         personal work styles. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282

 39. d. Ability to work well with others
         Project management requires getting things done
         through people who generally do not report directly
         to the project manager. The ability to influence
         project team members, as well as other key stake-
         holders, is crucial for success. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 16-17, 513

 40. c. Staffing management plan
         The staffing management plan is a document that
         describes when and how human resources will
         become part of the project team and when they will
         return to their organizational units. It addresses how
         staff members will be acquired, how long they will
         remain on the project, how and when they will be
         released, training needs, and other important aspects
         of forming and disbanding the team. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 265-266
Project Communications
Management


Study Hints
The Project Communications Management questions on the
PMP(R) certification exam are relatively basic and are taken
primarily from the PMBOK(R) Guide and other PMI(R)-published
reference materials. Common sense and your own experience
will play a large role in your ability to answer the questions
on this topic. There will be questions that test your specific
knowledge of PMBOK(R) Guide terms and concepts. However,
there will also be many general questions that require you to
choose the "best" answer. To answer these questions correctly,
you must apply common sense.
   The questions focus on formal and informal communi-
cation, verbal versus written communication, performance
reporting, and management styles. PMI(R) considers manage-
ment style to be an essential component of how a project
manager communicates.
   The PMI(R) handbooks (which are now included in
Principles of Project Management, PMI(R), 1997), Roles and
Responsibilities of the Project Manager by John R. Adams
and Brian W. Campbell, Conflict Management for Project

                                                           211
212      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Managers by John R. Adams and Nicki S. Kirchof, and Team
Building for Project Managers by Linn C. Stuckenbruck and
David Marshall, should be studied thoroughly for this section
of the PMP(R) certification exam. Also review Appendix X3 in
the PMBOK(R) Guide.
   The PMI(R) publication Human Resource Skills for the Project
Manager, which is volume 2 of The Human Aspects of Project
Management by Vijay K. Verma, is another useful reference.
PMI(R) considers the kickoff meeting one of the most effective
mechanisms in Project Communications Management. The
nature and purpose of this meeting are discussed in Team
Building for Project Managers.
   PMI(R) views Project Communications Management as a
process consisting of three elements: plan communications
management, manage communications, and control commu-
nications. See PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 10-1 for an overview of
this structure. Know this chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Communications
Management topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on
the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                   Project Communications Management    213


Major Topics
Importance of project communications management
Communication dimensions
Communication channels
Communication skills
Plan communications

   The communications model
   Encode
   Transmit message
   Decode
   Acknowledge
   Feedback/Response
   Communications requirements analysis
   Communications technology
   Communication methods
   Meetings
   Communications management plan

Manage communications

   Sender-feedback model
   Choice of media
   Writing style
   Meeting management techniques
   Presentation techniques
   Facilitation techniques
   Listening techniques
   Information management systems
   Performance reporting
   Simple
   Elaborate
   Project communications

Barriers to communication
214    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Control communications

   Issue log
   Meetings
   Work performance information
   Change requests
                    Project Communications Management        215


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. As project manager, you plan to conduct a "kickoff" meet-
    ing at which you will discuss all the following EXCEPT--
   a. Establishing working relationships and standard formats
      for global communication
   b. Reviewing project plans
   c. Establishing individual and group responsibilities and
      accountabilities
   d. Discussing specific legal issues regarding the contract

 2. One purpose of the communications management plan is
    to provide information about the--
   a. Methods that will be used to convey information
   b. Methods that will be used for releasing team members
      from the project when they are no longer needed
   c. Project organization and stakeholder responsibility
      relationships
   d. Experience and skill levels of each team member

 3. Project managers for international projects should recog-
    nize key issues in cross-cultural settings and place special
    emphasis on--
   a. Establishing a performance reporting system
   b. Using good communication planning
   c. Establishing and following a production schedule for
      information distribution to avoid responding to requests
      for information between scheduled communications
   d. Using translation services for formal, written
      project reports
216        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  4. You are managing a project with team members located
     at customer sites on three different continents. As you
     plan communications with your stakeholders, you
     should review--
      a.   Stakeholder management plan
      b.   Stakeholder register
      c.   Communications model
      d.   Communications channels

  5. Having worked previously on projects as a team m  ember,
     you are pleased to now be the project manager to
     develop a new process to ensure that software projects
     in your IT Department are considered a success and are
     not late or over budget. However, many of your team
     members are new to the organization. As you work
     to establish a high-performing team, you realize the
     importance of--
      a.   Mentoring
      b.   Coaching
      c.   Moving quickly through the forming and storming stages
      d.   Safeguarding information

  6. As a project manager, you try to use empathic listening
     skills to help understand another person's frame of
     reference. In following this approach, you should--
      a.   Mimic the content of the message
      b.   Probe, then evaluate the content
      c.   Evaluate the content, then advise
      d.   Rephrase the content and reflect the feeling
                    Project Communications Management     217


7. Statements of organizational policies and philosophies,
   position descriptions, and constraints are examples of--
  a.   Formal communication
  b.   Lateral communication
  c.   External communication
  d.   Horizontal communication

8. You have decided to organize a study group of other
   project managers in your organization to help prepare for
   the PMP(R) exam. What type of communication activity are
   you employing in your efforts to organize this group?
  a.   Horizontal
  b.   Vertical
  c.   Official
  d.   External

9. Your company CEO just sent you an e-mail asking you
   to make a presentation on your project, which has been
   in progress for 18 months, to over 50 identified internal
   and external stakeholders. You have been conducting
   such presentations and holding meetings regularly on this
   important project. You should begin by--
  a.   Defining the audience
  b.   Determining the objective
  c.   Deciding on the general form of the presentation
  d.   Circulating issues to be discussed
218        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 10. You are responsible for a project in your organization that
     has multiple internal customers. Because many people
     in your organization are interested in this project, you
     realize the importance of--
      a. Conducting a stakeholder analysis to assess informa-
         tion needs
      b. Performing communications planning early
      c. Determining the communications requirements of
         the customers
      d. Having an expert on communications management an
         customer relationship management on your team

 11. Project managers spend a great deal of time communi-
     cating with the team, the stakeholders, the client, and
     the sponsor. One can easily see the challenges involved,
     especially if one team member must communicate a
     technical concept to another team member in a different
     country. The first step in this process is to--
      a.   Encode the message
      b.   Decode the message
      c.   Determine the feedback loops
      d.   Determine the medium

 12. On your project, scope changes, constraints, assumptions,
     integration and interface requirements, and overlapping
     roles and responsibilities pose communications c hallenges.
     The presence of communication barriers is most likely to
     lead to--
      a.   Reduced productivity
      b.   Increased hostility
      c.   Low morale
      d.   Increased conflict
                    Project Communications Management       219


13. The most common communication problem that occurs
    during negotiation is that--
  a.   Each side may misinterpret what the other side has said
  b.   Each side may give up on the other side
  c.   One side may try to confuse the other side
  d.   One side may be too busy thinking about what to say
       next to hear what is being said

14. You finally have been appointed project manager for
    a major company project. One of your first activities
    as project manager will be to create the communica-
    tions management plan. As you match the stakeholder
    with the appropriate communication methods for that
    stakeholder, you could use any one of the following
    methods EXCEPT--
  a.   Interactive communications
  b.   Passive communications
  c.   Pull communications
  d.   Push communications

15. As an output of plan communications, it may be
    necessary to update the project documents, which
    include the--
  a.   Stakeholder register
  b.   Corporate policies, procedures, and processes
  c.   Knowledge management system
  d.   Stakeholder management plan

16. Sample attributes of a communications management plan
    include which one of the following?
  a.   Roles
  b.   Responsibilities
  c.   Ethics
  d.   Authority
220  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 17. The process of conferring with others to come to terms or
     reach an agreement is called--
    a.   Win-win
    b.   Negotiation
    c.   Getting to "yes"
    d.   Confrontation

 18. The key benefit of the control communications process
     is to--
    a. Sharing best practices with other project teams in the
       organization with lessons learned
    b. Ensuring the information needs of stakeholders are met
    c. Ensuring an optimal information flow among commu-
       nication participants
    d. Providing stakeholders with information about resolved
       issues, approved status, and project status

 19. The issue log is useful in control communications because
     it--
    a. Provides what has happened and is a platform for sub-
       sequent communications
    b. Includes the project's risk register
    c. Organizes and summarizes information gathered
    d. Serves as an information management system for
       communications management
                   Project Communications Management  221


20. As head of the PMO, you will receive performance reports
    for all major projects. You decided to set a guideline for
    project managers as performance reporting should--
   a. Collect work performance information on the status
      of deliverables
   b. Provide earned value data for project forecasting
   c. Provide information at an appropriate level for each
      audience
   d. Focus on cost and schedule variances rather than
      scope, resources, quality, and risks

21. A simple performance report provides information on--
   a.   Percent complete
   b.   Customer satisfaction
   c.   Unacceptable variances
   d.   Scope creep

22. Communication is important when setting and m  anaging
    expectations with the stakeholders. Which one of the
    following statements is NOT true regarding the importance
    of communications within a project?
   a. Communications is one of the single biggest contribu-
      tors to project success or failure.
   b. Project resources should be spent primarily on com-
      municating information that leads to project success.
   c. Effective communications includes awareness of
      communication styles, cultural issues, relationships,
      personalities, and the context of the situation
   d. Listening is part of communicating and is a way to
      gain insight into problem areas, managing conflicts,
      and making decisions.
222     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


23. In person-to-person communication, messages are sent
    on verbal levels and nonverbal levels simultaneously. As a
    general rule, what percentage of the message actually is
    sent through nonverbal cues?
   a.   5 percent to 15 percent
   b.   20 percent to 30 percent
   c.   40 percent to 50 percent
   d.   Greater than 50 percent

24. As an output from control communications, it may be
    necessary to update the--
   a.   Project schedule
   b.   Forecasts
   c.   Corporate policies, procedures, and processes
   d.   Knowledge management system

25. In project communications, the first step in a written
    communication is to--
   a. Analyze the facts and assumptions that have a bearing
      on the purpose of the message
   b. Gather thoughts or ideas
   c. Develop a logical sequence of the topics to be addressed
   d. Establish the basic purpose of the message

26. A communications management plan includes which one
    of the following sample contents?
   a. Issues
   b. Escalation processes, including time frames and the
      management chains
   c. Dimensions
   d. Project assumptions and constraints
                     Project Communications Management       223


27. Your organization has decided to use project manage-
    ment for all of its endeavors. It has established a Center of
    Excellence for Project Management to support the move-
    ment into management by projects and has appointed
    you as its director. Since you work in a matrix environ-
    ment, which of the following types of communications is
    the most essential for success?
   a.   Upward
   b.   Horizontal
   c.   Downward
   d.   Diagonal

28. You have heard recently that the client calls your progress
    reports the "Code of Hammurabi" because they seem to be
    written in hieroglyphics and are completely indecipherable
    to all but an antiquities scholar. This situation could have
    been avoided by--
   a. Informing the client at the start of the project about
      the types of reports they will receive
   b. Using risk management techniques to identify
      client issues
   c. Hiring an expert report writer to prepare standard reports
   d. Engaging in communications planning

29. Assume on your project you have identified 250 stake-
    holders located in three continents and of these 250,
    you have determined that 200 of them will be actively
    involved and interested in your project. Therefore, as you
    determine an appropriate communication method, your
    best approach is--
   a.   Elaborate status reports
   b.   Simple status reports
   c.   Knowledge repositories
   d.   E-mails
224     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


30. You want to ensure that the information you collect
    showing project progress and status is meaningful to
    stakeholders. You want to combine the type and format
    of the stakeholder's information needs with an analysis
    of the value of the information. You will document this
    information in the--
   a.   Communications register
   b.   Stakeholder register
   c.   Stakeholder management plan
   d.   Communications management plan

31. Work performance information is an output of which
    process?
   a. Manage risks
   b. Manage communications
   c. Control communications

   d. Report performance

32. Assume you want to optimize the work performance
    reports you will use to manage communications. You
    should do so by--
   a. Determining the most appropriate choice of communi-
      cations media
   b. Setting different communications techniques for differ-
      ent stakeholder groups
   c. Ensuring the information is consistent with regulations
      and standards
   d. Ensuring comprehensiveness, accuracy, and availability
                   Project Communications Management      225


33. Information received from stakeholders concerning
    project operations can be distributed and used to modify
    or improve future performance of the project. This modi-
    fication or improvement is done as an update to organiza-
    tional process assets during which following process?
   a.   Plan communications management
   b.   Distribute information
   c.   Manage communications
   d.   Report performance

34. General management skills relevant to the manage
    communications process include--
   a.   Operational planning
   b.   Organizational behavior
   c.   Setting and managing expectations
   d.   Influencing the organization

35. Changes in the report formats and lessons learned
    documents process should trigger changes to the--
   a. Project management plan and performance
      reporting system
   b. Integrated change control system and the communica-
      tions management plan
   c. Monitor and control project process and the project
      management plan
   d. Organizational process assets updates

36. One way to determine how to best update and commu-
    nicate project performance and respond to stakeholder
    information requests is to--
   a. Review the effectiveness of the communications
      management plan
   b. Set up a portal
   c. Hold meetings
   d. Distribute performance reports
226        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 37. The purpose of work performance data in control
     communications is to present results of comparative
     analysis to the--
      a.   Performance measurement baseline
      b.   Communications management plan
      c.   Stakeholder management plan
      d.   Deliverable status

 38. Because communications planning often is linked tightly
     with enterprise environmental factors, which one of the
     following statements is true?
      a. The project's organizational structure has a major
         effect on the project's communications requirements.
      b. Standardized guidelines, work instructions, and perfor-
         mance measurement criteria are key items to consider.
      c. Procedures for approving and issuing work authoriza-
         tions should be taken into consideration.
      d. Criteria and guidelines to tailor standard processes
         to the specific needs of the project should be stated
         explicitly.

 39. You are working on a project with 15 stakeholders. The
     number of communication channels on this project is--
      a.   15
      b.   105
      c.   210
      d.   225
                    Project Communications Management    227


40. Which of the following formulas calculates the number of
    communication channels in a project?
        n( n - 1)
   a.
            2
       2
   b. n - 1
         2
        n2 - 1
   c.
          n
        2n - 2
   d.
          1n
                   Project Communications Management    229


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c     d        21.   a   b    c   d

2.    a   b    c     d        22.   a   b    c   d

3.    a   b    c     d        23.   a   b    c   d

4.    a   b    c     d        24.   a   b    c   d

5.    a   b    c     d        25.   a   b    c   d

6.    a   b    c     d        26.   a   b    c   d

7.    a   b    c     d        27.   a   b    c   d

8.    a   b    c     d        28.   a   b    c   d

9.    a   b    c     d        29.   a   b    c   d

10.   a   b    c     d        30.   a   b    c   d

11.   a   b    c     d        31.   a   b    c   d

12.   a   b    c     d        32.   a   b    c   d

13.   a   b    c     d        33.   a   b    c   d

14.   a   b    c     d        34.   a   b    c   d

15.   a   b    c     d        35.   a   b    c   d

16.   a   b    c     d        36.   a   b    c   d

17.   a   b    c     d        37.   a   b    c   d

18.   a   b    c     d        38.   a   b    c   d

19.   a   b    c     d        39.   a   b    c   d

20.   a   b    c     d        40.   a   b    c   d
                   Project Communications Management       231


Answer Key
 1. d. Discussing specific legal issues regarding the contract
       Conducted after contract award or approval of the
       project, the kickoff meeting provides an opportunity
       for project participants to get to know each other
       and review information about the project. It is not a
       forum to discuss detailed project issues. [Planning]
       Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 224-225
       Kerzner, 200, 421-423

 2. a. Methods that will be used to convey information
       These methods or technologies can include memos,
       e-mails, and/or press conferences. They are one of
       several items to include in this plan. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296

 3. b. Using good communications planning
       An effective way to manage cultural diversity on
       projects is for the project manager to get to know
       the team members and to use good communication
       planning. It is necessary to consider time zones and
       language barriers as well as cultural differences and
       to include a glossary of common terminology in the
       communications management plan. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 290, 296, and 516
232      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  4. b. Stakeholder register
          The stakeholder register is an input to the plan
          communications management process. It contains
          the identified stakeholders including their name,
          position, location, and role; their main requirements,
          expectations, and potential influence; and whether
          or not they are supporters, neutral, or resistors of the
          project. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 291, 398

  5. b. Coaching
          Many communications skills are common to both
          general management and project management.
          Coaching is one example. It is especially useful to
          develop the team to higher levels of competency
          and performance and helping people recognize
          their potential through empowerment and develop-
          ment. It is used to aid team members to develop
          or enhance their skills required to achieve project
          success. [Planning and Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 519

  6. d. Rephrase the content and reflect the feeling
          Empathic listening requires seeing the world the
          way the other person sees it, with the goal of under-
          standing that person's views and feelings. Unlike
          sympathetic listening, empathic listening contains
          no element of value judgment. It is essential to listen
          actively and effectively and to question and probe
          ideas to help ensure better understanding. [Executing]
          Covey 2004, 239-243
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 515
                   Project Communications Management    233


7. a. Formal communication
      Formal communication provides direction and con-
      trol for project team members and other employees.
      They also contain reports, minutes, and briefings and
      are examples of organizational process assets used in
      manage communications and in control communica-
      tions. [Executing and Monitoring and Controlling]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287, 300, 306

8. a. Horizontal
      Communication activities have many potential
      dimensions to consider in exchanging information
      between the sender and the receiver. Horizontal
      communication occurs between or among peers, that
      is, across, rather than up and down, the organization.
      [Executing]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287

9. d. Circulating issues to be discussed
      Meetings are held regularly on projects to update and
      communicate project information and to respond to
      requests from stakeholders for the information. Most
      meetings consist of stakeholders coming together to
      resolve problems or make decisions. Typical meetings
      begin with a defined list of issues to be discussed,
      which are distributed in advance with minutes
      and other key information relative to the meeting.
      [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 295
234    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


10. b. Performing communications planning early
        On most projects, communications planning should
        be performed very early such as when the project
        management plan is prepared. This approach then
        allows appropriate resources, such as time and
        budget, to be allocated to communications activities.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 290

11. a. Encode the message
        As the first step in the basic communication model,
        it is essential to translate thoughts or ideas into a
        language that is understood by others. Then, the
        message is sent using various technologies, and
        the receiver decodes it or translates it back into
        meaningful thoughts or ideas. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 293-294

12. d. Increased conflict
        Barriers to communication lead to a poor flow of
        information. Accordingly, messages are misinterpreted
        by recipients, thereby creating different perceptions,
        understanding, and frames of reference. Left
        unchecked, poor communication increases conflict
        among project stakeholders, which causes the other
        problems listed to arise. Then, the project manager
        must work actively to resolve conflicts so disruptive
        impacts are prevented [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288
        Verma 1997, 24-25
                   Project Communications Management         235


13. a. Each side may misinterpret what the other side
       has said
       Effective communication is the key to successful
       negotiation. Misunderstanding is the most common
       communication problem. A project manager should
       listen actively, acknowledge what is being said, and
       speak for a purpose. It is essential to listen attentively
       ad communicate articulately. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 517
       Fisher et al. 1991, 32-34
       Verma 1996, 165

14. b. Passive communications
       You can use several different methods to share
       information. Interactive communications are multi
       directional in nature, such as conferences and meet-
       ings. Pull communications are those methods where
       the recipient finds the information at their leisure
       and gets the information that they want at their
       discretion. Push communications is targeted informa-
       tion sent to a select group but does not certify that
       the recipient actually has received the information,
       such as e-mail. Passive communications is more of
       a style of delivering the content or receiving the
       content. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 295

15. a. Stakeholder register
       In the plan communications management process the
       two documents that may be updated are the project
       schedule and the stakeholder register. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 297
236    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


16. b. Responsibilities
        The communications management plan should iden-
        tify the person responsible for communicating the
        information and the person responsible for authoriz-
        ing release of any confidential information. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296

 17. b. Negotiation
        Negotiation if done well increases the probability of
        project success and involves conferring with others of
        shared or opposed interests with a view toward com-
        promise. Negotiating is required to achieve mutually
        acceptable agreements between parties. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 288, 517

18. b. Ensuring optimal information flow among all
       communication participants
        While control communications as a process monitors
        and controls communications throughout the p    roject
        to ensure the communication needs of project
        stakeholders are met, the key benefit is to ensure
        an optimal information flow among all communica-
        tion participants at any moment in time. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 303
                    Project Communications Management       237


19. a. Provides what has happened and is a platform for
       subsequent communications
        The issue log is an input to control communications
        and is used to document and monitor issue resolu-
        tion. It can facilitate communications and ensure a
        common understanding of issues. In this process its
        information provides a repository of what already
        has happened in the project and serves as a p  latform
        for subsequent communications to be delivered.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 305

20. c. Provide information at an appropriate level for
       each audience
        Performance reporting is a tool and technique in
        manage communications. Performance reports range
        from simple status reports to more elaborate reports.
        The emphasis is to ensure performance reporting
        provides the needed information for each audience
        level. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 301

21. a. Percent complete
        A simple status report may show performance infor-
        mation such as percent complete or status informa-
        tion for each area (scope, schedule, cost, and quality).
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 301
238    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


22. b. Project resources should be spent primarily on com-
       municating information that leads to project success
        Communications is considered one of the single
        most powerful indicators of project success or failure.
        Effective communications includes an awareness of all
        types of filters that may be impeding or straining com-
        munications. Listening is vital to good communications.
        Resources also should be spent on determining where
        a lack of communications can lead to failure. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 289-291

23. d. Greater than 50 percent
        Nonverbal cues can be divided into four categories:
        physical, aesthetic, signs, and symbols. Many studies
        have demonstrated that most messages are conveyed
        through such nonverbal cues as facial expression,
        touch, and body motion, rather than through the
        words spoken. [Executing]
        Verma 1996, 19

24. b. Forecasts
        Communications control often entails the need
        to update project documents, including forecasts,
        performance reports, and the issue log. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 308

25. b. Gather thoughts or ideas
        For any type of communication, the first step in
        the basic communication model is to encode, which
        means the sender translates thoughts or ideas into
        language [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 293
                    Project Communications Management     239


26. b. Escalation processes, including time frames and the
       management chains
       Numerous items, including escalation processes,
       are part of the communications management plan.
       Business issues may arise that cannot be resolved
       at a lower staff level. During such a time, an escala-
       tion process is required to show time frames and the
       names of people in the management chain who will
       work to resolve these issues. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296

27. b. Horizontal
       Horizontal communication is between the project
       manager and his or her peers and will be where
       most of the communications will occur. Accordingly,
       it is essential for success in a highly competitive
       environment and requires diplomacy, experience,
       and mutual respect. [Executing]
       Verma 1997, 136
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287

28. d. Engaging in communications planning
       The communications management plan is prepared
       during plan communications management. The plan
       should include a description of the information to be
       distributed such as format, content, level of detail,
       as well as conventions and definitions to be used.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296
240  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 29. c. Knowledge repositories
         Knowledge repositories along with Intranet sites,
         e-learning, and lessons learned data bases are
         examplesof methods of pull communications. They
         are used for large volumes of information or for large
         audiences and require recipients to access communi-
         cation content at their own discretion. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 295

 30. d. Communications management plan
         The project team must conduct an analysis of stake-
         holder communications requirements to ensure that
         stakeholders are receiving the information required to
         participate in the project. For example, stakeholders
         typically require performance reports for information
         purposes. Such information requirements should be
         included in the communications management plan.
         [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 291 and 296

 31. c. Control communications
         Work performance information, an output of control
         communications, organizes and summaries perfor-
         mance data such as status and progress information
         on the project at the level required by stakeholders.
         This information next is communicated to the appro-
         priate stakeholders. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 307
                   Project Communications Management       241


32. d. Ensuring comprehensiveness, accuracy, and
       availability
       Work performance reports are an input to manage
       communications. They are a collection of project
       performance and status information used to facilitate
       discussion and create communications. They should
       be comprehensive, accurate, and available in a timely
       way. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 299

33. c. Manage communications
       Feedback from stakeholders is an example of an
       organizational process asset to update as a result of
       the manage communications process. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 303

34. c. Setting and managing expectations
       Communications skills are part of general manage-
       ment skills, and setting and managing expectations
       are an example in manage communications. This
       helps create, collect, distribute, store, retrieve, and
       ultimately dispose of project information according to
       the communications management plan. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 287-288, 297

35. d. Organizational process assets updates
       Any changes in report formats or lessons learned
       documentation are organizational process asset
       updates as an output of control communications.
       The documentation may become part of the
       historical data base for both the project and the
       organization. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 308
242    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


36. c. Hold meetings
        Meetings are a tool and technique in control com-
        munications. They can be face to face or online and
        in different locations and may include not only the
        project team but also suppliers, vendors, and other
        stakeholders. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 307

37. a. Performance measurement baseline
        Wok performance data are an input in control com-
        munications. These data organize and summarize
        information gathered and present the results of
        comparative analysis to the performance measure-
        ment baseline. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 305

38. a. The project's organizational structure has a major
       effect on the project's communications requirements.
        Enterprise environmental factors undoubtedly will
        influence the project's success and must be consid-
        ered because communication must be adapted to the
        project environment. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 29, 291
                   Project Communications Management      243


39. b. 105
       The formula for determining the number of communi
       cation channels is n(n - 1)/2, where n = the number
       of stakeholders: 15(15 - 1)/2 = (15)(14)/2 = 105. It is
       important to note that project managers must plan
       the project's communications requirements carefully,
       limiting who will communicate with whom given the
       potential for confusion when multiple communications
       channels can exist. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 292


40. a. n( n - 1)
           2
       Where n = the number of stakeholders. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 292
Project Risk Management


Study Hints
Most exam takers find the Project Risk Management questions
on the PMP(R) certification exam demanding because they
address many concepts that project managers may not have
been exposed to in their work or education. However, the
questions correspond closely to PMBOK(R) Guide material,
so you should not have much difficulty if you study the
concepts and terminology found there. Although the ques-
tions included do not contain mathematically complex work
problems, they do require you to know certain theories, such
as expected monetary value (EMV) and decision-tree analysis.
Additionally, you are likely to encounter questions related to
levels of risk faced by both buyer and seller based on various
types of contracts.
   PMI(R) views risk management as a six-step process including
plan risk management, identify risks, perform qualitative risk
analysis, perform quantitative risk analysis, plan risk response,
and control risk. PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 11-1 provides an over-
view of this approach. Know this chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Risk Management
topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on the areas
most likely to appear on the exam.

                                                             245
                                  Project Risk Management      247


Major Topics
Project risk management

   Risk defined
   Types of risk
   Known risks
   Unknown risks
   Organization's risk attitude
   Risk appetite
   Risk tolerance
   Risk threshold
   Risk factors
   Risk event
   Probability of occurrence
   Amount at stake (impact)
   Risk conditions
   Risk tolerances

Risk processes
Plan risk management

   Planning meetings and analyses
   Analytical techniques
   Risk management plan
   Methodology
   Roles and responsibilities
   Budget
   Timing
   Categories
   Definitions of probability and impact
   Probability and impact matrix
   Revised stakeholder tolerances
   Reporting formats
   Tracking
248  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Identify risks

   Definition
   Timing
   Plans and baselines
   Project documents

Identify risks tools and techniques

   Documentation reviews
   Brainstorming
   Delphi method
   Interviews
   Root cause analysis
   Strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats (SWOT)
   analysis
   Influence diagrams
   Checklists
   Assumption analysis
   Diagramming techniques
   Expert judgment

Risk register

   List of identified risks
   List of potential responses

Perform qualitative risk analysis

   Prioritize risks for further action
   Risk probability and impact assessment
   Probability and impact matrix
   Risk data quality assessment
   Risk categories
   Risk urgency assessment
   Expert judgment
                                 Project Risk Management      249


   Assumption log updates
   Risk register updates
   Relative ranking or priority list of risks
   Risks by category
   Causes of risks requiring particular attention
   Risks requiring near-term responses and additional
   analysis and responses
   Watch list of low priority risks

Perform quantitative risk analysis

   Numerical analysis of the effect of identified risks on
   project objectives
   Interviewing
   Probability distribution
   Sensitivity analysis
   Expected monetary value analysis
   Decision-tree analysis
   Monte Carlo analysis
   Path convergence
   Statistical distribution
   Risk register updates
   Probabilistic analysis of the project
   Probability of achieving cost and time objectives
   Prioritized list of quantified risks
   Trends

Plan risk responses

   Negative risks or threats
   Avoid
   Transfer
   Mitigate
   Accept
   Positive risks or opportunities
   Exploit
250      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


   Share
   Enhance
   Accept
   Contingent responses
   Risk register updates
   Risk-related contract decisions
   Updates to plans and documents

Control risks

   Definition and purpose
   Tools and techniques
   Risk reassessment
   Risk audits
   Variance and trend analysis
   Technical performance measurement
   Reserve analysis
   Status meetings
   Updates to the risk register
   Change requests
   Updates to organizational process assets, plans,
   and documents
                            Project Risk Management      251


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.
252  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  1. As the project manager, you have the option of p   roposing
     one of three systems to a client: a full-feature system
     that not only satisfies the minimum requirements but
     also offers numerous special functions (the "Mercedes");
     a system that meets the client's minimum requirements
     (the "Yugo"); and a system that satisfies the minimum
     requirements plus has a few extra features (the "Toyota").
     The on-time records and associated profits and losses are
     depicted on the below decision tree. What is the expected
     monetary value of the "Toyota" system?

                                                   Profit/Loss



                                           ime     $100,000
                                     On T = 60%
                                      Prob
                                      Late
                                     Prob
                                          = 40
                                               %   ($30,000)
                            s
                         de
                       ce
                    er
                   M

                                           ime     $50,000
                                     On T = 90%
                            Toyota    Pr o b
                                      Late
                                     Prob
                                            = 10
                                                 % ($10,000)
                         Yu
                            go




                                             ime $10,000
                                     On T 99%
                                        r o b =
                                      P
                                      Late
                                     Prob
                                            = 1% ($1,000)


    a.   $9,900
    b.   $44,000
    c.   $45,000
    d.   $48,000
                                Project Risk Management      253


2. A risk response strategy that can be used for both threats
   and opportunities is--
  a.   Share
  b.   Avoid
  c.   Accept
  d.   Transfer

3. The risk urgency assessment is a tool and technique used
   for--
  a.   Plan risk responses
  b.   Identify risks
  c.   Perform qualitative risk analysis
  d.   Perform quantitative risk analysis

4. Projects are particularly susceptible to risk because--
  a. Murphy's law states that "if something can go wrong,
     it will"
  b. There is uncertainty in all projects
  c. Project management tools are generally unavailable at
     the project team level
  d. There are never enough resources to do the job

5. As project manager, you have assembled the team to
   prepare a comprehensive list of project risks. Which one
   of the following documents would be the most helpful in
   this process?
  a.   OBS
  b.   WBS
  c.   RBS
  d.   CBS
254        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  6. You are working on identifying possible risks to your
     project to develop a nutritional supplement. You want
     to develop a comprehensive list of risks that can be
     addressed later through qualitative and quantitative risk
     analysis. An information gathering technique used to
     identify risks is--
      a.   Documentation reviews
      b.   Probability and impact analysis
      c.   Checklist analysis
      d.   Brainstorming

  7. The Delphi technique is a particularly useful method for
     identifying risks to--
      a. Present a sequence of decision choices graphically to
         decision makers
      b. Define the probability of occurrence of specific variables
      c. Reduce bias in the analysis and keep any one person
         from having undue influence on the outcome
      d. Help take into account the attitude of the decision
         maker toward risk

  8. A workaround is--
      a. An unplanned response to a negative risk event
      b. A plan of action to follow when something
         unexpected occurs
      c. A specific response to certain types of risk as
         described in the risk management plan
      d. A proactive, planned method of responding to risks
                                 Project Risk Management        255


 9. Most statistical simulations of budgets, schedules, and
    resource allocations use which one of the following
    approaches?
   a.   PERT
   b.   Decision-tree analysis
   c.   Present value analysis
   d.   Monte Carlo analysis

10. In the below path convergence example, if the odds of
    completing activities 1, 2, and 3 on time are 50 percent,
    50 percent, and 50 percent, what are the chances of
    starting activity 4 on day 6?

                            Activity 1
                             5 days




                            Activity 2
         Start                                    Activity 4
                             5 days




                            Activity 3
                             5 days



   a.   10 percent
   b.   13 percent
   c.   40 percent
   d.   50 percent
256     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


11. A project health check identified a risk that your project
    would not be completed on time. As a result, you are
    quantifying the project's risk exposure and determining
    what cost and schedule contingency reserves might be
    needed. You performed a schedule risk analysis using
    Monte Carlo analysis. The basis for your schedule risk
    analysis is the--
   a.   WBS
   b.   Gantt chart
   c.   Schedule network diagram and duration estimates
   d.   Probability/impact risk rating matrix

12. You are developing radio frequency (RF) technology
    that will improve overnight package delivery. You ask
    each stakeholder to estimate the most optimistic pack-
    age delivery time using the RF technology, the most
    pessimistic time, and the most likely time. This shows
    that for your next step you plan to--
   a.   Use a beta or triangular probability distribution
   b.   Conduct a sensitivity analysis
   c.   Structure a decision analysis as a decision tree
   d.   Determine the strategy for risk response

13. Each one of the following statements about risk avoidance
    is true EXCEPT that it--
   a. Focuses on changing the project management plan to
      eliminate entirely the threat
   b. Isolates the project's objectives from the risk's impact
   c. Accepts the consequences of the risk event should
      it occur
   d. Changes the project objective that is in jeopardy
                                Project Risk Management      257


14. If the probability of event 1 is 80 percent and of event 2
    is 70 percent and they are independent events, how likely
    is it that both events will occur?
   a.   6 percent
   b.   15 percent
   c.   24 percent
   d.   56 percent

15. The project scope statement should be used in the
    identify risk process because it--
   a. Identifies project assumptions
   b. Identifies all the work that must be done and, there-
      fore, includes all the risks on the project
   c. Helps to organize all the work that must be done on
      the project
   d. Contains information on risks from prior projects

16. Your project team has identified all the risks on the
    project and has categorized them as high, medium,
    and low. The "low" risks are placed on which one of the
    following for monitoring?
   a.   Threat list
   b.   Low risk list
   c.   Watch list
   d.   Low impact list

17. A general contingency is used for--
   a. Risks that are identified at the outset of the project
   b. Risks that are not identified at the outset of the project
      but are known before they occur
   c. Risks that cannot be known before they occur because
      they are external risks
   d. Any risks that cannot be known before they occur
258     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


18. The simplest form of quantitative risk analysis and
    modelingtechniques is--
   a.   Probability analysis
   b.   Sensitivity analysis
   c.   Delphi technique
   d.   Utility theory

19. If a business venture has a 60-percent chance to earn
    $2 million and a 20-percent chance to lose $1.5 million,
    what is the expected monetary value of the venture?
   a.   -$50,000
   b.   $300,000
   c.   $500,000
   d.   $900,000

20. You are managing the construction of a highly sophisti-
    cated data center in Port Moresby, Papua, New Guinea.
    Although this location offers significant economic advan-
    tages, the threat of typhoons has caused you to create
    a backup plan to operate in Manila in case the center
    is flooded. This plan is an example of what type of
    risk response?
   a.   Passive avoidance
   b.   Mitigation
   c.   Active acceptance
   d.   Deflection
                                Project Risk Management      259


21. A recent earned value analysis shows that your project is
    20 percent complete, the CPI is 0.67, and the SPI is 0.87.
    In this situation, you should--
   a. Perform additional resource planning, add resources,
      and use overtime as needed to accomplish the same
      amount of budgeted work
   b. Rebaseline the schedule, then use Monte Carlo analysis
   c. Conduct a risk response audit to help control risk
   d. Forecast potential deviation of the project at comple-
      tion from cost and schedule targets

22. The purpose of a numeric scale in risk management is
    to--
   a. Avoid high-impact risks
   b. Assign a relative value to the impact on project
      objectives if the risk in question occurs
   c. Rank order risks in terms of very low, low, moderate,
      high, and very high
   d. Test project assumptions

23. Risk score measures the--
   a.   Variability of the estimate
   b.   Product of the probability and impact of the risk
   c.   Range of schedule and cost outcomes
   d.   Reduced monetary value of the risk event

24. Which of the following is an example of recommended
    corrective action in risk management?
   a.   Conducting a risk audit
   b.   Engaging in additional risk response planning
   c.   Performing the contingency plan
   d.   Conducting a risk review
260    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 25. The primary advantage of using decision-tree analysis in
     project risk management is that it--
      a. Considers the attitude of the decision maker toward risk
      b. Forces consideration of the probability of each outcome
      c. Helps to identify and postulate risk scenarios for
         the project
      d. Shows how risks can occur in combination

 26. Your project is using complex, unproven technology.
     Your team conducted a brainstorming session to identify
     risks. Poor allocation of project resources was the number
     one risk. This risk was placed on the risk register, which
     included at this point a--
      a.   Watch list
      b.   Potential risk response
      c.   Known unknown
      d.   List of other risks requiring additional analysis

 27. When managing current projects, it is important to use
     lessons learned from previous projects to improve the
     organization's project management process. Therefore, in
     project closing procedures, it is important to review the--
      a.   Secondary risks that occurred
      b.   Checklists for identify risks
      c.   WBS dictionary
      d.   Fallback plan

 28. Risk mitigation involves--
      a.   Using performance and payment bonds
      b.   Eliminating a specific threat by eliminating the cause
      c.   Avoiding the schedule risk inherent in the project
      d.   Reducing the probability and/or impact of an adverse
           risk event to an acceptable threshold
                               Project Risk Management      261


29. On a typical project, when are risks highest and impacts
    (amount at stake) lowest?
   a.   During the concept phase
   b.   At or near completion of the project
   c.   During the implementation phase
   d.   When the project manager is replaced

30. Two key inputs to the perform quantitative risk analysis
    process are the--
   a.   WBS and milestone list
   b.   Scope management plan and process improvement plan
   c.   Schedule management plan and cost management plan
   d.   Procurement management plan and quality baseline

31. The highest risk impact generally occurs during which
    one of the following project life-cycle phases?
   a.   Concept and planning
   b.   Planning and implementation
   c.   Implementation and closeout
   d.   Concept and closeout

32. Which one of the following statements best characterizes
    an activity cost or duration estimate developed with a
    limitedamount of information?
   a. It should be part of the planning for the needed
      management reserve.
   b. It is an input to identify risks.
   c. It is an output from identify risks.
   d. It must be factored into the list of prioritized
      project risks.
262     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


33. What is the primary difference between a risk audit and a
    risk reassessment?
   a. A risk reassessment is conducted at the completion of
      a major phase; audits are conducted after the project
      is complete.
   b. Project stakeholders conduct risk audits; management
      conducts reassessments.
   c. Risk reassessments are regularly scheduled; risk audits
      are performed as defined in the project's risk manage-
      ment plan.
   d. There is no difference; they are virtually the same.

34. Accurate and unbiased data are essential for perform
    qualitative risk analysis. Which one of the following
    should you use to examine the extent of understanding
    of project risk?
   a.   Data quality assessment
   b.   Project assumptions testing
   c.   Sensitivity analysis
   d.   Influence diagrams

35. Assigning more talented resources to the project to
    reduce time to completion or to provide better quality
    than o
          riginally planned are examples of which one of the
    following strategies?
   a.   Enhance
   b.   Exploit
   c.   Share
   d.   Contingent response
                                Project Risk Management      263


36. Which of the following is NOT an objective of a
    risk audit?
   a. Confirming that risk management has been practiced
      throughout the project life cycle
   b. Confirming that the project is well managed and that
      the risks are being controlled
   c. Evaluating the effectiveness of risk responses in
      dealing with identified risks
   d. Ensuring that each risk identified and deemed critical
      has a computed expected value

37. Contingency planning involves--
   a. Defining the steps to be taken if an identified risk
      event should occur
   b. Establishing a management reserve to cover
      unplanned expenditures
   c. Preparing a stand-alone document that is separate
      from the overall project plan
   d. Determining needed adjustments to make during the
      implementation phase of a project

38. Assume that you are working on a new product for your
    firm. Your CEO learned that a competitor was about to
    launch a new product that has similar features to those of
    your project. The competitor plans to launch the product
    on September 1. It is now March 1. Your schedule called
    for you to launch your product on December 1. Your CEO
    now has now mandated that you fast track your project
    so you can launch your product on August 1. This fast
    track schedule is an example of an--
   a.   Unknown risk
   b.   A risk taken to achieve a reward
   c.   A response that requires sharing the risk
   d.   A passive avoidance strategy
264        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 39. As head of the project management office, you need to
     focus on those items where risk responses can lead to
     better project outcomes. One way to help you make these
     decisions is to--
      a.   Use a probability and impact matrix
      b.   Assess trends in perform quantitative risk analysis results
      c.   Prioritize risks and conditions
      d.   Assess trends in perform qualitative risk analysis
           results

 40. You are the project manager for the construction of an
     incinerator to burn refuse. Local residents and environ-
     mental groups are opposed to this project. Management
     agrees to move this project to a different location. This is
     an example of which one of the following risk responses?
      a.   Passive acceptance
      b.   Active acceptance
      c.   Mitigation
      d.   Avoidance
                       Project Risk Management       265


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d    21.    a    b    c       d

2.    a   b    c   d    22.    a    b    c       d

3.    a   b    c   d    23.    a    b    c       d

4.    a   b    c   d    24.    a    b    c       d

5.    a   b    c   d    25.    a    b    c       d

6.    a   b    c   d    26.    a    b    c       d

7.    a   b    c   d    27.    a    b    c       d

8.    a   b    c   d    28.    a    b    c       d

9.    a   b    c   d    29.    a    b    c       d

10.   a   b    c   d    30.    a    b    c       d

11.   a   b    c   d    31.    a    b    c       d

12.   a   b    c   d    32.    a    b    c       d

13.   a   b    c   d    33.    a    b    c       d

14.   a   b    c   d    34.    a    b    c       d

15.   a   b    c   d    35.    a    b    c       d

16.   a   b    c   d    36.    a    b    c       d

17.   a   b    c   d    37.    a    b    c       d

18.   a   b    c   d    38.    a    b    c       d

19.   a   b    c   d    39.    a    b    c       d

20.   a   b    c   d    40.    a    b    c       d
                                   Project Risk Management      267


Answer Key
 1. b. $44,000
        EMV Toyota = ($50,000 x 90% ) + ( -$10,000 x 10% )

                     = $45,000 + ( -$1,000 )

                     = $44,000
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339

 2. c. Accept
        Risk exists on every project, and it is unrealistic to
        think it can be eliminated completely. There are
        certain risks that simply must be accepted because
        we cannot control whether or not they will occur
        (for example, an earthquake). Acceptance is a
        strategyfor dealing with risk that can be used for
        both threats and opportunities. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345-346

 3. c. Perform qualitative risk analysis
        Risks that may happen in the near-term need urgent
        attention. The purpose of the risk urgency assess-
        ment is to identify those risks that have a high like-
        lihood of happening sooner rather than later. It is
        combined with the risk ranking to give a final risk
        severity ranking [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 333
268    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  4. b. There is uncertainty in all projects
          Every project has uncertainty associated with it
          because a project by its definition is a temporary
          endeavor undertaken to create a unique product,
          service, or result. Risks may be known or unknown.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 3 and 310

  5. c. RBS
          The risk breakdown structure (RBS) helps to provide
          framework for ensuring a comprehensive process of
          systematically identified risks. It is a hierarchically
          organized depiction of the identified risks by risk
          categories. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 317, 332

  6. d. Brainstorming
          Brainstorming is a frequently used information-
          gathering technique for identifying risk, because it
          enables the project team to develop a list of potential
          risks relatively quickly. Project team members, or
          invited experts, participate in the session. Risks are
          easily categorized for follow-on analysis. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 324
                               Project Risk Management      269


7. c. Reduce bias in the analysis and keep any one person
      from having undue influence on the outcome
      The Delphi technique provides a means for arriving
      at a consensus using a panel of experts to deter-
      mine a solution to a specific problem. Project risk
      experts are identified but participate anonymously.
      Each panelistanswers a questionnaire. Then the
      responses, along with opinions and justifications, are
      evaluated, and statistical feedback is given to each
      panel member. The process continues until group
      responses converge toward a solution. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 324
      Wideman 1992, C-2 and C-3

8. a. An unplanned response to a negative risk event
      Used in control risks, a workaround is a response
      to a threat that has occurred for which a prior
      response had not been planned or was not effective.
      [Monitoring and Controlling]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 567

9. d. Monte Carlo analysis
      Simulations are typically performed using Monte
      Carlo in which a project model is computed many
      times with the input values chosen at random for
      each iteration from the probability distribution of
      these variables. Monte Carlo analysis supports vari-
      ous statistical distributions (normal, triangular, beta,
      uniform, etc.) used in estimating budgets, schedules,
      and resource allocations. [Planning]
      Frame 2002, 89
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 340
270    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


10. b. 13 percent
        Probability (starting activity 4 on day 6) = (0..5)3
        = 0.125 or 13%
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331

11. c. Schedule network diagram and duration estimates
        When determining the likelihood of meeting the
        project's schedule end date through Monte Carlo,
        the schedule network diagram and duration estimate
        are used as inputs to the simulation program. Cost
        risk, on the other hand, uses cost estimates from the
        WBS. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 340

12. a. Use a beta or triangular probability distribution
        Interviews often are used to help quantify the prob-
        ability and consequences of risks on project objec-
        tives. The type of information collected during the
        interview depends on the type of probability distri-
        bution that is used. A beta or triangular distribution
        is used widely when information is gathered on the
        optimistic (low), pessimistic (high), and most likely
        scenarios. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 336-337
                                Project Risk Management      271


13. c. Accepts the consequences of the risk event should
       it occur
       Accepting the consequences of the risk event is
       categorized as risk acceptance. With this risk response
       approach, the project team takes no action to reduce
       the probability of the risk's occurring. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 344-345

14. d. 56 percent
       The likelihood is determined by multiplying the
       probability of event 1 by the probability of event 2.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332
       Wideman 1992, IV-7

15. a. Identifies project assumptions
       Project assumptions, which should be enumerated in
       the project scope statement, are areas of uncertainty,
       and as such are potential causes of project risk. The
       scope statement and the WBS are part of the scope
       baseline, an input to identify risks. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 322

16. c. Watch list
       Even low-priority risks must be monitored. A watch
       list is used to ensure such risks are tracked for con-
       tinued monitoring. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 347
272      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 17. d. Any risks that cannot be known before they occur
          There is a category of risks that is sometimes called
          unknown-unknowns, meaning that the risk is not
          knowable and, therefore, the probability of the risk
          is also not knowable. Your lead technical advisor
          becoming seriously ill, your offices being ransacked
          by persons engaged in industrial espionage, or one
          of your subcontractors winning the lottery and run-
          ning off to the Cayman Islands are all examples of
          risks that are not known before they occur. However,
          such risks must be expected and a general contin-
          gency can be set aside to address the impact they
          leave in their wake. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 310, 346, 348, and 533
          Pritchard 2005, 183-188

 18. b. Sensitivity analysis
          Sensitivity analysis, as a quantitative risk analysis and
          modeling technique, helps to determine the risks
          that have the most potential impact on the project.
          It examines the extent to which the uncertainty
          of each project element affects the objective being
          examined when all other uncertain elements are held
          at their baseline values. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 338
          Wideman 1992, C-1 and C-2

 19. d. $900,000
          EMV = ($2M x 60%) + (-$1.5M x 20%) =
          ($1.2M) + (-$300,000) = $900,000
          [Planning]
          Frame 2002, 192
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
                                 Project Risk Management    273


20. c. Active acceptance
        Active acceptance means not only accepting the
        consequences of a risk, but also establishing a
        plan for dealing with the risk, should it occur.
        Organizations typically establish a contingency plan
        funded by a contingency reserve (of time, money,
        or resources) to handle known, or even some-
        times potential unknown, threats or opportunities.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345

21. d. Forecast potential deviation of the project at comple-
       tion from cost and schedule targets
        Earned value is used for monitoring overall project
        performance against a baseline plan. It is a part of
        variance analysis, a tool and technique in control
        risks. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 352

22. b. Assign a relative value to the impact on project
       objectives if the risk in question occurs
        You can develop relative or numeric, well-defined
        scales using agreed-upon definitions by the stake-
        holders. When using a numeric scale, each level
        of impact has a specific number assigned to it.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332
274      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 23. b. Product of the probability and impact of the risk
          The risk score provides a convenient way to compare
          risks because comparing impacts or probabilities alone
          is meaningless. It helps guide risk responses. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 332

 24. c. Performing the contingency plan
          Corrective action in risk management is the p rocess
          of making changes to bring expected performance
          in line with the risk management plan. Such action
          consists of performing either the planned risk
          response, such as implementing contingency plans,
          or a workaround. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 353

 25. b. Forces consideration of the probability of each
        outcome
          As a graphical way to bring together information,
          decision-tree analysis quantifies the likelihood of
          failure and places a value on each decision. Usually
          applied to cost and time considerations, this form of
          risk analysis may be linked to a sensitivity analysis.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
          Wideman 1992, C-2 and C-3

 26. b. Potential risk response
          The risk register is prepared first in the identify
          risks process. It contains a list of identified risks in
          as much detail as possible and a list of potential
          responses when they are identifiable at this time.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 327
                                  Project Risk Management      275


27. b. Checklists for identify risks
        Checklists are a tool and a technique of the identify
        risks process and include risks encountered on
        similar, previous projects identified through the
        lessons learned process and from other sources. The
        projectteam should review the checklist as part of the
        identify risks process as well as during closeout. The
        team should add to the list as necessary, based on its
        experience, to help others in the future. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 325

28. d. Reducing the probability and/or impact of an adverse
       risk event to an acceptable threshold
        It is often more effective to take early action to
        reduce probability and/or impact of a risk occurring
        on a project than attempting to repair the damage
        after the risk has occurred. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345

29. a. During the concept phase
        Risks are highest at the beginning of a project
        because the project faces an uncertain future, and
        impacts are lowest at this time because investments
        in human and material resources are minimal.
        [Planning]
        Frame 2002, 80; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 40
        Wideman 1992, II-1-II-5
276      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 30. c. Schedule management plan and cost management plan
          The cost and schedule of a project are two areas
          significantly affected by risk occurrences. Information
          on these two areas, because of their quantitative
          nature, provides excellent input to the perform
          quantification risk process to help determine overall
          impact and to provide guidelines as managing risk
          reserves. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 335

 31. c. Implementation and closeout
          Opportunity and risk generally remain high d   uring
          the concept and planning phases. However, the
          amount at stake remains low because of the relatively
          low level of investment up to that point. During
          project implementation and closeout, however, risk
          falls to lower levels as remaining unknowns are
          translated into knowns. At the same time, the amount
          at stake rises steadily as the necessary resources are
          invested to complete the project. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 40; Wideman 1992, II-5-II-6

 32. b. It is an input to identify risks.
          Much of the output from planning in other knowl-
          edge areas, such as activity cost and duration esti-
          mates, may entail risk and is reviewed during the
          identify risks process. This process requires an
          understanding of the schedule, cost, and quality
          management plans found in the project management
          plan. Estimates that are aggressive or developed with
          a limited amount of information are even more likely
          to entail risk and, therefore, must also be an input to
          the identify risks process. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 321-322
                                 Project Risk Management        277


33. c. Risk reassessments are regularly scheduled; risk
       audits are performed as defined in the project's risk
       management plan.
        Risk reassessment is an ongoing activity by the proj-
        ect team. Risks should be discussed at every status
        meeting. Risk audits are performed during the project
        life cycle to examine and document the effectiveness
        of risk responses. They are conducted at appropriate
        frequencies as defined in the risk management plan.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351

34. a. Data quality assessment
        Perform qualitative risk analysis requires accurate
        and unbiased data. The use of low-quality data may
        result in a qualitative risk analysis that is of little use
        to the project manager regarding understanding of
        the risk, data available about the risk, data quality,
        and data reliability and integrity. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 332

35. b. Exploit
        Although it might have a negative connotation,
        exploitation is a strategy used for risks with positive
        impacts where the organization wants to ensure that
        the opportunity is realized. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345
278    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


36. d. Ensuring that each risk identified and deemed critical
       has a computed expected value
        It is not feasible or necessary to quantify every risk.
        Therefore, a risk audit should never have as an objec-
        tive to ensure that each project risk has a computed
        expected value. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351

37. a. Defining the steps to be taken if an identified risk
       event should occur
        For some risks it is appropriate for the project team
        to make a response plan that will be executed only
        under certain predefined conditions if it is believed
        that there will be sufficient warning to implement the
        plan. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 346

38. b. A risk taken to achieve a reward
        Project risk has its origin in the uncertainty that
        is present in all projects. Organizations and stake-
        holders are willing to accept varying degrees of
        risk, and risks that are threats to the project may
        be accepted if the risks are within tolerances and
        are in b
                alance with the rewards to be gained. This
        example of adopting a fast-track schedule is a risk
        taken to achieve the reward created by the earlier
        completion date. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 345
                                Project Risk Management      279


39. a. Use a probability and impact matrix
       The probability and impact matrix can be used to
       classify risks according to their level of impact and
       to prioritize them for future quantitative analyses
       and responses based on their rating. Typically these
       risk rating rules are specified by the organization in
       advance of the project. The matrix specifies combi-
       nations of probability and impact that lead to rating
       the risks as low, moderate, or high priority. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 331-332

40. d. Avoidance
       Risk avoidance involves changing the project
       management plan to eliminate the threat entirely.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 344
Project Procurement
Management


Study Hints
The Project Procurement Management questions on the
PMP(R) certification exam tend to be more process oriented
than legally focused. You do not need to know any country's
specific legal code; however, some non-U.S. exam takers
complain that the nature of many of the questions requires
an understanding of U.S. contract law. Although an occasional
question relating to the U.S. system may appear on the exam,
such questions do not seem to be problematic for most exam
takers. A firm understanding of the procurement process
usually will help you to find the correct answer. Moreover,
the questions will be worded such that the project manager or
project team is the "buyer."
   The exam requires you to know the basic differences
between the three broad categories of contracts (fixed-price,
cost-reimbursement, and time-and-materials) and the risks
inherent in specific contract types for both the buyer and the
seller. Several questions will also test your knowledge of the
various types of contracts within each category (for example,
firm-fixed-price versus fixed-price-incentive-fee contracts).

                                                           281
282  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


A question or two may also be included on international con-
tracting, such as the timing of foreign currency exchange and
duty on goods delivered to a foreign country.
   PMI(R) views Project Procurement Management as a four-step
process comprising plan procurement management, conduct
procurements, control procurements, and close procurements.
See PMBOK(R) Guide Figure 12-1 for an overview of this struc-
ture. Know this chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Procurement
Management topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on
the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                       Project Procurement Management    283


Major Topics
Project procurement management overview
Plan procurement management

   Make-or-buy analysis
   Procurement management plan
   Procurement statement of work
   Contract categories and risks
   Fixed-price
   Cost-reimbursement
   Time-and-materials
   Contract types and risks
   Cost-plus-fixed-fee
   Cost-plus-incentive-fee
   Cost-plus-award-fee
   Fixed-price-incentive-fee
   Firm-fixed-price
   Fixed price with economic price adjustments
   Contract incentives
   Contract origination
   Source selection criteria
   Procurement documents
   Make-or-buy decisions
   Change requests

Conduct procurements

   Proposals
   Qualified seller list
   Evaluating prospective sellers
   Contract negotiation
   Weighting system
   Screening system
   Independent estimates
   Proposal evaluation techniques
284      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


   Bidder conferences
   Expert judgment
   Analytical techniques
   Contract negotiation stages and tactics
   Five stages
   Negotiation tactics
   Selected sellers
   Agreements
   Contracts

Control procurements

   Procurement documents
   Standard clauses
   Elements of a legally enforceable contract
   Changes and change control
   Undefined work
   Procurement performance reviews
   Claims administration
   Records management system

Close procurements

   Contract closure procedure
   Procurement audit
   Procurement negotiations
   Closed procurements

Organizing for contract management

   Centralized contracting
   Decentralized contracting

Privity of contract
Foreign currency exchange
                        Project Procurement Management  285


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. What doctrine causes a party to relinquish rights
    under a contract because it knowingly fails to execute
    those rights?
   a.   Assignment of claims
   b.   Material breach
   c.   Waiver
   d.   Warranties

 2. Which term describes those costs in a contract that are
    associated with two or more projects but are not traceable
    to either of them individually?
   a.   Variable
   b.   Direct
   c.   Indirect
   d.   Semivariable

 3. Contract type selection is dependent on the degree of
    risk or uncertainty facing the project manager. From the
    perspective of the buyer, the preferred contract type in a
    low-risk situation is--
   a.   Firm-fixed-price
   b.   Fixed-price-incentive
   c.   Cost-plus-fixed fee
   d.   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost
286        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  4. The buyer has negotiated a cost-plus-incentive fee contract
     with the seller. The contract has a target cost of $300,000,
     a target fee of $40,000, a share ratio of 80/20, a maximum
     fee of $60,000, and a minimum fee of $10,000. If the
     seller has actual costs of $380,000, how much fee will the
     buyer pay?
      a.   $104,000
      b.   $56,000
      c.   $30,000
      d.   $24,000

  5. Which term describes the failure by either the buyer or
     the seller to perform part or all of the duties of a contract?
      a.   Termination of contract
      b.   Partial performance
      c.   Breach of contract
      d.   Contract waiver

  6. In some cases, contract termination refers to--
      a.   Contract closeout by mutual agreement
      b.   Contract closeout by delivery of goods or services
      c.   Contract closeout by successful performance
      d.   Certification of receipt of final payment

  7. Significant differences between the seller's price and
     your independent estimate may indicate all the following
     EXCEPT the--
      a.   SOW was not adequate
      b.   Seller misunderstood the SOW
      c.   Sellers failed to respond
      d.   Project team chose the wrong contract type
                        Project Procurement Management      287


 8. You are a contractor for a state agency. Your company
    recently completed a water resource management project
    for the state and received payment on its final invoice
    today. A procurement audit has been conducted. Formal
    notification that the contract has been closed should be
    provided to your company by the--
   a.   State's project manager
   b.   Person responsible for procurement administration
   c.   Project control officer
   d.   Project sponsor or owner

 9. Which term describes contract costs that are traceable to
    or caused by a specific project work effort?
   a.   Variable
   b.   Fixed
   c.   Indirect
   d.   Direct

10. When a seller breaches a contract, the buyer cannot
    receive--
   a.   Compensatory damages
   b.   Punitive damages
   c.   Liquidated damages
   d.   Consequential damages

11. Which term is NOT a common name for a procurement
    document that solicits an offer from prospective sellers?
   a.   Contractor initial response
   b.   Request for information
   c.   Request for quotation
   d.   Invitation for negotiation
288        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 12. Because you are working under a firm-fixed-price
     contract, management wants you to submit the final
     invoice and close out the contract as soon as possible.
     Before final payment on the contract can be authorized,
     you must--
      a.   Prepare a contract completion statement
      b.   Audit the procurement process
      c.   Update and archive contract records
      d.   Settle subcontracts

 13. Recent data indicate that more than 10,000 airline pas-
     sengers are injured each year from baggage that falls from
     overhead bins. You performed a make-or-buy analysis
     and decided to outsource an improved bin design and
     manufacture. The project team needs to develop a list of
     qualified sources. As a general rule, which method would
     the project team find especially helpful?
      a.   Advertising
      b.   Internet
      c.   Trade catalogs
      d.   Relevant local associations

 14. As you prepare to close out contracts on your project,
     you should review all the following types of documentation
     EXCEPT the--
      a.   Contract document for the contract being closed
      b.   Procurement audit report
      c.   Invoice and payment records
      d.   Seller performance reports
                        Project Procurement Management      289


15. You are working on a new project in your organization.
    You need to decide how best to staff the project and
    handle all its resource requirements. Your first step should
    be to--
   a. Conduct a make-or-buy analysis
   b. Conduct a market survey
   c. Solicit proposals from sellers using an RFP to deter-
      mine whether you should outsource the project
   d. Review your procurement department's qualified-seller
      lists and send an RFP to selected sellers

16. Your company decided to award a contract for p  roject
    management services on a pharmaceutical research
    project. Because your company is new to project manage-
    ment and does not understand the full scope of services
    that may be needed under the contract, it is most appro-
    priate to award a--
   a.   Firm-fixed-price contract
   b.   Fixed-price-incentive contract
   c.   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract
   d.   Time-and-materials contract

17. Requirements for formal contract acceptance and closure
    usually are defined in the--
   a.   Proposal
   b.   Statement of work
   c.   Contract terms and conditions
   d.   Procurement audit report
290        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 18. You plan to award a contract to provide project manage-
     ment training for your company. You decide it is impor-
     tant that any prospective contractor have an association
     with a major university that awards master's certificates in
     project management. This is an example of--
      a.   Setting up an independent evaluation
      b.   Preparing requirements for your statement of work
      c.   Establishing a weighting system
      d.   Establishing source selection criteria

 19. All the following elements must be evident in a written
     contract for it to be legally enforceable EXCEPT--
      a.   Legal capacity
      b.   Mutual assent
      c.   Appropriate form
      d.   Pricing structure

 20. A purchase order is a good example of which form
     of contracting?
      a.   Unilateral
      b.   Bilateral
      c.   Trilateral
      d.   Severable

 21. You are responsible for ensuring that your seller's
     performance meets contractual requirements. For effective
     contract control, you should--
      a.   Hold a bidders' conference
      b.   Establish the appropriate contract type
      c.   Implement the contract change control system
      d.   Develop a statement of work
                       Project Procurement Management       291


22. The primary benefit of contract control procurements is
    to ensure that--
   a. Buyers conduct performance reviews
   b. Payment is made in a timely fashion
   c. Disagreements are handled quickly and to every-
      one's satisfaction
   d. Both parties meet contractual obligations and protect
      their legal rights

23. Buyers use a variety of methods to provide incentives to
    a seller to complete work early or within certain contrac-
    tually specified time frames. One such incentive is the
    use of liquidated damages. From the seller's perspective,
    liquidated damages are what form of incentive?
   a.   Positive
   b.   Negative
   c.   Nominal
   d.   Risk-prone

24. The principal function of a warranty is to--
   a. Provide assurance of the level of quality to be provided
   b. Provide a way to assert claims for late payment
   c. Provide a way to allow additional time following accep-
      tance to correct deficiencies, without additional costs
   d. Ensure that goods purchased fit the purposes for
      which they are to be used
292     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


25. You have decided to award a contract to a seller that has
    provided quality services to your company frequently in
    the past. Your current project, although somewhat differ-
    ent from previous projects, is similar to other work the
    seller has performed. In this situation, to minimize your
    risk you should award what type of contract?
   a.   Fixed price with economic price adjustment
   b.   Fixed-price-incentive (firm target)
   c.   Firm-fixed-price
   d.   Cost-plus-award-fee

26. As project manager, you need a relatively fast and infor-
    mal method addressing disagreements with contractors.
    One such method is to submit the issue in question to
    an impartial third party for resolution. This process is
    known as--
   a.   Alternative dispute resolution
   b.   Problem processing
   c.   Steering resolution
   d.   Mediation litigation

27. A no-cost settlement sometimes is used--
   a. To close out a successful contract
   b. In lieu of formal termination procedures
   c. When buyer property has been furnished under
      the contract
   d. When such an arrangement is acceptable to one of the
      parties involved
                        Project Procurement Management        293


28. When writing payment terms in your fixed-price sub
    contracts it is especially important to--
   a. Include incentives if the seller exceeds or fails below
      defined objectives
   b. Provide flexibility to redirect the seller if the scope of
      work is not defined precisely confusion
   c. Link progress made to compensation paid
   d. Associate the payment to a specific time period for
      more efficient accounting

29. A buyer has negotiated a fixed-price-incentive-fee contract
    with the seller. The contract has a target cost of $200,000,
    a target profit of $30,000, and a target price of $230,000.
    The buyer also has negotiated a ceiling price of $270,000
    and a share ratio of 70/30. If the seller completes the con-
    tract with actual costs of $170,000, how much profit will
    the buyer pay the seller?
   a.   $21,000
   b.   $35,000
   c.   $39,000
   d.   $51,000

30. Requirements for formal deliverable acceptance are
    defined in the--
   a.   Contract
   b.   Procurement management plan
   c.   Overall project management plan
   d.   Specifications
294    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 31. Payment bonds are often required by the contract and
     require specific actions under the stated conditions.
     Payment bonds are specifically designed to ensure that
     the prime contractor provides payment of--
      a.   Insurance premiums
      b.   Weekly payrolls
      c.   Subcontractors, laborers, and sellers of material
      d.   Damages for accidents caused

 32. You are working on a contract in a remote location. The
     contract requires you to be on site at the office on a daily
     basis. You were unable to get to the office for three days
     last month because of severe blizzard conditions. Your
     failure to appear at the office was excused because of a
     clause in the contract entitled--
      a.   Non compos mentis
      b.   Forjurer royalme
      c.   Force majeure
      d.   Force minoris dictus

 33. All of the following are examples of good control
     procurement skills that project managers need to
     exercise EXCEPT--
      a. Approving invoices as the work is completed
      b. Supervising the work to be done under the terms of
         the contract
      c. Developing contract clauses
      d. Preparing and processing change requests

 34. The best approach to resolve the settlement of all out-
     standing contract changes, claims, and disputes is using--
      a.   Litigation
      b.   Alternative dispute resolution
      c.   Negotiation
      d.   Mediation
                       Project Procurement Management       295


35. On large contracts, the contract administrator typically
    has a need to resolve ambiguity in the clauses that govern
    work performance and other issues. Assume that on your
    contract there is an order of precedence clause. This
    means that--
   a. Inconsistencies in the solicitation of the contract shall
      be resolved in a given order of procedure
   b. An alternative dispute resolution process is in place
      that shall be followed to resolve any conflicts
   c. Any ambiguities are generally interpreted against the
      party who drafted the document
   d. Undefinitized contractual actions cannot be authorized

36. During contract negotiations on large contracts, the
    negotiation process focuses on many key issues, with
    price being one of them. Separate negotiations can be
    made on price, quantity, quality, and timing, which can
    significantly lengthen the process. The negotiation process
    can be shortened, however, provided that--
   a. Planning is done for negotiations
   b. Expertise of the project management staff in the
      procurement process is at a high level
   c. A request for proposal is used rather than a request
      for quotation
   d. There is integrity in the relationship and prior history
      with the vendor

37. Contract negotiations are NOT required when--
   a.   A company uses sealed bids
   b.   There is a sole source procurement
   c.   A competitive range is established
   d.   A two-step process is used
296    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 38. It is critical during the proposal preparation stage that--
      a. The negotiation strategy is determined
      b. A change management strategy is developed
      c. Roles and responsibilities for the ultimate project are
         determined
      d. Contract terms and conditions are reviewed before the
         proposal is submitted to the client

 39. Which of the following types of contracts has the least
     risk to the seller?
      a.   Firm-fixed-price
      b.   Cost-plus-fixed-fee
      c.   Cost-plus-award-fee
      d.   Fixed-price-incentive fee

 40. Assume that your company has a cost-plus-fixed-fee
     contract. The contract value is $110,000, which consists of
     $100,000 of estimated costs with a 10-percent fixed fee.
     Assume that your company completes the work but only
     incurs $80,000 in actual cost. What is the total cost to
     the project?
      a.   $80,000
      b.   $90,000
      c.   $10,0000
      d.   $125,000
                       Project Procurement Management    297


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d           21.   a    b    c   d

2.    a   b    c   d           22.   a    b    c   d

3.    a   b    c   d           23.   a    b    c   d

4.    a   b    c   d           24.   a    b    c   d

5.    a   b    c   d           25.   a    b    c   d

6.    a   b    c   d           26.   a    b    c   d

7.    a   b    c   d           27.   a    b    c   d

8.    a   b    c   d           28.   a    b    c   d

9.    a   b    c   d           29.   a    b    c   d

10.   a   b    c   d           30.   a    b    c   d

11.   a   b    c   d           31.   a    b    c   d

12.   a   b    c   d           32.   a    b    c   d

13.   a   b    c   d           33.   a    b    c   d

14.   a   b    c   d           34.   a    b    c   d

15.   a   b    c   d           35.   a    b    c   d

16.   a   b    c   d           36.   a    b    c   d

17.   a   b    c   d           37.   a    b    c   d

18.   a   b    c   d           38.   a    b    c   d

19.   a   b    c   d           39.   a    b    c   d

20.   a   b    c   d           40.   a    b    c   d
                       Project Procurement Management  299


Answer Key
 1. c. Waiver
       Under the doctrine of waiver, a party can relinquish
       rights that it otherwise has under the contract. If
       the seller offers incomplete, defective, or late perfor-
       mance, and the buyer's project manager knowingly
       accepts that performance, the buyer has waived its
       right to strict performance. In some circumstances,
       the party at fault may remain liable for provable
       damages, but the waiver will prevent the buyer from
       claiming a material breach and, thus, from terminat-
       ing the contract. [Executing]
       Adams et al. 1997, 275
       Kerzner, 2009, 850

 2. c. Indirect
       The nature of an indirect cost is such that it is neither
       possible nor practical to measure how much of the
       cost is attributable to a single project. These costs are
       allocated to the project by the performing organiza-
       tion as a cost of doing business. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202, 365

 3. a. Firm-fixed-price
       Buyers prefer the firm-fixed-price contract because
       it places more risk on the seller. Although the seller
       bears the greatest degree of risk, it also has the
       maximum potential for profit. Because the seller
       receives an agreed-upon amount regardless of its
       costs, it is motivated to decrease costs by efficient
       production. [Planning]
       Adams et al. 1997, 229-231
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363
300    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 4. d. $24,000
        Comparing actual costs with the target cost shows
        an $80,000 overrun. The overrun is shared 80/20
        (with the buyer's share always listed first). In this
        case 20% of $80,000 is $16,000, the seller's share,
        which is deducted from the $40,000 target fee.
        The remaining $24,000 is the fee paid to the seller.
        [Planning and Closing]
        Garrett 2007, 123
        PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364

 5. c. Breach of contract
        A breach of contract is a failure to perform either
        express or implied duties of the contract. Either the
        buyer or the seller can be responsible for a breach of
        contract. [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 278
        Ward 2008, 45
        Kerzner, 2009, 849

 6. a. Contract closeout by mutual agreement
        A contract can end in successful performance, mutual
        agreement, or breach of contract. Contract closeout
        by mutual agreement or breach of contract is called
        contract termination. [Closing]
        Garrett 2007, 185, PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 387

 7. d. Project team chose the wrong contract type
        The contract type is typically dictated by the pro-
        curement SOW and chosen by the contracting officer.
        Independent estimates are a tool and technique in
        conduct procurements. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376
                        Project Procurement Management          301


8. b. Person responsible for procurement administration
       The person responsible for procurement administra-
       tion should provide, in writing, formal notification
       that the contract has been completed. Requirements
       for formal acceptance and closeout should be defined
       in the contract. [Closing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 389

 9. d. Direct
       Direct costs are always identified with the cost
       objectives of a specific project and include salaries,
       travel and living expenses, and supplies in direct
       support of the project. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 202, 207, and 365

10. b. Punitive damages
       Punitive damages are designed to punish a guilty
       party and, as such, are considered penalties. Because
       a breach of contract is not unlawful, punitive
       damages are not awarded. The other remedies listed
       are available to compensate the buyer's loss. [Closing]
       Ward 2008, 357

11. b. Request for information
       Procurement documents are used to solicit proposals
       from prospective sellers. A request for information is
       generally used by the buyer to have potential sellers
       propose various pieces of information related to a prod-
       uct, service, or result or to a seller capability. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 368
302    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 12. d. Settle subcontracts
          All payments due must be settled by the seller before
          the contract can be officially closed. The other items
          listed are activities performed by the buyer. [Closing]
          Garrett 2007, 128-133

 13. a. Advertising
          Advertising in newspapers or specialty trade publica-
          tions is an excellent way to identify qualified bidders.
          Detailed information about specific sources may
          require more extensive effort, such as site visits or
          contact with previous customers. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376

 14. b. Procurement audit report
          In most organizations, a procurement audit is con-
          ducted after the contract has been closed. Therefore,
          the project manager would not have a procurement
          audit report to review. Contract document for the
          contract being closed, invoice and payment records,
          and seller performance reports are examples of the
          documents that should be available to the project
          manager and should be reviewed at closeout.
          [Closing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 388-389
                        Project Procurement Management       303


15. a. Conduct a make-or-buy analysis
        A make-or-buy analysis is a plan procurement man-
        agement tool and technique used to determine
        whether a particular product, service, or result can
        be produced or performed cost effectively by the
        performing organization or should be contracted out
        to another organization. The analysis includes both
        direct and indirect costs and any administrative costs
        incurred to manage the contractor. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 365

16. d. Time-and-materials contract
        A time-and-materials contract is a type of c ontract
        that provides for the acquisition of supplies or services
        on the basis of direct labor hours, at specified fixed
        hourly rates for wages, overhead, general and admin-
        istrative expenses, and profit; and materials at cost,
        including materials-handling costs. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364

17. c. Contract terms and conditions
        The contract terms and conditions typically describe
        the procedure the buyer will employ to close the
        contract. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377-378, 387

18. d. Establishing source selection criteria
        The selection criteria are typically included in
        procurement documents and are then used to rate
        or score proposals. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 368-369
304    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


19. d. Pricing structure
        The following elements must be present for a con-
        tract to be legally enforceable: legal capacity, mutual
        assent, consideration, legality, and an appropriate
        contract form that follows applicable laws governing
        businesses. [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 240

20. a. Unilateral
        The purchase order is a unilateral (one signature)
        offer that includes a promise to pay upon delivery.
        [Planning]
        Adams et al. 1997, 231

21. c. Implement the contract change control system
        Contract change control entails ensuring that contract
        changes are properly approved and that everyone
        who needs to know is made aware of such changes.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383

22. d. Both parties meet contractual obligations and protect
       their legal rights
        Contracts are awarded to obtain goods and services
        in accordance with the buyer's stated requirements.
        Although there are multiple purposes in the control
        procurements process, ensuring that the seller
        delivers what is stated in the contract is of paramount
        importance. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 379
                         Project Procurement Management       305


23. b. Negative
        Liquidated damages are considered negative incentives
        because they result in a loss of revenue for the seller
        if it fails to perform rather than a gain in revenue if it
        performs well. [Closing]
        Ward 2008, 251
        Kerzner, 2009, 849

24. a. Provide assurance of the level of quality to be provided
        A warranty is one party's assurance to the other
        that goods will meet certain standards of quality,
        including condition, reliability, description, function,
        or performance. This assurance may be express or
        implied. [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 272
        Kerzner, 2009, 850
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 369

25. c. Firm-fixed-price
        In a firm-fixed-price contract, the seller receives a
        fixed sum of money for the work performed regard-
        less of costs. This arrangement places the g  reatest
        financial risk on the seller and encourages it to
        control costs. [Planning]
        Adams et al.1997, 229
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363
306    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


26. a. Alternative dispute resolution
        Alternative dispute resolution, or dispute resolution,
        is a relatively informal way to address differences of
        opinion on contracts. Its purpose is to address such
        issues without having to seek formal legal redress
        through the courts. [Executing, Monitoring and
        Controlling, and Closing]
        Ward 2008, 15-17
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 378, 384, 388

27. b. In lieu of formal termination procedures
        A no-cost settlement can be used in lieu of formal
        termination procedures when the seller has indicated
        that such an arrangement is acceptable, no buyer
        property has been furnished under the contract, no
        payments are due the seller, no other obligations
        are outstanding, and the product or service can be
        readily obtained elsewhere. [Closing]
        Garrett 2007, 191

28. c. Link progress made to compensation paid
        A buyer under a fixed-price contract should pay a
        seller for work delivered rather than time expended.
        Linking payment with progress ensures that the seller
        will focus on results and not on effort expended.
        [Planning]
        Garrett 2007, Chapter 8
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 362-363
                        Project Procurement Management          307


29. c. $39,000
        To calculate the fee that the buyer must pay, actual
        costs are compared with the target cost. If actual costs
        are less than the target cost, the seller will earn profit
        that is additional to the target profit. If actual costs are
        more than the target cost, the seller will lose profit
        from the target profit. The amount of profit is deter-
        mined by the share ratio (with the buyer's share listed
        first). In this example, the seller is under target cost
        by $30,000. That amount will be split 70/30. So the
        buyer keeps $21,000, and the seller receives an addi-
        tional $9,000 added to the target profit, which is the
        incentive. Total fee is $39,000. [Planning and Closing]
        Garrett 2007, 123
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 362-363

30. a. Contract
        Two important components of any contract include
        what the buyer wants to buy and how the buyer
        defines acceptance of the products or services
        delivered. For contract closure to occur, deliverable
        acceptance must be completed. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 389

31. c. Subcontractors, laborers, and sellers of material
        Payment bonds, which are required by the buyer, are
        issued by guarantors to prime contractors. The buyer
        wants to ensure that subcontractors of the prime con-
        tractor receive payment so that work is not disrupted.
        [Closing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 273
308  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 32. c. Force majeure
         Force majeure clauses can be used to protect either
         party from events that are outside their control
         and not a result of their negligence, such as acts of
         nature, war, civil disobedience, or labor disruption.
         [Executing]
         Garrett 2007, 56
         Kerzner, 2009, 849

 33. c. Developing contract clauses
         First, developing contract clauses is done during
         contract formation, not control procurements, which
         begins at contract signing. Second, contract special-
         ists and attorneys--given their legal expertise--are
         typically the individuals who write contract clauses,
         not project managers. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         Verma 1995, 63
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 381-384

 34. c. Negotiation
         While there are a variety of ways to settle claims,
         disputes, and changes, the preferred approach is
         negotiation. It is a strategy to work toward compro-
         mise or to reach an agreement that both parties can
         accept. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 384, 517
                       Project Procurement Management        309


35. a. Inconsistencies in the solicitation of the contract shall
       be resolved in a given order of procedure
        The order of precedence specifies that any incon-
        sistency in the contract shall be resolved in a given
        order. This avoids confusion and debate, which could
        lead to litigation. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 860

36. d. There is integrity in the relationship and prior history
       with the vendor
        When people know and trust one another, and in
        particular have worked with each other before, the
        negotiation process can be significantly shortened.
        Three major factors of negotiation should be
        followed: compromise ability, adaptability, and
        good faith. [Executing]
        Kerzner 2009, 848

37. a. A company uses sealed bids
        When using the sealed bid method, competitive
        marketforces determine the price, and the award
        goes to the lowest bidder, provided all other terms
        and conditions of the contract are met. [Executing]
        Kerzner 2009, 847
310    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


38. d. Contract terms and conditions are reviewed before
       the proposal is submitted to the client
        The contracts (legal) representative is responsible
        for the preparation of the contract portion of the
        proposal. Generally, contracts with the legal depart-
        ment are handed through or in coordination with the
        proposal group. Before the proposal is submitted to
        the client, contract terms and conditions should be
        reviewed and approved. [Executing]
        Kerzner 2009, 866

39. b. Cost-plus-fixed-fee
        On a firm-fixed-price contract, the seller absorbs
        100 percent of the risks; while on a cost-type c ontract,
        the buyer carries the most risk. Cost-plus-fixed-fee
        contracts have less risk to sellers than
        cost-plus-award-fee or cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts
        because the fee is fixed based on costs, so the seller
        is guaranteed a certain level of profit. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364

40. b. $90,000
        In this situation the fixed-fee of $10,000 does
        not change but now represents a seller profit of
        12.5 percenton incurred costs. This means that the
        total cost to the project is $90,000. [Closing]
        Fleming 2003, 97
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 363-364
Project Stakeholder
Management


Study Hints
Project Stakeholder Management was added as a tenth
knowledge area in the PMBOK(R) Guide--Fifth Edition. The
four processes cover four of the five processes in the PMP(R)
certification exam. Stakeholder management is expanded
because identifying and analyzing stakeholder expectations and
their impact on the project and developing management tech-
niques to effectively engage stakeholders in project decisions
and execution are critical to project success. The project man-
ager and his or her team must have a continuous dialogue with
stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address any
issues they may have, and foster the level of appropriate stake-
holder engagement in project decisions and activities.
   With Project Stakeholder Management as a separate knowl-
edge area, the importance of working with stakeholders on
a project is emphasized. It involves focusing on managing
the expectations of the project's stakeholder groups and
engaging them in the project as appropriate. Research in the
project management field further has shown that stakeholder
engagement is one of the major keys to project success.

                                                            311
312     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


   Questions in this knowledge area will address the key stake-
holders on projects as well as areas covered in its four process
groups. The four processes not only interact with one another
but also interact with processes in the other nine knowledge
areas. You need to study these processes carefully to become
familiar with PMI(R)'s terminology and perspectives. PMBOK(R)
Guide Figure 13-1 provides an overview of the structure of
Project Stakeholder Management. Know this chart thoroughly.
   Following is a list of the major Project Stakeholder
Management topics. Use it to help focus your study efforts on
the areas most likely to appear on the exam.
                        Project Stakeholder Management      313


Major Topics
Stakeholder definition
Types of stakeholders on projects
Identify stakeholders

   Stakeholder analysis
   Preparation
   Classification models
   Meetings
   Stakeholder register

Plan stakeholder management

   Project management plan
   Organizational process assets
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Expert judgment
   Analytical techniques
   Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix
   Contents of the stakeholder management plan

Manage stakeholder engagement

   Key activities
   Communications management pan
   Change log
   Communications methods
   Interpersonal skills
   Management skills
   Issue log
   Organizational process assets updates
314  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


Control stakeholder engagement

   Work performance data
   Information management systems
   Work performance information
   Change requests
                         Project Stakeholder Management    315


Practice Questions
   INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for
   each multiple-choice question in the appropriate
   space on the answer sheet.

 1. During your project, you will have a number of different
    types of meetings. Some will be informational, others will
    be key updates, and some will be for decision-making
    purposes. While different attendees will attend each meet-
    ing, a best practice to follow is to:
   a. Group stakeholders into categories to determine which
      ones should attend each meeting
   b. Invite those stakeholders who have a high level of
      interest in your project to attend each meeting
   c. Be sensitive to the fact that stakeholders often have
      very different objectives
   d. Recognize that roles and responsibilities may overlap
      but practice a policy of `no surprises' and inform your
      stakeholders about any upcoming meetings

 2. You are managing a project with team members located
    at customer sites on three different continents. You have
    a number of stakeholders on your project, and most of
    them are located outside of the corporate office. Who
    should be responsible for stakeholder management?
   a.   A specific team member in each of the three locations
   b.   You, because you are the project manager
   c.   The project sponsor
   d.   A core team including you, as the project manager, and
        three representatives from the three different locations
316    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  3. Analyzing stakeholders is a part of the identify stakeholders
     process. Common approaches for analyzing stakeholders
     in a qualitative manner includes all the following two-axis
     grids, EXCEPT--
      a.   Comparing   power and influence
      b.   Comparing   power and interest
      c.   Comparing   influence and location
      d.   Comparing   influence and impact

  4. You are responsible for a project in your organization that
     has multiple internal customers. Because many people
     in your organization are interested in this project, you
     decide to prepare a stakeholder management strategy.
     Before preparing this strategy, you should--
      a. Conduct a stakeholder analysis to assess information
         needs
      b. Determine a production schedule to show when each
         stakeholder needs each type of information produced
      c. Determine the potential impact that each stakeholder
         may generate
      d. Prioritize each stakeholder's level of interest and
         influence

  5. Recognizing the importance of preparing a stakeholder
     management plan, you met with your team to obtain their
     buy in and to discuss it. You explained the key benefit of
     plan stakeholder management is to--
      a. Determine appropriate strategies for a continual focus
         on identifying stakeholders throughout the life cycle
      b. Provide a clear plan that is actionable to interact with
         stakeholders to support the project's interests
      c. Develop appropriate management strategies to
         effectively engage stakeholders
      d. Plan a series of meetings to ensure stakeholders
         remain interested and to address their concerns
                       Project Stakeholder Management      317


6. Assume you are actively working, along with your team,
   to manage stakeholder engagement on your project to
   develop a new drug to prevent any retina problems of
   any type. You know you must manage their engagement
   throughout the project life cycle. This means some orga-
   nizational process assets will need updating including--
 a.   Informal and formal project reports
 b.   The stakeholder register
 c.   The stakeholder management plan
 d.   Work performance information

7. Stakeholders often have issues, and you have asked each
   of your team members to document them. At each team
   meeting, you and your team discuss them and determine
   appropriate responses. You have a project issue log,
   which is--
 a. Part of the project's lessons learned
 b. Added to the stakeholder register to show which stake-
    holder raised it
 c. An output from the manage stakeholder engagement
    process
 d. An output from the control stakeholder engagement
    process
318      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  8. As you work on your project to update its software train-
     ing classes to focus on an agile approach, you have a
     number of key stakeholders. As many students and their
     managers are requesting these classes, your CEO has
     taken a special interest in your project and has asked you
     to accelerate your schedule to complete it in two months
     rather than in your planned six months but still have
     quality offerings. This means as you work to monitor
     overall project stakeholder relationships, you should--
      a. Provide notifications to stakeholders about status regularly
      b. Ask your stakeholders for regular feedback as you
         work on your project
      c. Provide presentations to each stakeholder group
      d. Determine how changes will be monitored and
         controlled

  9. As you work with your team to prepare your stakeholder
     management plan, you decided to develop a stakeholder
     engagement chart. You set it up so you could--
      a. Show the phase of your project of interest to identi-
         fied stakeholders
      b. Show gaps between current and desired levels of
         engagement
      c. Determine which stakeholders you and your team felt
         were critical to project success but did not know about it
      d. Determine when to involve key stakeholders in your
         project
                        Project Stakeholder Management      319


10. A number of items in the stakeholder management plan
    are similar to those in the communications management
    plan. An example is--
  a. Method for updating and refining the plans as the
     project progresses and develops
  b. Stakeholder communication requirements for the
     current project phase
  c. Information to be distributed to stakeholders including
     language, format, content, and level of detail
  d. Time frame and frequency for the distribution of
     required information to stakeholders

11. Having worked as a project manager for nine years, you
    know how important it is to identify the critical stake-
    holders so you do not overlook anyone who has a major
    influence on your project even if you do not ever plan to
    meet with or talk with this individual. As you work with
    your team, you explain the key benefit of the identify
    stakeholder process is that it--
  a. Identifies the people, groups, or organizations that
     could impact or influence project decisions
  b. Shows the interdependencies among project stake-
     holders to enable classification for how best to involve
     them on your project
  c. Identifies the appropriate focus for each stakeholder or
     a group of stakeholders
  d. Shows the potential impact each stakeholder has on
     project success
320      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 12. The last step in the stakeholder analysis process is to--
      a. Determine the organizational culture
      b. Assess how stakeholders probably will respond in
         various situations
      c. Determine stakeholder roles, interests, and expectations
      d. Evaluate the amount of support each stakeholder
         could generate

 13. You realize that on projects, some stakeholders will not
     be as receptive as others to your project and actually can
     be negative from the beginning. Assume you have classi-
     fied your stakeholders on your project designed to ensure
     students in your city have access to the best educational
     resources available, whether in class or on line, your
     stakeholder management plan is a sensitive document.
     Therefore, you need to--
      a. Tell your team to never disclose it to anyone outside
         the team without consulting you first
      b. Involve your team as you develop it but maintain the
         final copy yourself
      c. Review the validity of its underlying assumptions
      d. Set up an information distribution system and have
         each team member sign it for concurrence

 14. Stakeholder engagement involves a number of critical
     activities. An example is--
      a. Ensuring goals are met through negotiation and
         communications
      b. Developing management strategies to engage them
         during the project's life cycle
      c. Adjusting strategies and plans to engage
         stakeholders effectively
      d. Identifying the scope and impact of changes to
         project stakeholders
                        Project Stakeholder Management      321


15. Work performance information is an output of control
    stakeholder engagement. It includes a number of items,
    one of which is--
   a.   Change requests
   b.   Issue log
   c.   Documented lessons learned
   d.   Status of deliverables

16. Often in working as a project manager, it is easy to over-
    look key stakeholders. Assume you work for a device
    manufacturer and are working as the project manager for
    the next generation valve replacement. Your company has
    been a leader in this market, which means you have a lot
    of lessons learned available to you. Your project is sched-
    uled to last four years. As a best practice, you should--
   a. Work actively with your company's Knowledge
      Management Officer
   b. Consult regularly with your program manager
   c. Work actively with members of your Governance Board
   d. Work actively with members of your company's
      Portfolio Review Board
322      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 17. Assume you are managing the development of a con-
     struction project in your city to replace its five bridges
     so they are state of the art and meet updated safety
     standards since they originally were constructed 20 years
     ago. The design work has been completed, you have
     awarded subcontracts, and are set to begin construction.
     Today your legal department told you to stop work as
     you had not consulted them, and there was a critical
     standard you overlooked during the design process. This
     example shows--
      a. You need to continually work to engage stakeholders
         on your project
      b. You should use a RACI chart and have one of your
         team members work with the legal department
         throughout the project
      c. You should provide the legal department with a copy
         of your stakeholder management plan and ask for their
         representative to sign it and offer any comments
      d. You need to continually identify project stakeholders
                           Project Stakeholder Management    323


18. Assume your construction project is for a small city with
    only 8,500 people. There has been opposition to it from
    the beginning, when the City Commissioners approved it
    by many residents. The residents recognize they will be
    severely impacted as the new bridges are implemented,
    and during the public hearings before the Commissioners'
    decision, they hired an attorney to state they felt the more
    cost effective approach was to strengthen the bridges
    so they met today's safety requirements. Residents now
    know you have been ordered to stop work, and they have
    requested a meeting with the Commission on Tuesday.
    This means you should--
   a. Develop a mitigation plan to present at this meeting
   b. Work diligently with the legal department to satisfy
      their concerns and receive a go ahead before
      Tuesday's meeting
   c. Demonstrate at the meeting the sustainability impacts
      of the new bridges
   d. Balance the interests of these negative stakeholders
      and meet with them before Tuesday's meeting

19. The salience model is one way to classify stakeholders.
    In it--
   a.   Stakeholders'   power, urgency, and legitimacy are used
   b.   Stakeholders'   level of authority and concern are used
   c.   Stakeholders'   active involvement and power are used
   d.   Stakeholders'   influence and ability to effect changes
        are used
324        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 20. In plan stakeholder management, all organizational assets
     are used as inputs; however, which of the following are of
     particular importance?
      a.   Organization culture and the political climate
      b.   Practices and habits and templates
      c.   Lessons learned database and historical information
      d.   Organization's knowledge management system and
           policies and procedures

 21. Assume you have identified your stakeholders and are
     preparing your stakeholder management plan. You are
     fortunate that your team is a collocated team as you
     are working on an internal project to reorganize your
     IT Department so it is focused more on its customers.
     The project sponsor is the Chief Operating Officer, and
     the IT Department Director was surprised as she thought
     all was well. However, you notice when planning meet-
     ings are held, the Chief Financial Officer never attends.
     You feel since IT affects the entire company, all the senior
     leaders need some type of involvement. You therefore feel
     the Chief Financial Officer may be--
      a.   Resistant
      b.   Unaware
      c.   Uninterested
      d.   Satisfied

 22. Assume your stakeholder management plan has been
     approved. You now are working with your team to
     promote stakeholder engagement on your project.
     You explain in a team meeting its benefit is to--
      a.   Clarify and resolve identified issues
      b.   Meet stakeholder needs and expectations
      c.   Obtain their continued commitment to the project
      d.   Increase support and minimize resistance
                            Project Stakeholder Management        325


23. The stakeholder register should not be prepared only one
    time, but it should be updated regularly especially if--
   a.   The   stakeholder   is not an active participant
   b.   The   stakeholder   is not impacted by the project
   c.   The   stakeholder   does not read status updates
   d.   The   stakeholder   leads a corporate reorganization

24. Working to foster stakeholder engagement, as the project
    manager, you know a combination of interpersonal skills
    and general management skills is needed. An example of
    an key interpersonal skill in stakeholder engagement is--
   a.   Facilitating consensus
   b.   Influencing people
   c.   Resolving conflicts
   d.   Negotiating agreements

25. Stakeholder engagement must be controlled on a con-
    tinuous basis for it to be effective. You realize a number
    of project documents can be useful for you as a project
    manager. An example is--
   a.   Technical performance measures
   b.   Change log
   c.   Actual costs
   d.   Start and finish dates of schedule activities

26. Expert judgment is a best practice as a tool and technique
    in many project management processes, and the list of
    possiblesources for experts varies by the organization and
    by its association with others. One way once you have iden-
    tified experts who you feel could be of assistance is to--
   a.   Use a focus group
   b.   Review documentation
   c.   Hold one-on-one interviews
   d.   Conduct interviews
326        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 27. The sponsor is a key project stakeholder because he
     or she--
      a. Approves or manages the project's product, service,
         or result
      b. Leads the project through initiating until it is
         formally authorized
      c. Is the Chairperson of the project's Governance Board
         and makes the final go/no-go decision
      d. Has a major management role within the administra-
         tive area of the business

 28. Recognizing operations management is different than
     project management, as the project manager for a new
     line of electrical tractors to avoid the need to use costly
     fuel, you realize a best practice is to--
      a. Document the operational managers' influence either
         positive or negative in the stakeholder register
      b. Offer to include the operational managers in all
         project phases
      c. Recognize that the operational managers are only
         involved once they have ongoing responsibility for the
         product, service, or result
      d. Realize the operations managers have key responsibili-
         ties on the Portfolio Review Board

 29. Assume you are beginning your project to develop a
     series of residential condominiums in your city and are
     identifying possible stakeholders. A key organizational
     process asset you can review is--
      a.   Organizational culture
      b.   Organizational standards
      c.   Lessons learned
      d.   Local trends
                         Project Stakeholder Management       327


30. One way to develop an understanding of major project
    stakeholders to exchange and analyze project information
    about roles and interests is to--
   a.   Conduct interviews
   b.   Hold profile analysis meetings
   c.   Use questionnaires and surveys
   d.   Conduct a stakeholder analysis and analyze the results
        with a focus group

31. Assume you are managing a project to implement an
    electronic medical record system in your o
                                              phthalmologist's
    office. You have been working to identify your stake-
    holders to then make sure everyone is committed to
    it as some people have been working in this office for
    more than 20 years and are comfortable with the manual
    approach. At this point, you have documented assessment
    information, which includes--
   a. Role in the project
   b. Whether the stakeholder is a supporter, is neutral,
      or is resistant
   c. Potential influence in the project
   d. Organization position

32. Having prepared stakeholder management plans on
    previousprojects, you know it is positive to review the
    project management plan because it--
   a. Provides information as to how to plan appropriate
      ways to engage stakeholders
   b. Contains information useful to ensure the stake-
      holder management plan is aligned with the organi-
      zation's culture
   c. Helps to determine the best options to support an
      adaptive process for stakeholder management
   d. Contains a change management plan and documents
      how changes will be monitored and controlled
328      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 33. Assume you have performed your stakeholder analysis
     and now are working to enhance it with a stakeholder
     engagement assessment matrix. Such a matrix shows
     the stakeholder's current engagement level. These
     data enable--
      a. The project manager to prepare the stakeholder
         management plan
      b. The project manager to prepare the stakeholder
         management strategy
      c. The project manager to prepare the stakeholder inventory
      d. The project team to expand the stakeholder
         risk register

 34. The ability of stakeholders to influence a project is--
      a. Constant throughout the project life cycle as differ-
         ent stakeholders have different levels of interest in the
         project at different times
      b. Highest during the closing stage since key stakeholder
         acceptance criteria must be met
      c. Highest during planning as the team is still in the
         storming stage as various stakeholders' positions are
         being known and recognized
      d. Highest in the very early stages as the project is being
         approved and initiated
                         Project Stakeholder Management      329


35. Working on your project to design and construct five new
    bridges for your City, you are striving to actively manage
    the stakeholders on your project, especially those who
    will be inconvenienced by the project and have indicated
    they do not support it. You decided to review your com-
    munications management plan as it--
   a. Contains issue management procedures
   b. Describes the project's life cycle and the processes to
      be used in each phase
   c. Sets forth an escalation process
   d. Provides guidance as to how to best involve
      stakeholdersin the project

36. A supporting input for controlling stakeholder engage-
    ment is--
   a.   Budget
   b.   Project schedule
   c.   Historical information
   d.   Number of defects

37. As a result of the control stakeholder expectations pro-
    cess, you realize even though this process is under way
    until the closing phase that you have identified the root
    cause of some issues you have faced in controlling stake-
    holders expectations. You should therefore--
   a.   Review them with your Governance Board
   b.   Revise and reissue your stakeholder management plan
   c.   Prepare a change request
   d.   Update the lessons learned documentation
330     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


38. Identifying interrelationships and potential overlap between
    stakeholders is useful to the project manager as he or she
    works with stakeholders. It should be documented as part
    of the--
   a.   Stakeholder   register
   b.   Stakeholder   management strategy
   c.   Stakeholder   management plan
   d.   Stakeholder   engagement assessment matrix

39. A number of organizational process assets are useful as
    inputs to the manage stakeholder engagement process.
    Similarly a number of organizational process assets
    require updates because of this process. An example of
    one that is an input is---
   a.   Project reports
   b.   Historical information
   c.   Project records
   d.   Stakeholder notifications

40. Table reporting, spreadsheet analysis, and presentations
    are examples of--
   a. Project reports as an input to manage stakeholder
      engagement
   b. Work performance information as an output of control
      stakeholder engagement
   c. Tools and techniques used in control stakeholder
      engagement
   d. Updates from the plan stakeholder management
      process
                       Project Stakeholder Management    331


Answer Sheet

1.    a   b    c   d           21.    a    b    c       d

2.    a   b    c   d           22.    a    b    c       d

3.    a   b    c   d           23.    a    b    c       d

4.    a   b    c   d           24.    a    b    c       d

5.    a   b    c   d           25.    a    b    c       d

6.    a   b    c   d           26.    a    b    c       d

7.    a   b    c   d           27.    a    b    c       d

8.    a   b    c   d           28.    a    b    c       d

9.    a   b    c   d           29.    a    b    c       d

10.   a   b    c   d           30.    a    b    c       d

11.   a   b    c   d           31.    a    b    c       d

12.   a   b    c   d           32.    a    b    c       d

13.   a   b    c   d           33.    a    b    c       d

14.   a   b    c   d           34.    a    b    c       d

15.   a   b    c   d           35.    a    b    c       d

16.   a   b    c   d           36.    a    b    c       d

17.   a   b    c   d           37.    a    b    c       d

18.   a   b    c   d           38.    a    b    c       d

19.   a   b    c   d           39.    a    b    c       d

20.   a   b    c   d           40.    a    b    c       d
                         Project Stakeholder Management       333


Answer Key
 1. c. Be sensitive to the fact that different stakeholders
       often have very different objectives
        A project stakeholder is an individual, group, or
        organization that is actively involved in the project
        or have interests that may be affected, either posi-
        tively or negatively, as a result of the performance
        or completion of the project. Stakeholders also
        may exert influence on the project and its results.
        Managing stakeholder expectations is difficult since
        stakeholders often have different or conflicting
        objectives. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 30

 2. b. You, because you are the project manager
        Stakeholder management refers to any action taken
        by the project manager or project team to satisfy the
        needs of and to resolve issues with project stakeholders.
        The ability of the project manager to correctly iden-
        tify and manage stakeholders appropriately can mean
        the difference between project success or failure.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 391
334    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 3. c. Comparing influence and location
        Identifying and analyzing the stakeholders helps to
        classify them better for developing a strategy to help
        manage them and their expectations throughout the
        project. The most common comparison elements are:
        power, influence, interest, and impact. The location
        of the person may have an impact on one of the
        other measures, but it is not easily quantifiable on a
        low, medium, high, type scale. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396

 4. a. Conduct a stakeholder analysis to assess
       information needs
        Stakeholder analysis is used to analyze the informa-
        tion needs of the stakeholders and to determine the
        sources for meeting those needs. It helps to deter-
        mine whose interests should be taken into account
        throughout the project. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395-396

 5. b. Provide a clear plan that is actionable to interact with
       stakeholders to support the project's interests
        While the plan stakeholder management process
        develops appropriate management strategies to
        effectively engage the stakeholders during the project
        life cycle, the key benefit of this process is to have a
        plan that is clear and actionable to interact with them
        to support the project's interests. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 399
                       Project Stakeholder Management      335


6. a. Informal and formal project reports
      While a number of different organizational process
      assets require updates as a result of the manage
      stakeholder engagement process, project reports is
      one example. They include the formal and informal
      project reports that describe project status and
      include lessons learned, issue logs, project closure
      reports, and outputs from other knowledge areas.
      [Executing]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 409

7. c. An output of the manage stakeholder engagement
      process
      Issues logs are an output of this process, as issues
      are expected in this process. The log is updated as
      new issues are identified, and existing issues are
      resolved. [Executing]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 408

8. d. Determine how changes will be monitored and
      controlled
      As you work in managing stakeholder engagement
      you should review your project management plan.
      Your CEO has requested a major schedule change;
      among other things the project management plan
      is an input to this process as it contains a change
      management plan that documents how changes
      will be monitored and controlled. [Monitoring
      and Controlling]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 411
336      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  9. b. Show gaps between current and desired levels
        of engagement
          The stakeholder engagement assessment matrix is
          used as a tool and technique in plan stakeholder
          management. The purpose of the matrix is to show
          gaps between current and desired engagement
          levels to then ensure the plan provides these data.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 402-403

 10. a. Method for updating and refining the plans as the
        project progresses and develops
          The other items listed have specific stakeholder refer-
          ences that, while similar, are not in the communica-
          tions management plan. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 296, 403

 11. c. Identifies the appropriate focus for each stakeholder
        or a group of stakeholders
          The identify stakeholder process has a number of
          purposes. It identifies people, groups, or organiza-
          tions that could impact or be impacted by a decision,
          activity, or outcome of the project. It analyzes and
          documents relevant information concerning their
          interests, involvement, interdependencies, influence
          and potential impact on project success. Its key
          benefit is to allow the project manager to identify the
          appropriate focus for each stakeholder. [Initiating]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 393
                        Project Stakeholder Management      337


12. b. Assess how stakeholders probably will respond in
       various situations
       In stakeholder analysis, the last step is to assess how
       key stakeholders are likely to react or respond to var-
       ious situations in order to plan how to influence them
       to enhance their support and mitigate any potential
       negative impacts. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396

13. c. Review the validity of its underlying assumptions
       Information on resistant stakeholders can be
       damaging, and consideration is needed regarding
       distributing the stakeholder management plan and
       the stakeholder register. The project manager needs
       to be aware of the sensitive nature of these documents.
       When preparing and updating them, the best practice
       is to review the underlying assumptions to ensure
       continued accuracy and relevancy. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 404

14. a. Ensuring goals are met through negotiation and
       communications
       A key activity in manage stakeholder engagement is
       to manage stakeholder expectations through negotia-
       tion and communications, ensuring project goals are
       achieved. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 405
338      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 15. d. Status of deliverables
          Work performance information is performance data
          collected from various controlling processes that
          are analyzed and integrated based on relationships
          among areas. The data are transformed into infor-
          mation, which is correlated and contextualized and
          provides a sound foundation for project decisions.
          The status of deliverables is an example. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 413

 16. c. Work actively with members of your Governance
        Board
          New product development organizations are noted
          for setting up Governance Boards to oversee projects.
          Additionally in this situation, it is a long project that
          is important to the company. Project governance
          ensures the alignment of the project with stakeholder
          needs and expectations and is critical to the manage-
          ment of stakeholder expectations and to the achieve-
          ment of organizational objectives. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 30

 17. d. You need to continually identify project stakeholders
          Stakeholder identification is a continual process
          throughout the project life cycle. The legal depart-
          ment often is overlooked, but it is a significant
          stakeholder, and in this situation, delays resulted.
          Significant expenses often are due to legal require-
          ments that must be met before the project can
          be completed, or the project scope is delivered.
          [Initiating]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 31
                         Project Stakeholder Management      339


18. d. Balance the interests of these negative stakeholders
       and meet with them before Tuesday's meeting
        Overlooking negative stakeholders' interests can
        result in an increased likelihood of failures, delays, or
        other negative consequences to projects. The p   roject
        manager must control stakeholder engagement,
        which can be difficult since they often have different
        or competing objectives. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 32

19. a. Stakeholders' power, urgency and legitimacy are used
        In the salience model, stakeholders are described
        in classes based on their power or ability to impose
        their will, urgency or need for immediate action, and
        legitimacy or their involvement. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396

20. c. Lessons learned database and historical information
        While it is rare that all organizational process assets
        are used in any process, these are of particular
        importance as they provide insight on previous stake-
        holder management plans and their effectiveness.
        They can be used to plan stakeholder management
        activities for the current project. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 401
340      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 21. a. Resistant
          Since the Chief Financial Officer has financial respon-
          sibility for all of the company's work, in preparing a
          stakeholder engagement strategy, he or she probably
          is aware of this project, and probably is resistant to
          change, perhaps feeling resources could be better
          spent on other initiatives. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 402

 22. d. Increase support and minimize resistance
          The other possible answers are activities in the man-
          age stakeholder engagement process. Its benefit is to
          allow the project manager to increase support and
          minimize resistance from stakeholders to significantly
          increase chances for success. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 404-405

 23. b. The stakeholder is not impacted by the project
          Project document updates are an output to the man-
          age stakeholder engagement process. These updates
          involve the stakeholder register. It should be updated
          as stakeholder information changes, when new stake-
          holders are identified, or if stakeholders listed in the
          register are no longer involved in or impacted by the
          project. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 409
                         Project Stakeholder Management      341


24. c. Resolving conflicts
        Conflicts are common on projects and between stake-
        holders. Other interpersonal skills useful in managing
        stakeholder engagement are building trust, active listen-
        ing and overcoming resistance to change. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 407-408

25. b. Change log
        Projects involve change, and most everyone tends
        to resist it. A change log is useful to review in the
        control stakeholder engagement process. Other useful
        documents are the schedule, stakeholder register,
        issue log, and project communications. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412-413

26. a. Use a focus group
        The key word in the question was experts. Useful
        ways to obtain information from experts is to use a
        survey, such as a Delphi approach, or to use a focus
        group, an excellent approach to obtain insight into
        attitudes, useful to control stakeholder engagement.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412-413

27. b. Leads the project through initiating until it is formally
       authorized
        The sponsor is critical throughout the project. He or
        she provides resources for the project and is account-
        able for its success. From the beginning through
        closure, the sponsor promotes the project. [Initiating,
        Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 32
342    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


28. b. Offer to include the operational managers in all
       project phases
        The needs of operations managers who perform and
        conduct business operations are important consider
        ations in projects that affect their future work and
        endeavors. They should be engaged, and their needs
        identified in the stakeholder register. By considering
        them and appropriately including them in all project
        phases, the project manager can gain insight and
        avoid unnecessary issues that may arise if their input
        is overlooked. [Initiating, Planning, Executing, and
        Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 13

29. c. Lessons learned
        Lessons learned, stakeholder register templates,
        and stakeholder registers from previous projects are
        examples of organizational process assets that can
        influence the identify stakeholders process. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395

30. b. Hold profile analysis meetings
        A profile analysis meeting is a tool and technique
        in the identify stakeholders process. Its purpose is
        to develop a deeper understanding of major project
        stakeholders. The meetings can be used to exchange
        and analyze information about roles, interests, knowl-
        edge, and the overall position of each stakeholder
        about the project. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 398
                         Project Stakeholder Management      343


31. c. Potential influence in the project
        The stakeholder register contains assessment infor-
        mation as a key component. The assessment informa-
        tion includes: major requirements, main expectations,
        potential influence in the project, and the phase
        in the project life cycle with the most interest.
        [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 398

32. d. Contains a change management plan and documents
       how changes will be monitored and controlled
        Among other key items useful in the project manage-
        ment plan to review while preparing the stakeholder
        management plan is the change management plan.
        All projects involve some type of change. Reviewing
        this plan can help the project manager work with
        stakeholders who may be resistant to the project to
        help turn them into ones who are supportive or at
        least neutral to the resulting changes. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 400

33. a. The project manager to prepare the stakeholder
       management plan
        The stakeholder engagement assessment matrix
        shows the stakeholders current engagement in the
        project, and the project manager and team then can
        use it to note the desired level of engagement. As a
        tool and technique in plan stakeholder management,
        the project manager then uses it to help prepare the
        stakeholder management plan. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 402-403
344      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 34. d. Highest in the very early stages as the project is
        being approved and initiated
          The stakeholders' ability to influence the project is
          highest during the initial phases and gets progres-
          sively lower as the project progresses. Active manage-
          ment of stakeholders' involvement decreases the risk
          of the project failing to meet its goals and objectives
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 406

 35. c. Sets forth an escalation process
          Among other things, an escalation process is helpful
          especially if there are issues or risks involving
          communications that the project manager wishes to
          escalate to determine the most appropriate response
          or to share the approach he or she plans to follow.
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 406

 36. b. Project schedule
          Project documents are an input to control stakeholder
          engagement. They originate from initiating, planning,
          executing, or controlling processes and include the
          project schedule, stakeholder register, issue log,
          change log, and project communications. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 411-412
                        Project Stakeholder Management      345


37. d. Update the lessons learned documentation
       This documentation is an example of an organiza-
       tional process asset to update as it includes the root
       cause analysis of issues faced, the reasons certain
       corrective actions were taken, and other types of
       lessons learned about stakeholder management.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 415

38. c. Stakeholder management plan
       The stakeholder management plan identifies the
       management strategies required to effectively engage
       stakeholders. It includes, among other things, the
       identified interrelationships and potential overlap
       between stakeholders. This information is invaluable
       especially if some stakeholders are resistant or nega-
       tive to the project and also in determining the level
       of frequency of desired interaction and communica-
       tions requirements. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 403

39. b. Historical information
       Historical information about previous projects,
       organizational communications requirements, issue
       management procedures, and change control pro-
       cedures are examples of organizational process
       assets that can influence the manage stakeholder
       engagement process. [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 407
346  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 40. c. Tools and techniques used in control stakeholder
        engagement
         In control stakeholder engagement, they are
         examples of distribution formats from information
         management systems, a tool and technique in this
         process. Such systems provide a structured tool for
         the project manager to capture, store, and distrib-
         ute information to stakeholders about project cost,
         schedule progress, and performance. The project
         manager can use these systems to consolidate reports
         from several systems and facilitate report distribution.
         [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 412
Practice Test

This practice test is designed to simulate PMI(R)'s 200-question
PMP(R) certification exam.
  INSTRUCTIONS: Note the most suitable answer for each
multiple-choice question in the appropriate space on the
answer sheet.




                                                              347
348    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


  1. You recently took over a relatively new project expected
     to last another seven years. The previous project manager
     completed most of the WBS. When you begin to define
     the project activities, you realize that the WBS work
     packages expected to occur in the next year are planned
     in detail, but the work packages for later in the future
     (three years or more) are not planned with much detail,
     if any detail at all. You determine--
      a. It is a major problem. The WBS is incomplete and you
         need to redefine the project scope to complete the
         project schedule.
      b. It is a problem that must be resolved quickly. The
         previous project manager was not done with the WBS,
         and you must stop the project to complete the WBS in
         sufficient detail.
      c. It is not a problem at this time. The previous project
         manager was using the rolling wave planning technique,
         so you are able to continue defining the activities.
      d. It is not a problem at this time. You can only plan
         what you know. You plan to communicate to the
         project sponsor that the WBS is not sufficient to plan
         the whole project and that the sponsor can worry
         about the details.

  2. In the initial stage of the project life cycle, the project's
     technical objectives are apt to be understood only in a
     general sense. A major component of project conflict
     during this stage of the project is--
      a.   Concerns over priorities and procedures
      b.   Concerns about technical issues
      c.   Schedules
      d.   Confusion of establishing a project in the matrix
           management environment
                                           Practice Test    349


3. On your project to construct a new runway for your
   City's airport, you are in the process of selecting vendors
   for various parts of this project. You have conducted
   your make-or-buy analysis and have issued Requests
   for Proposals. You believe it is important to examine
   past performance of potential vendors. This means you
   are using--
  a.   Proposal evaluation techniques
  b.   Multi-disciplinary review teams
  c.   Analytical techniques
  d.   Independent estimates

4. Requirements typically are classified into product require-
   ments and project requirements. Capturing and manag-
   ing both types of requirements is important for project
   success, so you and your team decided to follow this
   classification system on your project to modernize all the
   telecommunications equipment in your company. During
   such an approach, all the following are examples of
   productrequirements EXCEPT--
  a.   Action requirements
  b.   Level of service requirements
  c.   Security requirements
  d.   Performance requirements

5. Change control procedures, configuration management
   knowledge base, versions, and baselines in the develop
   project management plan process are:
  a. Enterprise environmental factors
  b. Organizational process assets
  c. Part of the project's configuration management plan,
     which as a subsidiary plan will be part of the project
     management plan
  d. Part of the organization's management practices
350     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 6. You are managing a project that has five subcontractors.
    You must monitor contract performance, make payments,
    and manage provider interface. One subcontractor sub-
    mitted a change request to expand the scope of its work.
    You decided to award a contract modification based on a
    review of this request. All these activities are part of--
   a.   Control procurements
   b.   Conduct procurements
   c.   Form contract
   d.   Configuration management

 7. Although the project charter serves to state the project
    manager's authority and responsibility on the project,
    the project manager further requires which type of power
    in order to be an effective leader?
   a.   Expert
   b.   Legitimate
   c.   Position
   d.   Referent

 8. The performance measurement baseline consists of all the
    following EXCEPT--
   a.   Scope baseline
   b.   Requirements baseline
   c.   Schedule baseline
   d.   Cost baseline
                                            Practice Test      351


 9. While working as the project manager on a new project
    to improve overall ease of use in the development of a
    railroad switching station, you have decided to add a sub-
    ject matter expert who specializes in ergonomics to your
    team. She has decided to observe the existing approach
    as you and your team work to define requirements for the
    new system. This method is also called--
   a.   Mentoring
   b.   Coaching
   c.   Job shadowing
   d.   User experimentation

10. In addition to providing support to the project, quality
    assurance also provides an umbrella for--
   a.   Plan-do-check-act
   b.   Continuous process improvement
   c.   Project management maturity
   d.   Work performance information

11. As you manage the railroad switching station project, you
    are concerned that the business analyst who was respon-
    sible for preparing the WBS may have overlooked some
    parts of the project. In order to see if the WBS requires
    enhancements you decide to--
   a.   Perform a cause-and-effect diagram
   b.   Meet with your sponsor
   c.   Use an affinity diagram
   d.   Review the accompanying WBS Dictionary with a
        member of the PMO
352     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


12. Assume that your company is working under a
    fixed-price-incentive contract. It has a target cost of
    $100,000, a target profit of 10%, a price ceiling of
    $120,000, and a share formula of 80/20. Assume that your
    company completes all of the work but has actual costs of
    $110,000. What is the final value of this procurement?
   a.   $120,000
   b.   $132,000
   c.   $118,000
   d.   $110,000

13. If you apply the configuration management system along
    with change control processes project wide, you will
    achieve all but one of the which following objectives?
   a. Provide the basis for which the product configuration
      is defining
   b. List the approved configuration identification
   c. Document the specific responsibilities of each stake-
      holder in the perform integrated change control process
   d. Ensure the composition of a project's configuration
      items is correct

14. You need to outsource the testing function of your
    project. Your subcontracts department informed you
    that the following document must be prepared before
    conducting the procurement:
   a.   Make-or-buy analysis
   b.   Procurement management plan
   c.   Evaluation methodology
   d.   Contract terms and conditions
                                            Practice Test    353


15. Constraints common to projects include--
   a.   Scope, quality, schedule, budget, and risk
   b.   Scope, teaming, planning, and resources
   c.   Scope
   d.   Resources and communication

16. You are developing a project charter and want to ensure
    that any changes that may occur after the project begins
    will be controlled rigorously. You have consulted your
    company's configuration management knowledge base,
    and it contains versions and baselines of all the following
    official company documents EXCEPT--
   a.   Standards
   b.   Strategic plans
   c.   Policies
   d.   Procedures

17. To identify inefficient and ineffective policies, processes,
    and procedures in use on a project, you should conduct--
   a.   An inspection
   b.   A process analysis
   c.   Benchmarking
   d.   A quality audit

18. Your project management office implemented a project
    management methodology that emphasizes the impor-
    tance of integrated change control. It states that change
    requests can occur in all the following forms EXCEPT--
   a.   Indirect
   b.   Legally mandated
   c.   Informal
   d.   Internally initiated
354     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


19. Configuration management describes procedures for
    applying technical and administrative direction and
    surveillance. Which one of the following tasks is NOT
    performed in configuration management?
   a. Identifying functional and physical characteristics of an
      item or system
   b. Controlling changes to characteristics
   c. Performing an audit to verify conformance to
      requirements
   d. Allowing automatic approval of changes

20. A number of tools and techniques are helpful in the
    perform integrated change control process. If you want
    to implement an integrated change control process, you
    should use--
   a.   Configuration management software
   b.   A project management information system
   c.   Project status review meetings
   d.   Change control meetings
                                            Practice Test    355


21. Having worked previously as a software project manager,
    you were pleased to be appointed as the project manager
    for a new systems integration project designed to replace
    the existing air traffic control system in your country. You
    found a requirements traceability matrix to be helpful on
    software projects, so you decided to use it on this systems
    integration project. Using such a matrix helps to ensure
    that each requirement--
   a. Adds quality and supports the organization's
      quality policy
   b. Adds business value as it links to business and
      project objectives
   c. Sets forth the level of service, performance, safety,
      security, and compliance
   d. Shows the impact to other organizational areas and to
      entities outside of the performing organization

22. During the closing phase of the project, the top-ranked
    source of conflict is--
   a.   Schedule
   b.   Administrative procedures
   c.   Cost
   d.   Human resources

23. Which of the following ensures that requested changes
    to deliverables are thoroughly considered as part of the
    performintegrated change control process?
   a.   Scope change control system
   b.   Configuration management system
   c.   Change control board
   d.   Configuration status audits
356     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


24. Which of the following tools is used in process analysis to
    determine the underlying causes of defects?
   a.   Root cause analysis
   b.   Assumptions analysis
   c.   Cost-benefit analysis
   d.   Quality metrics

25. All of the following statements concerning validate scope
    and control quality are true EXCEPT--
   a. The processes can be performed in parallel
   b. Both processes use inspection as a tool and technique
   c. Validate scope is concerned with the acceptance of
      deliverables, and control quality is concerned with
      meeting quality requirements for the deliverables
   d. Validate scope verification typically precedes
      control quality

26. Consider a company that sells products to consumers: as
    one product begins the deterioration and death phases
    of its life cycle (or the divestment phase of a system),
    new products or projects must be established. This
    means that--
   a. The company      requires a continuous stream of projects
      to survive
   b. The company      is not at a high level of maturity
   c. The company      is in a period of overall decline
   d. The company      definitely lacks a balanced portfolio
                                               Practice Test    357


27. You are in the process of performing quality assurance
    on your product and find that some requirements are
    not as complete as they should be, which causes rework
    and adds costs to your overall project. The term for all
    costs incurred over the life of the product by investing in
    appraising and inspecting the product for conformance
    and nonconformance to requirements is called--
   a.   Life-cycle costs
   b.   Expected value
   c.   Cost of conformance
   d.   Cost of quality

28. The project scope baseline should be used in the identify
    risks process because it--
   a. Identifies project assumptions
   b. Identifies all work that must be done; therefore,
      it includes all risks on the project
   c. Helps organize all work that must be done on the project
   d. Contains information on risks from prior projects

29. Although there are various tools and techniques to
    consider as you collect requirements on your project,
    one approach that supports the concept of progressive
    elaboration is--
   a.   Idea/mind mapping
   b.   Affinity diagrams
   c.   Prototypes
   d.   Joint Application Design(R) sessions
358     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


30. Tools and techniques used to perform quality
    assurance include--
   a.   Tools from control quality and plan quality management
   b.   Tools from performance reporting
   c.   Variance analysis
   d.   Direct and manage project execution

31. An approach to provide insight into the health of the
    project and to identify any areas that require special
    attention is to--
   a.   Conduct periodic status reviews
   b.   Prepare regular status and progress reports
   c.   Prepare forecasts of the project's future
   d.   Continuously monitor the project

32. Although your company's project life cycle does not
    mandate when a project review should be conducted,
    you believe it is important to review performance at the
    conclusion of each phase. The objective of such a review
    is to--
   a. Determine how many resources are required to
      complete the project according to the project baseline
   b. Adjust the schedule and cost baselines based on
      past performance
   c. Obtain customer acceptance of project deliverables
   d. Determine whether the project should continue to the
      next phase
                                              Practice Test    359


33. The key management skills required during the adjourn-
    ing stage of team development include all but which one
    of the following?
   a.   Evaluating
   b.   Reviewing
   c.   Celebrating
   d.   Improving

34. Assume that your actual costs are $1,000; your planned
    value is $1,200; and your earned value is $1,500. Based
    on these data, what can be determined regarding your
    schedule variance?
   a. At -$300, the physical progress is being accomplished
      at a slower rate than is planned, indicating an unfavor-
      able situation.
   b. At +$300, the situation is favorable, as physical progress
      is being accomplished ahead of your plan.
   c. At +$500, the situation is favorable, as physical progress is
      being accomplished at a lower cost than was forecasted.
   d. At -$300, you have a behind-schedule condition, and
      your critical path has slipped.

35. The key to effective cost control is--
   a. Using earned value to forecast project status
   b. Focusing on projected expenditures and actively net-
      working with key stakeholders to ensure funds will be
      available as requested
   c. Informing stakeholders of the project's cost status
   d. Managing the approved cost baseline and any changes
      to it
360        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 36. The CPI on your project is 0.44, which means that
     you should--
      a. Place emphasis on improving the timeliness of the
         physical progress
      b. Reassess the life-cycle costs of your product, including
         the length of the life-cycle phase
      c. Place emphasis on improving the productivity by
         which work was being performed
      d. Recognize that your original estimates were fundamen-
         tally flawed, and your project is in an atypical situation

 37. Project deliverables are the outputs that include the
     product, service, or result of the project as well as
     ancillaryresults. These ancillary results should be in the--
      a.   Requirements management plan
      b.   Scope management plan
      c.   Project scope statement
      d.   Project acceptance criteria

 38. Which of the following tools and techniques is used in
     the close project or phase process?
      a.   Project management methodology
      b.   Work performance information
      c.   Expert judgment
      d.   Project management information system

 39. After the project scope statement is complete, it may be
     necessary to update other project documents. All the
     following are examples of a document that may require
     updates EXCEPT--
      a.   Project charter
      b.   Stakeholder register
      c.   Requirements documentation
      d.   Requirements traceability matrix
                                           Practice Test    361


40. A challenge of earned value management is predicting
    percent complete. The simplest formula to use to calculate
    EV is--
   a.   0/100 rule
   b.   50/50 rule
   c.   (Percent complete) x (budget at completion)
   d.   Milestone method

41. While managing a large project in your organization,
    you realize that your project team requires training in
    contract administration because you will be awarding
    several major subcontracts. After you analyze your project
    requirements and assess the expertise of your team mem-
    bers, you decide that your team will need a one-week
    class in contract administration. This training should--
   a. Commence as scheduled and stated in the staffing
      management plan
   b. Commence as scheduled and stated as part of the
      procurement management plan
   c. Be scheduled if necessary after performance assess-
      ments are prepared and after each team member
      has had an opportunity to serve in the contract
      administrator role
   d. Commence as scheduled and stated in the team
      development plan

42. Assume that on your project, you are using earned value
    management. Your project is one that has extremely long
    work packages. Therefore, the method you should use to
    calculate EV is--
   a.   0/100 rule
   b.   Milestone method
   c.   Equivalent effort
   d.   Apportioned effort
362     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


43. Your project sponsor has asked you, "What do we now
    expect the total job to cost?" Given that you are using
    earned value, you should calculate the--
   a.   To-complete performance index
   b.   Estimate to complete
   c.   Estimate at completion
   d.   Budget at completion

44. One key reason that the develop project charter process
    is so important is that it--
   a. Documents the boundaries of the project
   b. States the methods for acceptance of the project's
      deliverables
   c. Describes the project's characteristics
   d. Links the project to the ongoing work of the
      organization

45. Your company has been awarded a contract for project
    management consulting services for a major government
    agency. You were a member of the proposal writing team,
    are PMP(R) certified, and you are the project manager. You
    are now working to prepare your project management
    plan, which is to be submitted in one week. You decided
    to use some facilitation techniques to help develop your
    plan. While a number are possible, you selected--
   a.   Conflict resolution
   b.   Checklist analysis
   c.   SWOT analysis
   d.   Assumptions analysis
                                             Practice Test    363


46. Assume you had a phase gate meeting with your
    Governance Board for your project to develop the next
    generation radar system as part of the nation's airspace
    modernization program. At this meeting, the Board
    approved your project management plan. However, as
    you begin to execute your plan, an organizational process
    asset to consider is--
   a.   Stakeholder risk tolerances
   b.   The organization's culture
   c.   Hiring and firing guidelines
   d.   Process measurement data base

47. Consider the data in the table below. Assume that
    your project consists only of these three activities.
    Your estimate at completion is $4,400.00. This means
    you are calculating your EAC by using which of the
    following formulas?

          Activity   % Complete    PV      EV       AC
             A          100       2,000   2,000     2,200
             B           50       1,000    500       700
             C            0       1,000         0      0

   a. EAC = AC/EV x BAC
   b. EAC = AC/EV x [work completed and in progress] +
      [actual (or revised) cost of work packages that have
      not started]
   c. EAC = [Actual to date] + [all remaining work to be done
      at the planned cost including remaining work in progress]
   d. EAC =% complete x BAC
364        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 48. Rolling wave planning in the create WBS process refers to
     situations in which--
      a. Certain deliverables or subprojects will be accom-
         plished far into the future
      b. Additional work is added to the project after the scope
         baseline has been established; therefore, additional
         decomposition is required
      c. Identification codes for the WBS elements cannot be
         determined until the schedule activity list is complete
         in case revisions are required
      d. Subprojects are developed by external organiza-
         tions and then become part of the WBS for the
         entire project

 49. The lessons learned documentation is an output
     from the--
      a.   Identify stakeholders process
      b.   Develop project management plan process
      c.   Manage communications process
      d.   Plan communications management process

 50. Your experience has taught you that inappropriate
     responses to cost variances can produce quality or sched-
     ule problems or unacceptable project risk. When leading
     a team meeting to discuss the importance of cost control,
     you note that cost control is concerned with--
      a. Influencing the factors that create change to the
         authorized cost baseline
      b. Developing an approximation of the costs of the
         resources needed to complete the project
      c. Allocating the overall cost estimate to individual
         work items
      d. Establishing a cost performance baseline
                                           Practice Test    365


51. You are pleased to be the project manager for a new
    video conferencing system for your global organization.
    You want it to be one that is easy to use and is state of
    the art. As the project manager, you also are the project
    leader. You realize leadership is critical throughout the
    phases of the project and its key elements are--
   a.   Respect and trust
   b.   Political and cultural awareness
   c.   Negotiation and influencing
   d.   Decision making and conflict management

52. The WBS represents all product and project work,
    including project management. It is sometimes called the--
   a. Control account level
   b. 100% rule
   c. Integration of scope, cost, and schedule for comparison
      to the earned value
   d. The code of accounts
366    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 53. Your company is in the project management training busi-
     ness. In addition, the company publishes several exam
     study aids for the PMP(R) and CAPM(R) exam. You have your
     PMP(R), and you have been appointed as the project man-
     ager to make sure your company's training materials are
     updated to be aligned with the new PMBOK(R) Guide. You
     must complete your project in six months. You are now
     in month four. Many of your team members have been
     working on other projects as the company uses matrix
     management. In a performance review meeting today,
     you informed your Governance Board that you did not
     think you could complete this project in the remaining
     two months. You were informed that additional resources
     were not available, but you had to complete your project
     on time. Your best course of action is to--
      a.   Revise your schedule baseline
      b.   Use fast tracking
      c.   Adjust leads and lags now in your schedule
      d.   Use modeling techniques

 54. You are trying to determine whether or not to conduct
     100% final system tests of 500 ground-based radar units
     at the factory. The historical radar field failure rate is 4%;
     the cost to test each unit in the factory is $10,000; the cost
     to reassemble each passed unit after the factory test is
     $2,000; the cost to repair and reassemble each failed unit
     after factory test is $23,000; and the cost to repair and
     reinstall each failed unit in the field is $350,000. Using
     decision tree analysis, what is the expected value if you
     decide to conduct these tests?
      a.   $5.5 million
      b.   $5.96 million
      c.   $6.42 million
      d.   $7 million
                                            Practice Test    367


55. Motivation is dynamic and complex. The statement,
    "Motivation is an intrinsic phenomenon. Extrinsic satisfac-
    tion only leads to movements, not motivation" is attributed
    to which of the leading theories of motivation?
   a.   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Theory
   b.   Herzberg's Motivator-Hygiene Theory
   c.   Morse and Lorsch's Contingency Theory
   d.   McGregor's Theory X/Theory Y

56. Each time you meet with your project sponsor, she
    emphasizes the need for cost control. To address her
    concerns, you should provide--
   a.   Work performance information
   b.   Cost baseline updates
   c.   Resource productivity analyses
   d.   Trend analysis statistics

57. One output of the control costs process is cost forecasts,
    which is when--
   a. Modifications are made to the cost information used
      to manage the project and are communicated to
      stakeholders
   b. Trend analyses are performed and communicated to
      stakeholders
   c. A budget update is required and communicated to
      all stakeholders
   d. A calculated EAC value or a bottom-up EAC value is
      documented and communicated to stakeholders
368        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 58. You work for an electrical utility company and will be
     managing a project to build a new substation that will
     serve a new industrial park. This project was authorized
     because of a--
      a.   Business need
      b.   Market demand
      c.   Technological advance
      d.   Customer request

 59. A final project report is a recommended best practice.
     Although this report can be organized in a variety of
     ways, how should each item that is covered in the report
     be addressed?
      a. A recommendation for changing current practice
         should be made and defended.
      b. The focus should be solely on items that did not work
         well on the project.
      c. Individuals who did not contribute successfully as
         team members should be noted.
      d. An earned value discussion is warranted.

 60. At the time the risk register is first prepared, it should
     contain all the following entries EXCEPT--
      a.   Root causes of risk
      b.   Structure for describing risks
      c.   List of risks requiring near-term responses
      d.   List of potential responses
                                            Practice Test    369


61. Which of the following theorists stated that people gener-
    ally are motivated according to the strength of their desire
    either to achieve high levels of performance or to exceed
    in competitive situations?
   a.   David McGregor
   b.   David McClelland
   c.   Victor Vroom
   d.   B. F. Skinner

62. Your project is considered very risky. You plan to perform
    numerous what-if scenarios on your schedule using simu-
    lation software that will define each schedule activity and
    calculate a range of possible durations for each activity.
    The simulation then will use the collected data from each
    activity to calculate a distribution curve (or range) for
    the possible outcomes of the total project. Your planned
    approach is an example of which following technique?
   a.   PERT
   b.   Monte Carlo analysis
   c.   Linear programming
   d.   Concurrent engineering

63. Project execution must be compared, and deviations must
    be measured for management control according to the--
   a.   Scope baseline
   b.   Performance measurement baseline
   c.   Schedule baseline
   d.   Control system
370  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 64. A number of items may be part of the schedule data for
     the project. The amount of additional detail will vary, but
     the data should include all the following items EXCEPT--
    a.   Schedule activities
    b.   Activity attributes
    c.   Identified assumptions
    d.   Resource breakdown structure

 65. If a team member, when facing schedule delays and cost
     overruns, develops several alternatives for completing the
     project successfully on schedule and within budget and
     asks questions such as, "Can we do it?," "If we do it what
     are the consequences?," and "Is it really worth the effort
     involved?," he or she is primarily motivated by the--
    a.   Contingency Theory
    b.   Expectancy Theory
    c.   Reinforcement Theory
    d.   Equity Theory

 66. Which tool or technique is NOT used for schedule control?
    a.   Performance reviews
    b.   Project management software
    c.   Work performance information
    d.   Leads and lags

 67. All the following are examples of project document
     updates from the manage project team process EXCEPT--
    a.   Issue log
    b.   Roles description
    c.   Project staff assignments
    d.   Personnel skills
                                          Practice Test     371


68. Recording and reporting information regarding when
    appropriate configuration information should be provided
    and regarding the status of proposed and approved
    changes effectively is done through--
   a.   Configuration status accounting
   b.   Configuration verification and audit
   c.   Project management methodology
   d.   A project management information system (PMIS)

69. Decomposition is a technique used to break larger,
    complex items into smaller and more manageable
    items. Which following statement best describes the role
    decomposition plays in creating the WBS?
   a. Final output of creating the WBS is described   in terms
      of phases of a project life cycle.
   b. Final output of creating the WBS is described   in terms
      of schedule activities.
   c. Final output of creating the WBS is described   in terms
      of verifiable products, services, or results.
   d. Final output of creating the WBS is described   in terms
      of the scope of the project.

70. The schedule management plan is a key document. It is--
   a. An output of the develop schedule process
   b. A tool and technique used in the develop schedule
      process
   c. The first time management process
   d. A separate planning effort completed in conjunction
      with the time management processes
372     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


71. Activity attributes are used to extend the description
    of the activity and to identify its multiple components.
    In the early stages of the project, an example of an
    activity attribute is--
   a.   Activity codes
   b.   Activity description
   c.   Predecessor and successor activities
   d.   Activity name

72. You are working on a new project in your city to con-
    struct an environmentally friendly landfill. The existing
    site is so undesirable that many residents have moved
    to other neighboring cities because of their proximity to
    it. However, even though the project has the support of
    the public, you need to have a number of hearings of
    the city's government before you are authorized to begin
    work. As you are in the planning phase of the project,
    you are waiting for these hearings to be scheduled and
    held before you can begin site preparation. These hear-
    ings are an example of--
   a.   A milestone
   b.   An external dependency
   c.   An item to be scheduled as a fragnet
   d.   A mandatory dependency

73. You are working on a project and want to know how
    many activities in the previous month were completed
    with significant variances. You should use a(n)--
   a.   Control chart
   b.   Inspection
   c.   Scatter diagram
   d.   Trend analysis
                                             Practice Test    373


74. Your project has a budget of $1.5 million for the first year,
    $3 million for the second year, $2.2 million for the third
    year, and $800,000 for the fourth year. Most of the project
    budget will be spent during--
   a.   Starting the project
   b.   Organizing and preparing
   c.   Carrying out the work
   d.   Closing the project

75. If you decide to follow an open subordination approach
    to resolving conflict, you are using which style of conflict
    resolution?
   a.   Avoiding
   b.   Accommodating
   c.   Compromising
   d.   Collaborating

76. Typically, the seller receives formal written notice that the
    contract has been completed by the--
   a. Project manager
   b. Authorized procurement administrator
   c. Member of the project management team responsible
      for daily contract administration
   d. Purchasing department head

77. Working in the control procurements process since your
    project is using five contractors, you need to update a
    number of organizational process assets. An example is--
   a.   Procurement management plan
   b.   Procurement documentation
   c.   Correspondence
   d.   Warranties
374    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 78. You are beginning a new project staffed with a virtual
     team located across five different countries. To help limit
     conflict and misunderstandings concerning the justifica-
     tion, objectives, and high-level requirements of the project
     among your team members and their functional managers,
     you ask the project sponsor to prepare a--
      a. Memo to team members informing them that they
         work for you now
      b. Project charter
      c. Memo to functional managers informing them that you
         have authority to direct their employees
      d. Human resource management plan

 79. To anticipate and help develop approaches to deal with
     potential quality problems on your project, you want to
     use a variety of root-cause analysis techniques including
     all the following approaches EXCEPT--
      a.   Fishbone diagrams
      b.   Ishikawa diagrams
      c.   System or process flowcharts
      d.   Checklists

 80. All of the following are examples of ways to generate
     options for mutual gain during negotiations EXCEPT--
      a.   Separating inventing from deciding
      b.   Options broadening
      c.   Zero-sum game analysis
      d.   Multiplying options by shuttling between the specific
           and the general
                                           Practice Test     375


81. Recently, your company introduced a new processing
    system for its products. You were the project manager
    for this system and now have been asked to lead a team
    to implement needed changes to increase efficiency and
    productivity. To help you analyze the process outputs,
    you and your team have decided to use which following
    technique?
   a.   System flowcharts
   b.   Design of experiments
   c.   Pareto analysis
   d.   Control charts

82. Effective leadership is one key to successful project man-
    agement. There are several theories of leadership. One
    model is Hershey and Blanchard's situational leadership
    model that describes directive behavior and supportive
    behavior. Of the following, which one is NOT a key word
    for supportive behavior?
   a.   Listen
   b.   Structure
   c.   Praise
   d.   Facilitate

83. Based on quality control measurements on your manu-
    facturing project, management realizes that immediate
    corrective action is required to the material requirements
    planning (MRP) system to minimize rework. To imple-
    ment the necessary changes you should follow--
   a.   The organization's quality policy
   b.   The quality management plan
   c.   Established operational definitions and procedures
   d.   A defined integrated change control process
376    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 84. You are the project manager on a project to improve
     traffic flow in the company's parking garage. You decide
     to use flowcharting to--
      a.   Help anticipate how problems occur
      b.   Show dependencies between tasks
      c.   Show the results of a process
      d.   Forecast future outcomes

 85. Successful project management involves both project
     leadership as well as project management skills. Several
     different leadership styles are appropriate in different
     phases of the project life cycle. Assume that you are
     working on a project, and it is in the execution phase.
     The leadership style that is most appropriate should con-
     sist of a blend of all but which one of the following?
      a.   Change master
      b.   Decision maker
      c.   Team and synergy
      d.   Trustworthiness

 86. Schedule control is one important way to avoid delays.
     While planning and executing schedule recovery, one tool
     available to you for control schedules is--
      a.   Changing the schedule management plan
      b.   Immediately rebaselining
      c.   Adjusting leads and lags
      d.   Changing all project and resource calendars
                                              Practice Test    377


87. You have been the project manager for your nuclear sub-
    marine project for four years. While you did not assume
    this position until the project management plan had been
    prepared and approved, you find you spend a significant
    amount of time collecting data and communicating. You
    also spend time reviewing the impact of project changes
    and implementing ones that have been approved. Often
    you have had to modify a non-conforming product,
    which means you are spending time on--
   a.   Corrective actions
   b.   Updating the project's requirements
   c.   Updating the traceability matrix
   d.   Defect repair

88. You were assigned recently as the project manager of a
    program management office project to implement a new
    enterprise-wide scheduling system for use throughout
    your company. You identify the need for a project charter
    to provide you with appropriate authority for applying
    resources, completing the project work, and formally initi-
    ating the project. Who should issue the project charter?
   a.   The project manager--you
   b.   The customer
   c.   The person who formally authorizes the project
   d.   A member of the training and development department
        as they will own the training on the new system

89. In which of the following methods of resolving conflict
    will the conflict typically reappear again in another form?
   a.   Smoothing
   b.   Compromising
   c.   Collaborating
   d.   Confronting
378     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


90. Statistical sampling is a method in perform quality control
    to determine the conformance to requirements for some
    component or product of a project. Its greatest advantage
    is that it--
   a. Does not require a large expenditure of resources
   b. Is accurate enough with a sampling of less than 1%
   c. Does not require 100% inspection of the components
      to achieve a satisfactory inference of the population
   d. Needs to be conducted only when a problem is dis-
      covered with the end product or when the customer
      has some rejects

91. Your project sponsor wants to know whether process
    variables are within acceptable limits. To answer this
    question, you should--
   a.   Conduct a process analysis
   b.   Conduct a root cause analysis
   c.   Use a control chart
   d.   Use a run chart

92. All the following statements are true about the grassroots
    estimate, EXCEPT--
   a.   Its accuracy rate is from -5% to +10%
   b.   It is also called an engineering estimate
   c.   It is used primarily for Level 1 of the WBS
   d.   It may take months to prepare
                                          Practice Test    379


93. You are planning a project and want to account for how
    the project will be managed in the future. While building
    your cost performance data, you want to provide guidance
    for when the project is later executed, because you know
    that different responses are required depending upon the
    degree of variance from the baseline. For example, a vari-
    ance of 10 percent might not require immediate action,
    whereas a variance of 20 percent will require more imme-
    diate action and investigation. You decide to include the
    details of how to manage the cost variances as part of
    which following plan?
   a.   Cost management plan
   b.   Change management plan
   c.   Performance measurement plan
   d.   Variance management plan

94. Assume that you are managing a project team. Your team
    is one in which its members confront issues rather than
    people, establish procedures collectively, and is team
    oriented. As the project manager, which of the following
    represents your team's stage of development and the
    approach you should use during this time?
   a.   Storming; high directive and supportive approach
   b.   Norming; high directive and low supportive approach
   c.   Norming; high supportive and low directive approach
   d.   Performing; low directive and supportive approach
380     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


95. You are finalizing all the contracts and ensuring that they
    are closed. The close procurements process involves all
    the following administrative actions EXCEPT--
   a. The procurement administrator is reassigned
   b. Finalizing open claims
   c. Updating the project records to show the final
      contract results
   d. Archiving the contracts and contract records for
      future use

96. You are working on a project and want to identify the
    cause of problems in a process by the shape and width
    of the distribution of the process variables. You should
    use a--
   a.   Histogram
   b.   Pareto chart
   c.   Scatter diagram
   d.   Trend analysis
                                            Practice Test    381


97. You are working on a construction project in a city dif-
    ferent from your headquarters' location. You and your
    team have not worked in this city, City B, previously,
    and you lack knowledge of the local building codes.
    You had a team member review the codes, and he said
    they were in far greater detail than those in your city,
    City A. When you asked him how much time he would
    need to spend to gain a complete understanding of these
    codes, he estimated that at least five weeks would be
    needed. You then decided it would be more cost effec-
    tive to hire a local person from City B who specializes in
    this area. As a result, as you prepare your schedule and
    estimate your resource requirements for this project, you
    should coordinate this work closely with which of the
    following processes:
   a.   Estimate costs
   b.   Define activities
   c.   Determine budgets
   d.   Develop schedule

98. Assume that you were the first person in your company
    to be PMP(R) certified and also that you earned a doctorate
    in project management. People throughout the organiza-
    tion admired your achievements. Based on your success
    in managing projects, your company now has adopted
    a management-by-projects philosophy. You have been
    appointed head of your company's project management
    office to lead the organization as it transitions to this new
    way of working. So far, people seem to willingly comply
    with your demands and requests. In this situation, you are
    using which type of power?
   a.   Legitimate
   b.   Expert
   c.   Contacts
   d.   Referent
382      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


 99. The nature of project work is such that it inevitably
     causes stress. Project managers thus need to learn how
     to cope with and manage stress and understand what
     stress is and why it is created. Project managers need to
     note that it can be a positive experience depending on
     how people perceive stress and should work to mentor
     team members accordingly. As you strive to become
     more aware of stress, which one of the following is NOT
     considered a stress-creating factor that is related to the
     project environment?
    a.   Role ambiguity
    b.   Corporate politics
    c.   Career development
    d.   Selection of team members

100. Assume you are working as the project manager on the
     first project in your company to use the critical chain
     approach to scheduling. You are a PMP(R) and also are
     certified in critical chain. You are getting ready for a
     performance review with your Governance Board,
     and you can expect they will ask questions about--
    a.   The magnitude of variance against the schedule baseline
    b.   Schedule risk
    c.   Performance to date since the past review meeting
    d.   The buffer needed and buffer remaining
                                            Practice Test    383


101. You are in the early stages of a project to manufacture
     disposable medical devices. You need a number of engi-
     neers including ones with specialties in mechanical,
     environmental, and systems engineering. In the early
     stages of this project, your resource pool includes a large
     number of both junior and senior engineers in the various
     specialty areas. However, as the project progresses--
    a. Fewer systems engineers will be needed
    b. The resource pool can be limited to those people who
       are knowledgeable about the project
    c. To complete the project on time, you will continue to
       require access to a large number of engineers in their
       specialty areas
    d. You will only need junior level engineers as the senior
       level people can be used early in the project to mentor
       and train them

102. A number of approaches can be helpful when estimating
     resource requirements for activities on a project. Assume
     you are managing a project and you have already pre-
     pared your WBS. When you decomposed your WBS, it
     has 45 work packages. You then prepared an activity list.
     Now, you are preparing your schedule and determining
     your resource requirements. You found there were about
     30 activities that you could not estimate with a reasonable
     degree of confidence, so you and your team decided to
     use which one of the following approaches to help with
     these activity resource estimates:
    a.   Resource breakdown structure
    b.   Published estimating data
    c.   Alternatives analysis
    d.   Bottom-up estimating
384  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


103. To practice effective schedule control, your project team
     must be alert to any issues that may cause problems in
     the future. To best accomplish effective schedule control,
     the team should--
    a. Review work performance information
    b. Allow no changes to the schedule
    c. Update the schedule management plan on a continu-
       ous basis
    d. Hold status reviews

104. Functional managers play a vital role in ensuring project
     success. Since most projects operate in a matrix environ-
     ment, there is shared authority between project managers
     and functional managers. Functional managers tend to
     focus on--
    a.   Who will do the task
    b.   Why the project manager needs resources
    c.   How much time and money is available for the task
    d.   Why will the task be done

105. You are a member of a project selection committee that
     uses the net present value technique. Using this approach,
     the project is acceptable if the--
    a. Sum of the net present value of all estimated cash flow
       during the life of the project equals the profit
    b. Net present value of the inflow is greater than the
       specified amount or percentage threshold
    c. Gross present value of all future expected cash flow
       divided by the initial cash investment is greater than one
    d. Net present value of the inflow is less than the
       specified amount or percentage threshold
                                              Practice Test  385


106. A watch list of low priority risks is documented in the--
    a.   Work performance information
    b.   Risk register
    c.   Fallback plans
    d.   Risk response plan

107. You are the project manager for a major logistics installa
     tion project and must obtain specific services from local
     sources external to your project. Your subcontracts
     administrator has told you to prepare a product or service
     description, which is referenced in a--
    a.   Project statement of work
    b.   Contract scope statement
    c.   Request for proposal
    d.   Contract

108. It often is advantageous to appoint a termination manager
     in the closing phase of the project and release the project
     manager so that he or she is available to work on another
     project. If this is the case, the termination manager should
     focus attention on all but which one of the following?
    a.   Ensuring that documentation is complete
    b.   Ascertaining any product support requirements
    c.   Receiving formal acceptance of the project from the client
    d.   Preparing personnel performance evaluations
386      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


109. You are working on a project to upgrade the existing
     fiber-optic cables in your province. You have determined
     that a resource can install 25 meters of cable per hour,
     so the duration required to install 1,000 meters would be
     40 hours. This means you are using--
    a.   Productivity efficiency factors
    b.   Parametric estimating
    c.   Analogous estimating
    d.   PERT

110. During the stages of team development, your team is in
     which stage when there is problem solving and inter
     dependence along with achievement and synergy?
    a.   Storming
    b.   Forming
    c.   Norming
    d.   Performing

111. When you are about to terminate a contract, the one
     place to look for specific procedures for contract closure
     is in the--
    a.   Statement of work in the contract
    b.   Terms and conditions in the contract
    c.   Product description
    d.   Organizational process assets

112. Today, the primary cause of why projects are not
     completed on time and within cost and are terminated
     early is due to--
    a.   Contractual issues
    b.   Complexity of the project
    c.   An increase in the allocated time
    d.   Behavioral-oriented reasons
                                             Practice Test    387


113. Life-cycle phase definitions are different in different
     industries. For example, all of the following are terms that
     could be used in the closing phase of a project EXCEPT--
    a.   Testing and commissioning
    b.   Conversion
    c.   Implementation
    d.   Final audit

114. Your company is embarking on a project to launch a new
     product delivery service. You are the project manager
     for this project and have just finished the concept phase.
     The various outputs/deliverable(s) for this phase include--
    a.   Project management plan
    b.   Scope of work and requirements
    c.   Project charter and stakeholder register
    d.   Roles and responsibilities of the project manager

115. Behavior roles of team members influence the team's
     process, behavior, and effectiveness. An example of a
     task-oriented role to perform is that of a(n)--
    a.   Harmonizer
    b.   Initiator
    c.   Devil's advocate
    d.   Group observer
388     PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


116. You are managing a project in which your team m embers
     all work in the same geographic location and have
     worked together previously on many projects. Everyone
     is aware of the various strengths and weaknesses of the
     individual team members and their key areas of expertise.
     As a result--
    a. A kickoff meeting is recommended
    b. Team-building activities will not be needed on
       your project
    c. You should expect minimal conflicts and changes
       to occur
    d. Rewards and recognition will be handled smoothly
       throughout the project

117. Team building should be ongoing throughout the project
     life cycle. However, it is hard to maintain momentum and
     morale, especially on large, complex projects that span
     several years. One guideline to follow to promote team
     building is to--
    a. Consider every meeting a team meeting, not the
       projectmanager's meeting
    b. Conduct team building at specific times during the
       project through off-site meetings
    c. Engage the services of a full-time facilitator before any
       team-building initiatives are conducted
    d. Develop the project schedule using the services of a
       project control officer and then issue it immediately to
       the team
                                             Practice Test  389


118. You have been assigned as the project manager for a
     major project in your company where the customer and
     key supplier are located in another country. You have
     been working on your project for six months. Recently,
     you traveled to this country, and at the conclusion of
     a critical design review meeting, which was highly
     successful, you realized you were successful in building a
     high-performing team. You had your own team members,
     who work in a weak matrix structure, on a conference
     call during this meeting. Although it was difficult to reach
     agreement on some key issues, you therefore relied on
     your interpersonal skills in--
    a.   Facilitation
    b.   Negotiating
    c.   Influencing
    d.   Decision making

119. You are leading a team to review and improve the project
     selection and prioritization method. You know that the
     two most important questions to answer are "can we do
     the project?" (feasibility study) and "should we do the
     project?" (cost-benefit analysis). The team is considering
     many different management concerns, including financial
     return, market share, and public perception. The most
     important criterion for building a project selection
     model is--
    a.   Risks
    b.   Realism
    c.   Ease of use
    d.   Benefits realization
390        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


120. Because risk management is relatively new on projects in
     your company, you decide to examine and document the
     effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified
     risks and their root causes. You therefore--
      a. Conduct a risk audit
      b. Hold a risk status meeting
      c. Ensure that risk is an agenda item at regularly
         scheduled staff meetings
      d. Reassess identified risks on a periodic basis

121. Thinking back to lessons that your company learned from
     experiences with its legacy information systems during
     the Y2K dilemma, you finally convinced management to
     consider systems maintenance from the beginning of the
     project. However, maintenance should--
      a. Always be included as an activity to be performed
         during the closeout phase
      b. Have a separate phase in the life cycle for information
         systems project because 60% to 70% of computer systems'
         life-cycle costs generally are devoted to maintenance
      c. Not be viewed as part of the project life cycle
      d. Be viewed as a separate project

122. On your systems development project, you noted during a
     review that the system had less functionality than planned
     at the critical design review. This note suggests that
     duringthe control risks process you used which following
     tools and techniques?
      a.   Risk reassessment
      b.   Variance analysis
      c.   Technical performance measurement
      d.   Reserve analysis
                                             Practice Test     391


123. The workaround that you used to deal with a risk that
     occurred should be documented and included in which
     following processes?
    a. Report performance and monitor and control risks
    b. Validate scope and perform quality assurance
    c. Direct and manage project work and perform
       integrated change control
    d. Monitor and control project work and control risks

124. Contested changes are requested changes when the
     buyer and seller cannot agree on compensation for the
     change. They are also known as all but which one of the
     following?
    a.   Disputes
    b.   Demands
    c.   Appeals
    d.   Claims

125. A structured review of the seller's progress to deliver
     projectscope and quality within cost and schedule is
     known as a(n)--
    a.   Procurement performance review
    b.   Procurement audit
    c.   Inspection
    d.   Status review meeting
392        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


126. Within your company's portfolio, your project is ranked
     in the top five in terms of importance of the 60 projects
     under way; however, the number of resources available to
     you is still limited. You have decided to pilot test the use
     of critical chain on your project. You have calculated your
     critical path. You want to ensure that your target finish
     date does not slip in the critical chain method. To do so
     you should--
      a.   Add a project buffer
      b.   Put in three feeding buffers
      c.   Determine the drum resource
      d.   Manage the total float of the network paths

127. The greatest degree of uncertainty is encountered during
     which phase of the project life cycle?
      a.   Concept
      b.   Planning
      c.   Implementation
      d.   Closeout

128. A team-building approach that facilitates concurrent
     engineering is--
      a.   Matrix management
      b.   Fast-tracking
      c.   Tight matrix
      d.   Task force
                                            Practice Test    393


129. A number of different decision-making styles can be used
     in a team environment. When quality and acceptance
     are both important, which of the following styles should
     be used?
    a.   Command
    b.   Consultation
    c.   Consensus
    d.   Coin flip

130. Historical information is used--
    a. To compare current performance with prospective
       lessons learned
    b. To prepare the stakeholder management plan
    c. To evaluate the skills and competencies of prospective
       team members
    d. As an input to develop project charter

131. Work completed, key performance indicators, technical
     performance measures, start and finish dates of schedule
     activities, number of change requests, number of defects,
     actual costs, and actual decisions are examples of work
     performance data are an output of--
    a.   Project plan development
    b.   Risk control
    c.   Monitor and control project work
    d.   Direct and manage project work
394    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


132. Two team members on your current construction project
     are engaged in a major argument concerning the selection
     of project management software. They refuse to listen
     to each other. The most appropriate conflict resolution
     approach for you to use in this situation is--
      a.   Accommodating
      b.   Compromising
      c.   Collaborating
      d.   Forcing

133. As you use the critical chain method in lieu of the
     criticalpath method in developing your schedule,
     assume you have determined the buffer schedule
     activities. Your planned activities are scheduled to their
     latest possibleplaned start and end dates. Therefore,
     you are focusing on--
      a. Managing the free float of each network path
      b. Managing the total float of the network paths
      c. Managing remaining buffer durations against the
         remaining durations of task chains
      d. Managing the total buffer durations against the
         durations of the task chains

134. A key member of your project has deep technical skills
     and many years of experience in the company. Although
     she is not a manager, people respect her and do what
     she suggests. Of the following types of power, which one
     does she have?
      a.   Legitimate
      b.   Reward
      c.   Referent
      d.   Expert
                                           Practice Test    395


135. You have been placed in charge of a group of people that
     is selecting one of three possible projects. As you gather
     in the conference room, many team members already
     have decided which project selection technique to use.
     Some prefer IRR, and others argue for BCR. In deciding
     which method to use, your first step should be to--
    a. Compare and contrast selection techniques and iden-
       tify the advantages and disadvantage of each
    b. Identify the technique used most often in the company
       and determine if it is appropriate for this project
    c. Select the method for which most team members
       have knowledge
    d. Determine the philosophy and wishes of management

136. Before considering a project closed, what document
     should be reviewed to ensure that project scope has
     been satisfied?
    a.   Project scope statement
    b.   Project management plan
    c.   Project closeout checklists
    d.   Scope management plan
396        PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


137. A cost management plan should establish and document
     the various earned value rules of performance measure-
     ment. Along with defining the WBS to the level that the
     earned value analysis will be performed and establishing
     how earned value will be credited to the project (0-100,
     0-50-100, and so on), which following rule is also recog-
     nized regarding performance measurement?
      a. Determine the formula for calculating the estimate to
         complete (ETC) for the project
      b. Determine the code of accounts allocation provision
         for the WBS
      c. Determine the formula for calculating the estimate at
         completion (EAC) for the project
      d. Determine the variance thresholds to be used in
         the project

138. All the following elements are organizational process
     asset updates, resulting from closing a project or
     phase EXCEPT--
      a.   Project files
      b.   Project or phase closure documents
      c.   Historical information
      d.   Final product, service, or result transition

139. You have a conflict on your team but have enough time
     to resolve it, and you want to maintain future relation-
     ships. Thankfully, there is mutual trust, respect, and
     confidence among the parties involved. You decide to
     use confronting to resolve this conflict. In using this
     approach, your first step should be to--
      a.   Separate people from the problem
      b.   Acknowledge that conflict exists
      c.   Establish ground rules
      d.   Explore alternatives
                                             Practice Test    397


140. One way to evaluate the project schedule performance
     is to--
    a. Use the project management information system (PMIS)
    b. Determine the percent complete of in-progress
       schedule activities
    c. Establish a schedule change control system
    d. Determine the total float variance

141. Validate scope works hand-in-hand with control quality
     and generally follows control quality. A tool and
     technique used in validate scope that is not used in
     control quality is--
    a.   Group decision-making techniques
    b.   Inspection
    c.   Statistical sampling
    d.   Variance analysis

142. Research has shown that during the execution phase of
     the project, the majority of conflicts involve--
    a.   Personalities
    b.   Project priorities
    c.   Cost
    d.   Schedule

143. You are a goal-oriented project manager who is more
     interested in work accomplishment than relationship
     building. This indicates that you tend to resolve conflicts
     primarily through the use of--
    a.   Smoothing
    b.   Compromising
    c.   Collaborating
    d.   Forcing
398    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


144. You are working on a long-term project that has a n   umber
     of benefits to its customers and users. Therefore, as the
     project manager, one of your first steps was to identify the
     stakeholders that were critical to project success. Because
     this project will need long-term support by your organiza-
     tion once it is completed, key stakeholders are--
      a.   Operations managers
      b.   Functional managers
      c.   Sellers
      d.   Business partners

145. Effective communication occurs in groups as well as
     between individuals and is made up of several key
     components, such as the purpose of the message, the
     audience that you are delivering the message to, and
     the content of the message itself. One important area to
     consider when working with manage communications--
      a.   The choice of media
      b.   How often to distribute the information
      c.   The communications plan
      d.   The project performance report structure

146. A conflict resolution approach that is NOT considered
     to be very effective when more than a few players are
     involved and their viewpoints are mutually exclusive is--
      a.   Forcing
      b.   Avoiding
      c.   Compromising
      d.   Collaborating
                                            Practice Test      399


147. The key output of identify stakeholders that documents
     identification information, assessment information, and
     classification is the--
    a.   Stakeholder management plan
    b.   Communications plan
    c.   Stakeholder register
    d.   Communications log

148. Improvement to the processes and the product is a
     goal of project quality management. Assume that after
     completing a quality audit, you have discovered some
     gaps/shortcomings in the way that the project team is
     completing one deliverable. As an output to perform
     quality assurance, you would create which following item
     that feeds directly into the perform integrated change
     control processes?
    a.   Quality management plan updates
    b.   Risk register
    c.   Change requests
    d.   Project document updates

149. The estimate costs process uses all the following tools
     and techniques EXCEPT--
    a.   Three-point estimating
    b.   Cost of quality assumptions
    c.   Reserve analysis (contingency reserves)
    d.   Basis of estimates
400      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


150. A contract typically is used when a project is being
     performed for an external customer. An agreement is
     used as an input to--
    a.   Develop project charter
    b.   Develop project team
    c.   Plan procurement management
    d.   Conduct procurements

151. As you prepare to close your project, which of the
     following is an input to the close project or phase process?
    a.   Work performance information
    b.   Expert judgment
    c.   Accepted deliverables
    d.   Change requests

152. Managing change to the scope baseline is the main
     objectiveof the process of control scope. The scope
     baseline consists of the following components EXCEPT--
    a.   Project scope statement
    b.   WBS
    c.   WBS dictionary
    d.   Scope management plan
                                            Practice Test     401


153. Assume you have been working with your sponsor to
     prepare you charter, and you plan to present it to your
     Steering Committee on Friday. You are managing a
     software project, and the business need stated that you
     should use agile for the first time in our company rather
     than waterfall. In the Develop Project Charter process,
     this is then--
    a. Tool and technique
    b. Part of the enterprise environment factors as an input
       to this process
    c. A high-level requirement
    d. Stated in the strategic plan as a tool and technique in
       this process

154. Procurement documents are used in the identify stake-
     holder process because they--
    a. Are an enterprise environmental factor and an input to
       the process
    b. Are an organizational process asset and an input to
       the process
    c. Note key stakeholders as parties in the contract
    d. Serve as a way to prioritize and classify stakeholders

155. You completed your stakeholder analysis. How do you
     want to manage those stakeholders that have a high
     interest in your project and high power over decisions
     affecting your project?
    a.   Manage them closely
    b.   Keep them satisfied
    c.   Keep them informed
    d.   Monitor them occasionally
402    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


156. Change requests include a group of potential changes
     to a project. Types of change requests include all the
     following EXCEPT--
      a.   Defect repairs
      b.   Maintenance requests
      c.   Corrective actions
      d.   Preventive actions

157. You are working on a project that needs approval from
     your City Council and the courts, because the project is
     one with significant environmental and social impacts.
     Although many consumer groups are advocates of this
     project, others are opposed to it. Hearings are scheduled
     to resolve these issues and to obtain the needed permits
     to proceed. In preparing your human resource plan, you
     decide to designate a person as the court liaison, which is
     an example of a--
      a.   Role
      b.   Responsibility
      c.   Required competency
      d.   Ability of the team member to make appropriate
           decisions
                                             Practice Test    403


158. Assume you are managing an international project. Your
     team is located in Atlanta, Georgia, US; Berlin, Germany;
     and Melbourne, Australia. You and your sponsor are
     located in Paris, France, and your customer is located
     in Athens, Greece. Recognizing the different locations
     of the stakeholders in your project in its initial stages, a
     best practice to follow in terms of working toward project
     success is to--
    a. Determine who decides the project is a success
    b. Aligning the personal inputs of different project
       participants with a vision focused on success
    c. Establishing the project culture during the initiating
       stage of the project
    d. Identifying basic cultural characteristics and selecting
       one to follow

159. As a project manager, you recognize the importance of
     actively engaging key project stakeholders on a project.
     You have prepared an analysis of your stakeholders
     early in your project and classified them according to
     their interest, influence, and involvement in your project.
     You want to now--
    a. Focus on relationships necessary to ensure success
    b. Assess stakeholder legitimacy
    c. Determine the urgency that each stakeholder requires
       when he or she requests information about the project
    d. Focus on each stakeholder's power relevant to
       the project
404      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


160. Based on a recent quality audit of your project, your
     organization's quality assurance department is supportive
     of your approach as it notes the following c haracteristics
     of quality that are being followed consistency. They
     include all of the follow EXCEPT--
    a.   Cost of quality
    b.   Customer satisfaction
    c.   Management responsibility
    d.   High-performing team

161. The plan quality management process includes all the
     following techniques EXCEPT--
    a.   Benchmarking
    b.   Design of experiments
    c.   Process analysis
    d.   Control charts

162. You are managing a major international project that
     involves multiple performing organizations. To establish
     the guiding rules for the project regarding quality,
     you and your project team must develop a--
    a.   Improvement management plan
    b.   Configuration management plan
    c.   Quality policy
    d.   List of quality metrics for the project
                                             Practice Test    405


163. You are working on a project that management has
     decided to terminate early, because the product was
     rendered obsolete by the introduction of new technology
     by a competitor. You have awarded a contract for part of
     the project that will be terminated, and fortunately have a
     clause that enables you to terminate it for convenience at
     any time. This means that--
    a. Your contractual obligations are complete once you
       issue the termination for convenience
    b. You may need to compensate the seller for seller
       preparations and for any completed or accepted work
    c. You need to compensate the seller only for accepted
       work that was completed prior to the termination order
    d. Specific rights and responsibilities are determined once
       the termination order is issued

164. Of the following, which one is NOT true concerning
     a contract?
    a. It is a legal relationship subject to remedy in the courts.
    b. It can take the form of a complex document or a
       simple purchase order.
    c. It is a mutually binding legal relationship that obligates
       the seller to provide specific products, services, or
       results and obligates the buyer to pay the seller.
    d. It includes a specific contract management plan.

165. All of the following can be used in lieu of the term
     "bidders conferences" EXCEPT--
    a.   Contractor conferences
    b.   Pre-bid conferences
    c.   Vendor conferences
    d.   Project review meetings
406      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


166. Assume you are preparing your procurement management
     plan. A useful tool and technique is to--
    a.   Have a meeting
    b.   Use your risk register
    c.   Review the requirements document
    d.   Use your stakeholder register

167. Your role in the project includes helping to resolve
     problems; making recommendations regarding p       riorities;
     accelerating activities to meet the target schedule;
     promoting communications among project team mem-
     bers; and helping management monitor the project's
     progress on a regular basis. Most of the people work-
     ing on your p roject are scientists or technical experts.
     You are working in which of the following types of
     organizational structures?
    a.   Task force
    b.   Balanced matrix
    c.   Project expeditor
    d.   Project coordinator

168. In order for a matrix organizational approach to be
     successful, the two-boss situation should be resolved.
     To overcome the two-boss problem, it is important to--
    a. Have the project manager and the functional manager
       work together to complete performance evaluations
    b. Prepare a responsibility chart to define responsibilities
    c. Guarantee a balance of power between the functional
       manager and the project manager
    d. Promote interface relationship management
                                             Practice Test     407


169. The resource calendar is an output of which
     following process?
    a.   Develop project team
    b.   Acquire project team
    c.   Estimate activity durations
    d.   Manage project team

170. An intentional activity to ensure future performance of
     project work is aligned with the project management
     plan is--
    a.   Preventive action
    b.   Corrective action
    c.   Implemented change requests
    d.   Work performance information

171. Close procurements is a process that involves includes
     activities for administrative closure such as--
    a.   Customer acceptance and final payment
    b.   Audit project success or failure and archiving records
    c.   Final contractor payment and lessons learned
    d.   Transition of the final product and acceptance
         of deliverables
408  PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


172. As a project manager, not only must you be a leader,
     but you also must be responsible for the management,
     administrative, and technical aspects of the project. Which
     followingskill is NOT representative of the skills needed
     for project leadership/interpersonal relations?
    a. Influencing the organization by sharing power and
       getting others to cooperate toward common goals
    b. Creating an environment to meet project objectives
       while offering maximum self-satisfaction related to
       what people value the most
    c. Helping a group of people bound by a common sense
       of purpose to work interdependently with each other
    d. Understanding of policies, operating procedures, and
       regulations of external stakeholder organizations

173. Assume you are managing a project, and your project
     management plan has been approved. Your project has
     a high level of change associated with it. There is active
     and ongoing stakeholder involvement. This means you
     probably are working with a(n)--
    a.   Adaptive life cycle
    b.   Iterative life cycle
    c.   Incremental life cycle
    d.   Predictive life cycle

174. One way to help mitigate personnel risks that may occur
     during the end of the project is to--
    a. Meet individually with each team member
    b. Provide specific recognition to each team member who
       has worked on the project
    c. Prepare a staff release plan
    d. Document the time each person is to work on the
       project in a resource calendar
                                             Practice Test    409


175. You are conducting a stakeholder analysis on your
     project. After identifying potential stakeholders, the next
     step in the process is to--
    a. Determine their desired level of participation
    b. Provide detailed contact information for each identi-
       fied stakeholder
    c. Perform an assessment to see how each stakeholder
       might react in certain situations
    d. Analyze each stakeholder's impact or support and
       classify them

176. Assume your project communication management plan
     has been approved by your sponsor and the members
     of your Steering Committee. You are managing a global
     project and have team members working virtually in
     four continents and stakeholders in numerous locations.
     Your next step is to--
    a.   Set up an information management system
    b.   Select communications technology
    c.   Determine performance reporting methods
    d.   Select a communications model

177. Although your project team is working virtually, you are
     striving to make it a high-performing team. You held
     a virtual kickoff meeting to ensure there was a shared
     projectvision. You now see that team members are
     addressing the work to be done, but they do not seem to
     be collaborating. You realize the team is--
    a. Concerned about their formal roles and
       responsibilities
    b. Independent
    c. Forming
    d. Storming
410      PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


178. You are conducting a stakeholder analysis on your project.
     Your organization uses an approach to classify stake-
     holders based on their level of authority and their active
     involvement in the project. This approach is known as--
    a.   A power/interest grid
    b.   A power/influence grid
    c.   An influence/impact grid
    d.   A salience model

179. When managing projects, one important technique is
     capturing lessons learned from previous projects to
     improve the organization's project management process.
     Therefore, in planning the project, it is important to plan
     the closing procedures, particularly to review the--
    a.   Risk responses that were used
    b.   Checklists for risk identification
    c.   WBS and scope documents
    d.   Team members' performance feedback

180. The basic approach to quality management in projects is
     to be compatible with which of the following:
    a. Six-Sigma, failure mode and effect analysis, and total
       quality management
    b. The International Organization for Standardization
       (ISO)
    c. Methods, such as those recommended by Deming,
       Juran, and Crosby
    d. Inspection over prevention
                                              Practice Test    411


181. During a bidders conference, it is important that--
    a. Only qualified sellers participate
    b. All potential sellers are given equal standing
    c. The evaluation criteria for the proposal is used to
       determine participation
    d. Responses to questions be provided solely to the
       prospective seller that asked the question

182. One key interpersonal skill used to manage stakeholder
     expectations is--
    a.   Negotiation skills
    b.   Building trust
    c.   Compromise
    d.   Conversation

183. You are a project manager leading the construction
     project of a new garbage incinerator. Local residents and
     environmental groups are opposed to this project because
     of its environmental impact. Management agrees with
     your request to partner with a third party that will be
     responsible for providing state-of-the-art "air scrubbers,"
     to clean the exhaust to an acceptable level. This decision
     will delay the project but will allow it to continue. It is an
     example of which following risk response?
    a.   Passive acceptance
    b.   Active acceptance
    c.   Mitigation
    d.   Transference
412    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


184. All the following are processes in project procurement
     management EXCEPT--
      a.   Terminate procurements
      b.   Control procurements
      c.   Plan procurement management
      d.   Close procurements

185. Working in the systems integration field, you are primarily
     responsible for coordinating the work of numerous sub-
     contractors. Your current project is coming to an end. You
     have 15 major subcontractors as well as a variety of other
     sellers. Now that you are closing contracts (procurements),
     you should--
      a. Conduct a trend analysis
      b. Use earned value to assess lessons learned
      c. Ask each contractor to meet with you individually at
         its own expense
      d. Conduct a procurement audit

186. You are managing a moderately risky project. You have
     done well identifying risks and assessing them both on
     the probability of the risk event occurring and on the
     level of impact that the risk could have on your project
     if it actually occurred. But to help with a "next" level of
     qualitative risk analysis, you could use a--
      a.   Risk priority assessment
      b.   Risk quality assessment
      c.   Risk urgency assessment
      d.   Quantitative risk analysis
                                              Practice Test    413


187. You are identifying possible risks to your project concern-
     ing the development of a nutritional supplement. You
     want to reach out to your experts and build consensus on
     the risks that qualitative and quantitative risk analysis can
     address later. Although you can use various techniques,
     a key information gathering technique that helps to build
     consensus is--
    a.   Documentation review
    b.   Probability/impact analysis
    c.   Checklist analysis
    d.   Delphi technique

188. Managing five contractors on your project for a new
     stadium in your City that can be used for baseball and
     for football and can be easily converted for either sport is
     a challenge along with managing your 15 person project
     team. You decided to conduct an audit of one of your
     contractors and are--
    a. Using it as a baseline for improvements to the other
       contracts under way
    b. Verifying compliance in the seller's work processes
    c. Accompanying it with a project quality audit
    d. Using it for lessons learned documentation

189. A weighting system can be used for all but which one of
     the following reasons?
    a. To select a single seller that will be asked to sign a
       standard contract
    b. To establish a negotiating sequence by ranking all
       proposals by the weighted evaluation scores that have
       been assigned
    c. To quantify qualitative data to minimize possible bias
    d. To establish minimum requirements of performance
       for one or more of the evaluation criteria
414    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


190. One way to make it more likely practice project risk
     management on projects is to--
    a. Hold meetings
    b. Have the team take an orientation class on risk
       management early in the project
    c. Give one team member the responsibility for risk
       management working in conjunction with the PMO
    d. Assign each team member a risk to own, which is
       documented in the risk register

191. Your firm specializes in roller-coaster construction.
     It recently received an RFP to build the world's most
     "death-defying" roller coaster. You know that such
     a roller coaster has never been built before and that
     this would be a high-risk project. You are receiving a
     cost-plus-award-fee contract, which means--
    a. Your fee will be paid for completed work
    b. Your fee amount will not change unless there is a
       scope change
    c. Your fee is generally not subject to appeals
    d. If your final cost is greater, you will share costs
       with the buyer based on a pre-negotiated cost
       sharing formula

192. Work performance information in control risks
     means that--
    a. Recommended preventive or corrective action is
       considered through change requests
    b. Outcomes of risk reassessments and risk audits are
       documented
    c. Templates to the risk management plan and the risk
       register are recommended
    d. A mechanism to communicate and support project
       decision making is provided
                                             Practice Test  415


193. A number of factors affect make-or-buy decisions
     such as--
    a.   Desired level of quality
    b.   Risk-related contract decisions
    c.   Value delivered by vendors meeting the needs
    d.   Performance data

194. For complex procurement items, often contract negotia-
     tion can be an independent process. An example of an
     input if such a process is used is--
    a.   Open items list
    b.   Approved changes
    c.   Documented decisions
    d.   Expert judgment

195. Marketplace conditions are an input to which one of the
     following processes?
    a.   Plan procurement management
    b.   Conduct procurements
    c.   Control procurements
    d.   Close procurements

196. Each project can benefit from stakeholder involvement;
     however, it is in both the project manager's and the
     teams' best interest to ensure that all project stakeholders
     have positive attitudes toward the project and its goals
     and objectives. Working as a project manager, you have
     a number of key stakeholders on your project. The
     stakeholder that identifies potential conflicts between
     organizational strategies and project goals is the--
    a.   Chairperson of the Governance Board
    b.   Program manager
    c.   Director of the project management office
    d.   Chief Operating Officer
416    PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide


197. While many different techniques can be used to rate or
     score proposals, all will use--
      a. A screening system
      b. A weighting system in conjunction with a screening
         system
      c. Expert judgment and some form of proposal evalua-
         tion techniques
      d. Quality ratings and contractual compliance

198. When determining the message that you will deliver
     to stakeholders, knowing both the content (what you
     want to say) and your audience is important. Which of
     the following helps you to understand how others may
     interpret your message?
      a.   Sender-receiver models
      b.   Facilitation techniques used in delivery
      c.   Negotiation skills
      d.   Presentation skills used in the development of
           the message

199. One of the reasons why it is challenging to work on a
     virtual team is that e-mail is the primary form of commu-
     nications. However, words alone typically comprise what
     percent of the total impact of any message?
      a.   Seven percent
      b.   15 percent
      c.   38 percent
      d.   55 percent
                                             Practice Test    417


200. Assume you are working on a multi-phase project as
     your project is planned to last three years. A best practice
     is to--
    a. Periodically review the business case
    b. Use a single prime contractor and have this contractor
       award any subcontracts
    c. Rely on your PMO for guidance
    d. Set up a `tight matrix'
Answer Sheet




               419
420    Answer Sheet



1.     a   b    c     d   21.   a   b   c   d

2.     a   b    c     d   22.   a   b   c   d

3.     a   b    c     d   23.   a   b   c   d

4.     a   b    c     d   24.   a   b   c   d

5.     a   b    c     d   25.   a   b   c   d

6.     a   b    c     d   26.   a   b   c   d

7.     a   b    c     d   27.   a   b   c   d

8.     a   b    c     d   28.   a   b   c   d

9.     a   b    c     d   29.   a   b   c   d

10.    a   b    c     d   30.   a   b   c   d

11.    a   b    c     d   31.   a   b   c   d

12.    a   b    c     d   32.   a   b   c   d

13.    a   b    c     d   33.   a   b   c   d

14.    a   b    c     d   34.   a   b   c   d

15.    a   b    c     d   35.   a   b   c   d

16.    a   b    c     d   36.   a   b   c   d

17.    a   b    c     d   37.   a   b   c   d

18.    a   b    c     d   38.   a   b   c   d

19.    a   b    c     d   39.   a   b   c   d

20.    a   b    c     d   40.   a   b   c   d
                                Answer Sheet       421



41.   a   b   c   d   61.   a     b    c       d

42.   a   b   c   d   62.   a     b    c       d

43.   a   b   c   d   63.   a     b    c       d

44.   a   b   c   d   64.   a     b    c       d

45.   a   b   c   d   65.   a     b    c       d

46.   a   b   c   d   66.   a     b    c       d

47.   a   b   c   d   67.   a     b    c       d

48.   a   b   c   d   68.   a     b    c       d

49.   a   b   c   d   69.   a     b    c       d

50.   a   b   c   d   70.   a     b    c       d

51.   a   b   c   d   71.   a     b    c       d

52.   a   b   c   d   72.   a     b    c       d

53.   a   b   c   d   73.   a     b    c       d

54.   a   b   c   d   74.   a     b    c       d

55.   a   b   c   d   75.   a     b    c       d

56.   a   b   c   d   76.   a     b    c       d

57.   a   b   c   d   77.   a     b    c       d

58.   a   b   c   d   78.   a     b    c       d

59.   a   b   c   d   79.   a     b    c       d

60.   a   b   c   d   80.   a     b    c       d
422    Answer Sheet



81.    a    b    c    d   101.   a   b   c   d

82.    a    b    c    d   102.   a   b   c   d

83.    a    b    c    d   103.   a   b   c   d

84.    a    b    c    d   104.   a   b   c   d

85.    a    b    c    d   105.   a   b   c   d

86.    a    b    c    d   106.   a   b   c   d

87.    a    b    c    d   107.   a   b   c   d

88.    a    b    c    d   108.   a   b   c   d

89.    a    b    c    d   109.   a   b   c   d

90.    a    b    c    d   110.   a   b   c   d

91.    a    b    c    d   111.   a   b   c   d

92.    a    b    c    d   112.   a   b   c   d

93.    a    b    c    d   113.   a   b   c   d

94.    a    b    c    d   114.   a   b   c   d

95.    a    b    c    d   115.   a   b   c   d

96.    a    b    c    d   116.   a   b   c   d

97.    a    b    c    d   117.   a   b   c   d

98.    a    b    c    d   118.   a   b   c   d

99.    a    b    c    d   119.   a   b   c   d

100.   a    b    c    d   120.   a   b   c   d
                                  Answer Sheet       423



121.   a   b   c   d   141.   a      b    c      d

122.   a   b   c   d   142.   a      b    c      d

123.   a   b   c   d   143.   a      b    c      d

124.   a   b   c   d   144.   a      b    c      d

125.   a   b   c   d   145.   a      b    c      d

126.   a   b   c   d   146.   a      b    c      d

127.   a   b   c   d   147.   a      b    c      d

128.   a   b   c   d   148.   a      b    c      d

129.   a   b   c   d   149.   a      b    c      d

130.   a   b   c   d   150.   a      b    c      d

131.   a   b   c   d   151.   a      b    c      d

132.   a   b   c   d   152.   a      b    c      d

133.   a   b   c   d   153.   a      b    c      d

134.   a   b   c   d   154.   a      b    c      d

135.   a   b   c   d   155.   a      b    c      d

136.   a   b   c   d   156.   a      b    c      d

137.   a   b   c   d   157.   a      b    c      d

138.   a   b   c   d   158.   a      b    c      d

139.   a   b   c   d   159.   a      b    c      d

140.   a   b   c   d   160.   a      b    c      d
424    Answer Sheet



161.   a    b    c    d   181.   a   b   c   d

162.   a    b    c    d   182.   a   b   c   d

163.   a    b    c    d   183.   a   b   c   d

164.   a    b    c    d   184.   a   b   c   d

165.   a    b    c    d   185.   a   b   c   d

166.   a    b    c    d   186.   a   b   c   d

167.   a    b    c    d   187.   a   b   c   d

168.   a    b    c    d   188.   a   b   c   d

169.   a    b    c    d   189.   a   b   c   d

170.   a    b    c    d   190.   a   b   c   d

171.   a    b    c    d   191.   a   b   c   d

172.   a    b    c    d   192.   a   b   c   d

173.   a    b    c    d   193.   a   b   c   d

174.   a    b    c    d   194.   a   b   c   d

175.   a    b    c    d   195.   a   b   c   d

176.   a    b    c    d   196.   a   b   c   d

177.   a    b    c    d   197.   a   b   c   d

178.   a    b    c    d   198.   a   b   c   d

179.   a    b    c    d   199.   a   b   c   d

180.   a    b    c    d   200.   a   b   c   d
Appendix: Study Matrix


Overview
Periodically, the Project Management Institute (PMI(R)) publishes a
Role Delineation Study (RDS) and uses to define the responsi-
bilities of the recipients of the Project Management Professional
(PMP(R)) credential In 2009, PMI(R) commissioned a new RDS
for the PMP(R), which then was published as the PMI(R) PMP(R)
Examination Content Outline (ECO) and issued it in July 2011.
It serves as the foundation for the PMP(R) exam and for our
200-question practice test in this book and in our on line test.
    The ECO identified five broad performance domains and
determined how the 175 questions on the PMP(R) exam would
be distributed according to these domains*. The distribution is
as follows:

                   I      Initiating                             13%
                   II     Planning                               24%
                   III    Executing                              30%
                   IV     Monitoring and Controlling             25%
                   V      Closing                                  8%


*   PMI(R) distributes 25 pretest questions across the six domains in any way that it
    deems appropriate for the purpose of "testing" the questions.

                                                                                   425
426     Appendix: Study Matrix


The matrix beginning on page identifies each practice test
question according to its performance domain and its knowl-
edge area in the PMBOK(R) Guide.
  The matrix is designed to help you--

   Assess your strengths and weaknesses in each of the
   performance domains
   Identify those areas in which you need additional study
   before you take the PMP(R) exam

Here is an easy way to use the matrix:

  Step 1 Circle all the questions you missed on the practice
    test in Column 1.
  Step 2 For each circled question, note the corresponding
    process in Column 2.
  Step 3 To determine whether any patterns emerge indicat-
    ing weak areas, tally the information you obtained from
    the matrix.
  Step 4 To ensure that you have a good understanding of
    the major management processes that define a particular
    knowledge area, including the input, tools and techniques,
    and output, refer to the appropriate knowledge area in
    the PMBOK(R) Guide.

The last column in the matrix is provided for your notes.
                                 Appendix: Study Matrix       427


Study Matrix
 Practice
   Test
 Question    Performance
 Number     Domain Process   Knowledge Area     Study Notes
    1       Planning         Integration
    2       Executing        Integration
    3       Executing        Procurement
    4       Planning         Scope
    5       Planning         Integration
    6       Monitoring and   Procurement
            Controlling
    7       Executing        Integration
    8       Planning         Integration
    9       Planning         Scope
    10      Executing        Quality
    11      Executing        Quality
    12      Monitoring and   Procurement
            Controlling
    13      Monitoring and   Integration
            Controlling
    14      Planning         Procurement
    15      Monitoring and   Integration
            Controlling
    16      Initiating       Integration
    17      Executing        Quality
    18      Monitoring and   Integration
            Controlling
    19      Monitoring and   Integration
            Controlling
428     Appendix: Study Matrix



Practice
  Test
Question     Performance
Number      Domain Process       Knowledge Area   Study Notes
   20       Monitoring and       Integration
            Controlling
   21       Planning             Scope
   22       Closing              Integration
   23       Monitoring and       Integration
            Controlling
   24       Executing            Quality
   25       Monitoring and       Scope
            Controlling
   26       Closing              Integration
   27       Executing            Quality
   28       Planning             Risk
   29       Planning             Scope
   30       Executing            Quality
   31       Monitoring and       Integration
            Controlling
   32       Initiating           Integration
   33       Executing            Human
                                 Resources
   34       Monitoring and       Time
            Controlling
   35       Monitoring and       Cost
            Controlling
   36       Monitoring and       Time
            Controlling
   37       Planning             Scope
   38       Closing              Integration
                                   Appendix: Study Matrix      429



Practice
  Test
Question    Performance
Number     Domain Process   Knowledge Area        Study Notes
   39      Planning         Scope
   40      Monitoring and   Cost
           Controlling
   41      Executing        Human
                            Resources
   42      Monitoring and   Cost
           Controlling
   43      Monitoring and   Cost
           Controlling
   44      Initiating       Integration
   45      Planning         Integration
   46      Executing        Integration
   47      Monitoring and   Cost
           Controlling
   48      Planning         Scope
   49      Executing        Communications
   50      Monitoring and   Cost
           Controlling
   51      Executing        Human
                            Resources
   52      Planning         Scope
   53      Monitoring and   Time
           Controlling
   54      Planning         Risk
   55      Executing        Human
                            Resources
   56      Monitoring and   Cost
           Controlling
430        Appendix: Study Matrix



 Practice
   Test
 Question       Performance
 Number        Domain Process       Knowledge Area   Study Notes
      57       Monitoring and       Cost
               Controlling
      58       Initiating           Integration
      59       Closing              Integration
      60       Planning             Risk
      61       Executing            Human
                                    Resources
      62       Planning             Time
      63       Monitoring and       Cost
               Controlling
      64       Planning             Time
      65       Executing            Human
                                    Resources
      66       Planning             Time
      67       Monitoring and       Human
               Controlling          Resources
      68       Monitoring and       Integration
               Controlling
      69       Planning             Time
      70       Planning             Time
      71       Planning             Time
      72       Planning             Time
      73       Monitoring and       Time
               Controlling
      74       Executing            Integration
      75       Executing            Human
                                    Resources
                                   Appendix: Study Matrix    431



Practice
  Test
Question    Performance
Number     Domain Process   Knowledge Area        Study Notes
   76      Closing          Procurement
   77      Monitoring and   Procurement
           Controlling
   78      Initiating       Integration
   79      Monitoring and   Quality
           Controlling
   80      Executing        Human
                            Resources
   81      Monitoring and   Quality
           Controlling
   82      Executing        Human
                            Resources
   83      Monitoring and   Quality
           Controlling
   84      Monitoring and   Quality
           Controlling
   85      Executing        Human
                            Resources
   86      Monitoring and   Time
           Controlling
   87      Executing        Integration
   88      Initiating       Integration
   89      Executing        Communications
   90      Monitoring and   Quality
           Controlling
   91      Monitoring and   Quality
           Controlling
   92      Planning         Cost
432      Appendix: Study Matrix



 Practice
   Test
 Question     Performance
 Number      Domain Process       Knowledge Area   Study Notes
    93       Planning             Cost
    94       Executing            Human
                                  Resources
    95       Closing              Procurement
    96       Monitoring and       Quality
             Controlling
    97       Planning             Time
    98       Executing            Human
                                  Resources
    99       Monitoring and       Human
             Controlling          Resources
   100       Monitoring and       Time
             Controlling
   101       Planning             Time
   102       Planning             Time
   103       Monitoring and       Time
             Controlling
   104       Executing            Human
                                  Resources
   105       Initiating           Integration
   106       Monitoring and       Risk
             Controlling
   107       Initiating           Integration
   108       Closing              Integration
   109       Planning             Time
   110       Executing            Human
                                  Resources
                                   Appendix: Study Matrix       433



Practice
  Test
Question    Performance
Number     Domain Process   Knowledge Area        Study Notes
  111      Closing          Procurement
  112      Closing          Integration
  113      Closing          Integration
  114      Initiating       Integration
  115      Executing        Human
                            Resources
  116      Executing        Human
                            Resources
  117      Executing        Human
                            Resources
  118      Monitoring and   Integration
           Controlling
  119      Initiating       Integration
  120      Monitoring and   Risk
           Controlling
  121      Initiating       Integration
  122      Monitoring and   Risk
           Controlling
  123      Monitoring and   Risk
           Controlling
  124      Monitoring and   Procurement
           Controlling
  125      Monitoring and   Procurement
           Controlling
  126      Planning         Time
  127      Initiating       Integration
  128      Executing        Human
                            Resources
434         Appendix: Study Matrix



 Practice
   Test
 Question        Performance
 Number         Domain Process       Knowledge Area   Study Notes
      129       Executing            Human
                                     Resources
      130       Initiating           Integration
      131       Executing            Integration
      132       Executing            Human
                                     Resources
      133       Planning             Time
      134       Executing            Human
                                     Resources
      135       Initiating           Integration
      136       Closing              Integration
      137       Planning             Cost
      138       Closing              Integration
      139       Executing            Human
                                     Resources
      140       Monitoring and       Time
                Controlling
      141       Monitoring and       Scope
                Controlling
      142       Executing            Human
                                     Resources
      143       Executing            Communications
      144       Initiating           Stakeholders
      145       Executing            Communications
      146       Executing            Communications
      147       Initiating           Stakeholders
      148       Executing            Quality
                                   Appendix: Study Matrix      435



Practice
  Test
Question    Performance
Number     Domain Process   Knowledge Area        Study Notes
  149      Planning         Cost
  150      Initiating       Integration
  151      Closing          Integration
  152      Monitoring and   Scope
           Controlling
  153      Initiating       Integration
  154      Initiating       Stakeholders
  155      Initiating       Stakeholders
  156      Executing        Integration
  157      Planning         Time
  158      Initiating       Integration
  159      Initiating       Stakeholders
  160      Planning         Quality
  161      Planning         Quality
  162      Planning         Quality
  163      Executing        Procurement
  164      Executing        Procurement
  165      Executing        Procurement
  166      Planning         Procurement
  167      Planning         Human
                            Resources
  168      Planning         Human
                            Resources
  169      Planning         Human
                            Resources
  170      Executing        Integration
436    Appendix: Study Matrix



 Practice
   Test
 Question     Performance
 Number      Domain Process     Knowledge Area   Study Notes
      171    Closing            Procurement
      172    Executing          Communications
      173    Executing          Integration
      174    Planning           Time
      175    Initiating         Stakeholders
      176    Executing          Communications
      177    Executing          Human
                                Resources
      178    Initiating         Stakeholders
      179    Planning           Risk
      180    Executing          Quality
      181    Executing          Procurement
      182    Executing          Stakeholders
      183    Planning           Risk
      184    Closing            Procurement
      185    Closing            Procurement
      186    Planning           Risk
      187    Planning           Risk
      188    Monitoring and     Procurement
             Controlling
      189    Executing          Procurement
      190    Monitoring and     Risk
             Controlling
      191    Planning           Procurement
      192    Monitoring and     Risk
             Controlling
                                Appendix: Study Matrix       437



Practice
  Test
Question    Performance
Number     Domain Process   Knowledge Area     Study Notes
  193      Executing        Procurement
  194      Executing        Procurement
  195      Planning         Procurement
  196      Initiating       Stakeholders
  197      Executing        Procurement
  198      Executing        Communications
  199      Executing        Communications
  200      Initiating       Integration
Answer Key

1. c. It is not a problem at this time. The previous
      project manager was using the rolling wave p   lanning
      technique, so you are able to continue defining
      the activities.
      Rolling wave planning provides progressive detailing
      of the work to be accomplished throughout the life
      of the project. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131, 152

2. d. Confusion of establishing a project in the matrix
      management environment
      During project formation, there is always an
      element of confusion or lack of clarity regarding the
      balance of power between the project manager and
      functional managers. If not resolved, such confusion
      manifests itself in conflicts regarding technical
      decisions, resource allocation, and scheduling later in
      the project. [Executing]
      Meredith and Mantel 2012, 151-152




                                                          439
440    Answer Key


 3. c. Analytical techniques
        Analytical techniques are a tool and technique n
        conduct procurements. They are used to help organi-
        zations identify the readiness of a vendor to provide
        the desired end state, determine costs to support
        budgeting, and avoid cost overruns In evaluating
        past performance they identify areas that have more
        risk and that may need to be monitored closely for
        project success. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 376

 4. a. Action requirements
        Such classification systems are helpful in both defin-
        ing and documenting stakeholder needs to meet
        project objectives. Project requirements are ones that
        involve actions, processes, or other conditions the
        project needs to meet. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 112

 5. b. Organizational process assets
        Organizational process assets include formal and
        informal plans, policies, procedures, and guidelines.
        As an input to the develop project management
        plan process, they include the items listed as well as
        standardized guidelines, instructions, proposal evalu-
        ation criteria, and performance measurement criteria;
        project management plan template; change control
        procedures; project files from previous projects; and
        historical information and lessons learned [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 75
                                               Answer Key      441


6. a. Control procurements
      The purpose of control procurements is to ensure
      that the contractual requirements are met by the
      seller. This objective is accomplished by managing
      procurement relationships, monitoring contract
      performance and making changes and corrections to
      contracts if appropriate. [Monitoring and Controlling]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 379

7. a. Expert
      Expert power is a function of knowledge, skills, and
      reputation possessed by the project manager. In such
      situations, project personnel will do what the p
                                                      roject
      manager wants because they believe he or she
      knows best, and they trust and respect the project
      manager. [Executing]
      Adams et al. 1997, 174-180
      Verma 2005, 54
      Levin 2010, 163

8. b. Requirements baseline
      The scope, schedule, and cost baselines may be
      combined into a performance measurement baseline.
      It also may include technical and quality parameters.
      It then is used as an overall project baseline against
      which project execution is compared to measure and
      manage performance. It also is used for earned value
      measurements. [Planning]
      PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 302, 549
442    Answer Key


 9. c. Job shadowing
        Observations are a tool and technique in the collect
        requirements process. They provide a way to view
        individuals in their environment and to see how they
        perform their jobs or tasks and carry out processes.
        Another term for this approach is job shadowing
        and usually is done by an observer viewing the user
        performing his or her job. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 116

10. b. Continuous process improvement
        Continuous process improvement provides an
        iterative means for improving the quality of all pro-
        cesses and is part of the definition of quality assur-
        ance. Its objective is to reduce waste and eliminate
        non-value-added activities. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242-243

11. c. Use an affinity diagram
        In quality assurance an affinity diagram is used to
        generate ideas that can be linked to form organized
        patterns of thought about a problem. Using them in
        project management, one can enhance the c reation
        of the WBS by using it to give structure to the
        decomposition of scope. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245
                                               Answer Key      443


12. c. $118,000
       In this situation, there is a $10,000 overrun from
       the target costs. Applying the 80/20 share ratio, the
       seller's share of the overrun is 20% of $10,000 or a
       minus $2,000 in earned fee. The final value of this
       procurement is $110,000 in costs, plus a seller fee
       of $10,000 less $2,000, or $8,000 for a final price of
       $118,000. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Fleming 2003, 92

13. c. Document the specific responsibilities of each
       stakeholder in the perform integrated change
       control process
       Configuration management is an integral part of
       the perform integrated change control process. It is
       necessary because projects by their nature involve
       changes. The integrity of baselines must be main-
       tained by releasing only approved changes for incor-
       poration into the project's products or services and
       by maintaining their related configuration and plan-
       ning documentation. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96-97

14. b. Procurement management plan
       The procurement management plan describes how
       the project management team will acquire goods
       and services from outside the performing organiza-
       tion. It describes how the procurement processes will
       be used from developing procurement documents
       through closing contracts. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 366-367
444  Answer Key


 15. a. Scope, quality, schedule, budget, and risk
        The constraints include, but are not limited to scope,
        schedule, budget (cost), quality, resources, and risk.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 6

 16. b. Strategic plans
        The configuration management knowledge base
        is an organizational process asset. It contains the
        versions and baselines of all company policies, prac-
        tices, procedures, and standards, as well as pertinent
        project documents. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 98

 17. d. A quality audit
        A quality audit is a tool and technique for the p
                                                         erform
        quality assurance process. It is primarily used to
        determine whether the project team is complying
        with organizational and project policies, processes,
        and procedures. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247

 18. c. Informal
        Change requests are an input to the perform inte-
        grated change control process. Although occurring
        in many forms, they must be formal requests devel-
        oped within the context of a change control system
        consisting of documented procedures. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96, 531
                                             Answer Key      445


19. d. Allowing automatic approval of changes
       Allowing for automatic approval of defined changes
       is a function of the change control system, not con-
       figuration management. Configuration management
       ensures that the description of the project product
       is correct and complete. The change control s ystem
       consists of a set of procedures to describe how
       modifications to project deliverables and documenta-
       tion are managed and controlled. [Monitoring and
       Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 94, 96, and 531

20. d. Change control meetings
       Often, a project will set up a change control board,
       which has the responsibility for meeting and review-
       ing the change requests, and approving, rejecting,
       or other disposition of the changes. Decisions of
       the board are documented and communicated to
       stakeholders for information and follow-up actions.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 99

21. b. Adds business value as it links to business and
       project objectives
       The requirements traceability matrix is a table that
       links requirements to their origin and traces them
       throughout the life cycle. This approach helps to
       ensure that each requirement adds value as it links
       to the business and project objectives. It also tracks
       requirements during the life cycle to help ensure
       that the requirements listed in the requirements
       document are delivered at the end of the project.
       [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 118
446    Answer Key


22. a. Schedule
        In many projects, there is a rush to finish
        because of schedule slippages that develop in the
        execution/implementation phase. Delays in schedules
        become cumulative and impact the project most
        severely in the final stages of the project. While there
        are other sources of conflict, such as personalities
        and cost, attempting to finish on time is always on
        everyone's mind. [Closing]
        Verma 1996, 103 and 105

23. b. Configuration management system
        The formal configuration management system is an
        important tool and technique for scope control and
        focuses on deliverables and documents. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 96-97

24. a. Root cause analysis
        Determining the root cause of the problem means
        to determine the origin of the problem. What may
        appear to be the problem on the surface is often
        revealed, after further analysis, not to be the real
        cause of the problem. Process analysis includes root
        cause analysis used to identify as problem, discover
        the underlying causes that lead to it and develop
        preventive actions. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247
                                            Answer Key      447


25. d. Validate scope typically precedes control quality
        Validate scope focuses on accepting project deliv-
        erables, and to be accepted, they must meet the
        requirements. Control quality is one way to ensure
        that the requirements have been met, which is why
        control quality typically is done before validate
        scope. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 134

26. a. The company requires a continuous stream of
       projects to survive
        Organizations that rely on products for their revenue
        must constantly be introducing new products into
        the marketplace as old products are removed. Ideally,
        this should be an overlapping process to maintain
        balanced or increasing revenue over time. The
        closure phase evaluates the efforts of the total system
        and serves as input to the conceptual phase for new
        projects and systems. It also has an impact on other
        ongoing projects with regard to identifying priorities.
        [Closing]
        Kerzner 2009, 69-70

27. d. Cost of quality
        Cost of quality involves both the cost of conformance
        and the cost of non-conformance. Examples of the
        cost of conformance are divided into two categories
        prevention costs and appraisal cots (includes inspec-
        tions). Costs of non-conformance include internal
        failure costs and external failure costs. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 235
448  Answer Key


28. a. Identifies project assumptions
        Project assumptions, which should be enumerated
        in the project scope baseline in the scope statement,
        are areas of uncertainty, and therefore, potential
        causes of project risk. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 322

 29. c. Prototypes
        Prototypes are used to obtain early feedback on
        requirements by providing a working model of the
        expected product before it is built. Stakeholders then
        can experiment with this model rather than discuss-
        ing abstract representations of requirements. This
        approach supports progressive elaboration, because
        it is used in iterative cycles of mock-up creation, user
        experimentation, feedback generation, and prototype
        revision. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 116

30. a. Tools from control quality and plan quality
       management
        The tools used from plan quality management and
        control quality are used in perform quality assur-
        ance. The perform quality assurance process also
        uses affinity diagrams, process decision program
        charts, interrelationship digraphs, tree diagrams,
        prioritization matrices, activity network diagrams,
        matrix diagrams, quality audits, and process analysis.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 245-247
                                               Answer Key      449


31. d. Continuously monitor the project
       The monitor and control project work process is
       performed throughout the project and includes
       collecting, measuring, and disseminating performance
       information and assessing measurements and trends
       to effect process improvement. Continuous monitor-
       ing is important because it provides insight into the
       project's health, highlighting areas requiring special
       attention. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 88

32. d. Determine whether the project should continue to
       the next phase
       The review at the end of a project phase is called a
       phase-end review. The purpose of this review is to
       determine whether the project should continue to the
       next phase for detecting and correcting errors while
       they are still manageable and for ensuring that the
       project remains focused on the business need it was
       undertaken to address. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 41, 549

33. c. Celebrating
       During the adjourning stage of team development,
       the emphasis is on tasks and relationships that
       promote closure and celebration. There is recogni-
       tion and satisfaction as the theme is moving on and
       separation. Management skills involve evaluating,
       reviewing, and improving, while leadership qualities
       are celebrating and bringing closure. [Executing]
       Verma 1997, 40; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276
450    Answer Key


34. b. At +$300, the situation is favorable, as physical prog-
       ress is being accomplished ahead of your plan.
        Schedule variance is calculated as EV - PV, or $1,500
        - $1,200 = +$300. Because the SV is positive, physical
        progress is being accomplished at a faster rate than
        planned. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 648-649; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

35. d. Managing the approved cost baseline and any
       changes to it
        The control costs process involves monitoring the
        project's status to update the project costs and man-
        aging changes to the cost baseline. Its benefit is
        that is provides the means to recognize variance in
        order to take corrective action and minimize risks.
        Therefore, effective management of the approved
        cost baseline and any changes is imperative.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 215-216

36. d. Recognize that your original estimates were
       fundamentally flawed, and your project is in an
       atypical situation
        CPI = EV/AC. It measures the efficiency of the physi-
        cal progress accomplished compared to the baseline.
        A CPI of 0.44 means that for every dollar spent, you
        are only receiving 44 cents of progress. Therefore,
        something is not correct with how you planned
        your project, or your original estimates were funda-
        mentally flawed, and your project is in an atypical
        situation. You might want to reconsider a formal
        "replan" and/or take a new baseline of your project.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 650-652; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224
                                           Answer Key      451


37. c. Project scope statement
       The project scope statement describes in detail the
       deliverables and what work must be done to pre-
       pare them. Ancillary results are also considered
       deliverables and are included in the project scope
       statement. They include items such as project man-
       agement reports and documentation. Deliverables in
       the project scope statement may be described at a
       summary level or in a detailed way. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 123

38. c. Expert judgment
       According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, expert judgment
       is use in close project or phase to ensure closure is
       performed to appropriate standards. [Closing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 102

39. a. Project charter
       Outputs of the define scope project are the p roject
       scope statement and project document updates
       that include updates to the stakeholder register,
       requirements documentation, and the requirements
       traceability matrix. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 125
452    Answer Key


40. c. (Percent complete) x (budget at completion)
        Multiplying the percent complete by the budget
        at completion, or the total budget for the project,
        is the simplest formula to use. The 50/50 rule, or
        the more conservative 0/100 rule, can eliminate
        the necessity for the continuous determination of
        percent complete. After the percent complete is
        determined, it can be plotted against time expended.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 656-657

41. a. Commence as scheduled and stated in the staffing
       management plan
        Training is a tool and technique for the develop
        project team process. The requirements and schedule
        for the develop project team process should be
        stated in the staffing management plan. Project team
        members' skills can be developed as part of the
        project activities. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266, 275

42. b. Milestone method
        The milestone method is especially helpful for
        work packages of long duration that have interim
        milestones or a functional group of activities with
        a milestone established at specific control points.
        In the EV system, value is earned when the mile-
        stone is completed. In such cases, a budget is
        assigned to the milestone rather than to the work
        packages. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 656
                                           Answer Key      453


43. c. Estimate at completion
       EAC is the total amount of money estimated to be
       spent on the project. It can be calculated several dif-
       ferent ways. However, the basic approach is to add
       the actual costs to date plus the estimate to complete.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       Kerzner 2009, 660
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

44. d. Links the project to the ongoing work of the
       organization
       The project charter not only authorizes a project, it
       shows how the project is linked to the strategic plan
       of the organization. Among other things, the project
       charter documents the business need for the project
       and describes the current understanding of the
       requirements. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68

45. a. Conflict resolution
       Facilitation techniques are a tool and technique in
       develop project management plan process. Other
       examples are brainstorming, problem solving, and
       meeting management. They are used to help teams
       and individuals achieve agreement to accomplish the
       project's objectives. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 77
454    Answer Key


46. d. Process measurement data base
        The process measurement data base is an organiza-
        tional process asset that is used to collect and make
        available measurement data on processes and prod-
        ucts. The other answers are examples of enterprise
        environmental factors used as inputs to direct and
        manage the project work. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 83

47. c. EAC = [Actual to date] + [all remaining work to be
       done at the planned cost including remaining work
       in progress]
        This formula assumes that all of the remaining work
        is independent of the burn rate incurred thus far. AC
        is $2,900 + [$500 + $1,000]. The $500 is from Activity
        B, and the $1,000 is from Activity C. [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        Kerzner 2009, 660
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224

48. a. Certain deliverables or subprojects will be accom-
       plished far into the future
        Many projects involve deliverables or subprojects
        that will be accomplished far into the future and
        cannot be specified in detail at the current time.
        In these situations, the project management team
        typically waits until the deliverable or subproject is
        clarified so that details for that portion of the WBS
        can be developed. Then a rolling wave planning
        approach can be used. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131
                                            Answer Key      455


49. c. Manage communications process
        Lessons learned documentation is an output of the
        manage communications process. It is an element of
        the organizational process assets updates. It includes
        the causes of issues, reasons for corrective actions
        selected, and other types of lessons learned about
        communications management. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 303

50. a. Influencing the factors that create change to the
       authorized cost baseline
        The control costs process is also concerned with
        ensuring that requested changes have been acted
        upon, managing actual changes if and when they
        occur, ensuring cost expenditures do not exceed
        authorized funding, monitoring cost performance,
        preventing unapproved changes from being included
        in the reported cost or resource use, informing stake-
        holders of all approved changes and their costs and
        bringing expected cost overruns within acceptable
        limits. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 216

51. a. Respect and trust
        Leadership is critical to project management as it
        focuses on ensuring a group of people are working
        toward a common goal and enables them to work
        as a team. It involves getting things done through
        others. Respect and trust, not fear and submission,
        are its key elements. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 513
456    Answer Key


52. b. 100% rule
        The WBS is a deliverable-oriented, hierarchical
        decomposition of work to be done by the project
        team. Sometimes called the 100% rule, it shows the
        total of the work at the lowest levels must roll up to
        the higher levels so that nothing is left out and no
        extra work is done. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131

53. b. Use fast tracking
        Fast tracking or crashing the schedule for the
        remaining work to be done are examples of schedule
        compression techniques to find ways to bring
        project activities that are behind into alignment
        with the project management plan. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190

54. c. $6.42 million
        Test: $5M + $960K + $460K = $6.42M; Don't Test: $7M.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 339
                                               Answer Key      457


55. b. Herzberg's Motivator-Hygiene Theory
       Frederick Herzberg's Motivator-Hygiene Theory
       asserts that some job factors lead to satisfaction,
       whereas others can only prevent dissatisfaction.
       There are two types of factors associated to the
       motivation process: hygiene factors, which relate to
       the work environment, and motivators, which relate
       to the work itself. Hygiene factors, if provided appro-
       priately, can prevent dissatisfaction, while motivating
       factors can increase job satisfaction and are more
       permanent. [Executing]
       Verma 1996, 56, 64-65
       Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 200

56. a. Work performance information
       The project's work performance information should
       document and communicate the CV, SV, CPI, SPI,
       TCPI, and VAC for the WBS components in particular
       for specific work packages and control accounts.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 225

57. d. A calculated EAC value or a bottom-up EAC value is
       documented and communicated to stakeholders
       Cost forecasts are another output of control costs,
       and the EAC is used to show the expected total costs
       of completing all work expressed as the sum of the
       actual cost to date and the estimate to complete.
       [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 224-225
458    Answer Key


58. d. Customer request
        Projects can be authorized as a result of a market
        demand, organizational need, customer request,
        technological advance, legal requirement, ecological
        impact, or a social need. The new industrial park
        is an example of a project authorized because of a
        customer request. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69

59. a. A recommendation for changing current practice
       should be made and defended.
        It is important to capture lessons learned, which
        then can be used on subsequent projects. The more
        detailed the lessons the better. However, when it
        comes to personnel lessons learned, the informa-
        tion should be handled in a confidential manner.
        [Closing]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 570

60. c. List of risks requiring near-term responses
        The primary outputs from identify risks are initial
        entries into the risk register. It ultimately contains
        outcomes of other risk management processes as
        they are conducted. As an output of identify risks,
        the risk register should contain a list of identified
        risks, a list of potential responses, root causes that
        gave rise to the identified risks, and a structure for
        describing risks. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 327
                                                Answer Key      459


61. b. David McClelland
       According to David McClelland, there are three rel-
       evant motives or needs in work situations: the need
       for achievement, power, and affiliation or association.
       This theory supports the view that there is a high
       correlation between achievement, affiliation, and
       power motives and the overall motivation and perfor-
       mance achieved in a project. [Executing]
       Verma 1996, 68
       Levin, 2010, 88-91

62. b. Monte Carlo analysis
       Simulation is a tool and technique for the develop
       schedule process by which multiple project durations
       with different sets of activity assumptions are calcu-
       lated. Monte Carlo analysis is the most commonly
       used simulation technique. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180, 340, 562

63. b. Performance measurement baseline
       The PMB is an approved, integrated
       scope-schedule-cost plan for the project work against
       which project execution is compared in order to
       measure and manage performance. It includes
       contingency reserve but not management reserve.
       It typicallyintegrates scope, schedule, and cost
       parameters of the project, but it may also include
       technical and quality parameters. [Monitoring
       and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 302, 549
460    Answer Key


64. d. Resource breakdown structure
        Schedule data for the project schedule includes a
        number of items as it collects the information used to
        describe and control the schedule. It includes sched-
        ule milestones, schedule activities, activity attributes,
        and assumptions and constraints. It may include
        resource histograms, alternate schedules, contingency
        reserves cash-flow projections, and order and
        deliveryschedules [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 184, 191, and 561

65. b. Expectancy Theory
        Developed by Victor Vroom, Expectancy Theory
        asserts that people think seriously about how much
        effort they should put into a task before doing it.
        Motivation is linked to an expectation of a favorable
        outcome. It is based on the concept that people
        choose behaviors that they believe will lead to
        desired rewards and outcomes. [Executing]
        Verma 1996, 73

66. c. Work performance data
        Work performance data is an input to control
        schedule. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 185

 67. d. Personnel skills
        Personnel skill updates are an example of an enter-
        prise environmental factor that may require updates
        as a result of the manage project team process
        along with inputs to the organizational performance
        appraisals. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 285
                                            Answer Key       461


68. a. Configuration status accounting
        Configuration status accounting captures, stores, and
        accesses the needed configuration information to
        manage products and product information effectively.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 97

69. c. Final output of creating the WBS is described in
       terms of verifiable products, services, or results.
        By using decomposition, the upper-level WBS com-
        ponents are subdivided for the work for each of the
        deliverables or subcomponents into its most funda-
        mental elements, where the WBS components then
        represent verifiable products, service, or results.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 131

70. c. The first time management process
        The schedule management plan is the output of plan
        schedule management, the first of the seven time
        management processes. It is a subsidiary plan to the
        project management plan. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 143

71. d. Activity name
        The components for each activity evolve over time.
        In the initial stages of the project, they include
        the activity ID, WBS ID, and the activity name.
        Later, additional information is added as other time
        management processes are performed. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 153
462    Answer Key


72. b. An external dependency
        Some dependencies are external ones, and they
        involve a relationship between project activities and
        nonproject activities. In sequencing activities, the
        project management team must determine which
        dependencies are external as they are usually outside
        of the team's control. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 158

73. d. Trend analysis
        Trend analysis is used in many control processes in
        project management. The trend analysis e xamines
        the performance of the project over time to
        determine whether performance is improving or
        deteriorating. Graphical analysis techniques are
        valuable in trend analysis to understand performance
        to date and to compare it to future performance
        goals in the form of completion dates. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 188

74. c. Carrying out the work
        The implementation phase (carrying out the work)
        is when all interfaces affecting the project must be
        coordinated and when the product or service of the
        project is created. In most projects, this phase is also
        where a large portion of the project budget is spent.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 56
                                           Answer Key       463


75. b. Accommodating
       Open subordination is much like an accommodat-
       ing or smoothing style of conflict management in
       which negotiators are more concerned about positive
       relationships than about substantive outcomes. It can
       dampen hostility, increase support and cooperation,
       and foster more interdependent relationships. This
       is an effective style for project managers to use with
       support staff. It concedes one's position to the needs
       of others to maintain harmony and relationships.
       [Executing]
       Verma 1996, 157
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283

76. b. Authorized procurement administrator
       The buyer, through its authorized procurement
       administrator, is responsible for providing the seller
       with formal written notice of contract completion.
       The procurement administrator does so when
       the seller has met all contractual requirements as
       articulated in the contract. [Closing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 389

77. c. Correspondence
       Contract terms and conditions often require w   ritten
       documentation of certain aspects of buyer/seller
       communications. Examples include any warnings of
       unsatisfactory performance and requests for changes
       in the contract or clarification. Other organizational
       process assets to update include payment s chedules
       and requests and seller performance evaluation
       documentation. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 386
464    Answer Key


78. b. Project charter
        Although the project charter cannot stop conflicts from
        arising, it can provide a framework to help resolve
        them, because it describes the project manager's
        authority to apply organizational resources to project
        activities. The project charter also documents the
        business needs, justification, objectives, and high-level
        requirements of the project. [Initiating]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 228-229
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72

79. d. Checklists
        Checklists are used to verify that the work of the
        project and its deliverables fulfill a set of require-
        ments. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 242 and 250

80. c. Zero-sum game analysis
        Achieving mutual gain during negotiations means
        that each party benefits by the decisions made.
        A zero-sum game is where one side wins at the
        expense of the other. [Executing]
        Ward 2008, 474
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 517
                                             Answer Key      465


81. d. Control charts
       Control charts help to determine whether or not a
       process is stable or has predictable performance.
       This function of control charts is achieved through
       the graphical display of results over time to deter-
       mine whether differences in the results are created
       by random variations or are unusual events. In a
       manufacturing environment, such charts are used to
       track repetitive actions such as manufactured lots.
       In a project management environment, they can be
       used to monitor processes such as cost and sched-
       ule variances, number requirements, and errors in
       project documents. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238

82. b. Structure
       Supportive behavior is relationship oriented and is
       the extent to which the leader engages in two-way
       communication, listens, provides support and
       encouragement, facilitates interaction, and involves
       the followers in decision making. Structure connotes
       a certain level of rigidity and inflexibility and is not a
       term associated with supportive behavior. [Executing]
       Verma 1996, 216-217
       Kerzner, 2009, 222-223

83. d. A defined integrated change control process
       If the recommended corrective or preventive actions
       or a defect repair require a change to any of the proj-
       ect management plans, a change request should be
       prepared in conformance with the perform integrated
       change control process. [Monitoring and Controlling]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 253
466    Answer Key


84. a. Help anticipate how problems occur
        Flowcharts depict the interrelationship of a system's
        components and show the relationships among
        process steps. They are often referred to as process
        maps as they display the sequence of steps and
        the branching possibilities for a process that trans-
        forms one or more inputs into one or more outputs.
        Flowcharts show activities, decision points, branching
        loops, parallel paths, and the order of processing. As
        such, they aid the team in anticipating where quality
        problems might occur, which helps in developing
        approaches for dealing with these potential problems.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 236

85. a. Change master
        During the execution stage, the major attributes
        and emphasis is on realignment. The leadership
        style/blend that is most appropriate is one who
        is a decision maker, balances work and fun, is
        trustworthy, and promotes the team concept and
        synergy. [Executing]
        Verma 1996, 225

86. c. Adjusting leads and lags
        Corrective action is anything that brings expected
        future schedule performance in line with the project
        plan. Adjusting leads and lags is one of many
        tools available to identify the cause of variation.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190
                                           Answer Key       467


87. d. Defect repair
       Defect repair is an intentional activity to modify
       a nonconforming product or project component.
       [Executing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 81

88. c. The person who formally authorizes the project
       The charter is issued by the project initiator or
       sponsor who formally authorizes the existence of a
       project and provides the project manager with the
       authority to apply organizational resources to project
       activities. [Initiating]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71

89. a. Smoothing
       Smoothing emphasizes areas of agreement while
       avoiding points of disagreement. It tends to keep
       peace only in the short term. [Executing]
       Adams et al. 1997, 181-189
       Verma 1996, 118
       PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283
468    Answer Key


90. c. Does not require 100% inspection of the components
       to achieve a satisfactory inference of the population
        The application of the statistical concept of p
                                                       robability
        has proven, over many years in many applications,
        that an entire population of products need not be
        inspected, if the sample selected conforms to a
        normal distribution of possible outcomes (the "bell"
        curve). Sample frequency and sizes should be
        determined as the quality management plan is pre-
        pared in order that the cost of quality includes the
        number of tests and expected scrap. [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 240 and 252

91. c. Use a control chart
        A control chart is one of the seven basic tools of
        quality control that determines whether or not a pro-
        cess is stable or has predictable performance. It also
        illustrates how a process behaves over time. When
        a process is within acceptable limits, it need not be
        adjusted; when it is outside acceptable limits, an
        analysis should be conducted to determine the rea-
        sons why. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238

92. c. It is used primarily for Level 1 of the WBS
        Estimates are categorized according to accuracy
        and the time to prepare them. Grassroots or
        engineering-type estimates are definite estimates
        and are prepared when detailed information about
        the project is available. These estimates would use
        the work-package level of the WBS. [Planning]
        Kerzner 2009, 574
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 201
                                               Answer Key      469


93. a. Cost management plan
       The management and control of costs focuses on
       variances. Certain variances are acceptable, and
       others, usually those falling outside a particular
       range, are unacceptable. The actions taken by the
       project manager for all variances are described in
       the cost management plan. [Planning]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 198-199

94. c. Norming; high supportive and low directive approach
       There are four stages of team development: forming,
       storming, norming, and performing. Different leader-
       ship styles in terms of the amount of required sup-
       portive and directive behavior are appropriate when
       a team is in a certain development stage. At the
       norming stage, the third stage in team development,
       leaders provide high support and low direction.
       [Executing]
       Verma 1996, 227
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276

95. a. The procurement administrator is reassigned
       The close procurements process looks at the
       administration of the contract and not the people
       responsible or involved with the contract. [Closing]
       PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 387
470  Answer Key


96. a. Histogram
        In a histogram, or a special form of bar chart, each
        column represents an attribute or characteristic of
        a problem or situation. The height of each column
        represents the relative frequency of the characteristic.
        It describes the central tendency, dispersion, or
        shape of a statistical distribution. [Monitoring and
        Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 238

 97. a. Estimate costs
        The estimate activity resources process involves
        estimating the type and quantities of material,
        people, equipment, or supplies needed to perform
        each a ctivity. This means close coordination with the
        estimate costs process is needed. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 141, 162

98. a. Legitimate
        Legitimate power is formal authority based on a
        person's position within the organization. It comes
        with the right to give orders or make requests.
        [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 174-180
        Verma 1996, 233
        Levin 2010, 161-162
                                                 Answer Key    471


 99. a. Role ambiguity
        The main sources of stress are grouped into four
        categories of stress-creating factors: those related
        to roles and relationships, those related to the job
        environment, personal factors, and factors related to
        the project environment or climate. Role ambiguity
        is an example of factors related to roles and respon-
        sibilities. It occurs when an individual is not clear
        about his or her job responsibilities. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        Verma 1996, 180, 183-184; Levin, 2010, 176-183

100. d. The buffer needed and the buffer remaining
        Critical chain is an approach in scheduling in which
        the project team can place buffers on any project
        schedule path to account for limited resources and
        project uncertainties. During a performance review,
        comparing the amount of buffer remaining to the
        amount of buffer needed to protect the delivery date
        can help to determine schedule status. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 180, 189
472      Answer Key


101. b. The resource pool can be limited to those people
        who are knowledgeable about the project
          Resource calendars are an input to the estimate
          activity resource process and to the estimate activity
          durations process. They are used to estimate resource
          use. Early in a project, the resource pool might
          include people at different levels of expertise in large
          numbers, but as the project progresses, the resource
          pool then can be limited to those people who are
          knowledgeable about the project because of their
          work on it. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 163, 167-168

102. d. Bottom-up estimating
          When an activity cannot be estimated with a reason-
          able degree of confidence, the work then needs to
          be decomposed into more detail. The estimates then
          are aggregated into a total quantity for each of the
          activity's resources through a bottom-up approach.
          These activities may or may not have dependencies
          between them. However, when dependencies exist,
          this pattern of use of resources then is documented
          in the estimated requirements for each activity.
          [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 164

103. a. Review work performance information
          The calculated SV and SPI time performance
          indicators for WBS components, in particular the
          work packages and control accounts, are d  ocumented
          and communicated to stakeholders as an output
          of the control schedule process. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 190
                                               Answer Key       473


104. a. Who will do the task
         In a matrix environment, project resources (that is,
         people) come from the functional departments.
         Therefore, it is the functional manager's job to
         identify who will work on specific project tasks.
         [Executing]
         Verma 1995, 56-57
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 37

105. b. Net present value of the inflow is greater than the
        specified amount or percentage threshold
         The discounted cash-flow approach--or the present
         value method--determines the net present value of
         all cash flow by discounting it by the required rate
         of return. The impact of inflation can be considered.
         Early in the life of a project, net cash flow is likely to
         be negative because the major outflow is the initial
         investment in the project. If the project is successful,
         cash flow will become positive. [Initiating]
         Meredith and Mantel 2012, 51

106. b. Risk register
         The monitor and control risks process includes keep-
         ing track of those risks on the watch list. Low-priority
         risks are inputs to the monitor and control risks
         process and are documented in the risk register.
         Other inputs that are part of the risk register include
         identified risks and risk owners, agreed-upon risk
         responses, control actions to assess the effectiveness
         of response plans, specific implementation actions,
         symptoms and warning signs of risk, residual and
         secondary risks, and the time and cost contingency
         reserves. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 350
474    Answer Key


107. a. Project statement of work
         The project statement of work describes in a narra-
         tive form the products, services, or results that the
         project will deliver. It references the product scope
         description as well as the business need and strategic
         plan. [Initiating]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 68

108. d. Preparing personnel performance evaluations
         The project manager, or whoever supervised the
         work of each individual team member, should
         prepare the personnel evaluations because they have
         an intimate understanding of the work performed
         by the team members. The termination manager
         focuses instead on the administrative requirements
         of termination and the environment within which
         the p
              roject will be operating if it is continued in any
         way. [Closing]
         Meredith and Mantel 2012, 564-566

109. b. Parametric estimating
         Parametric estimating uses statistical relationships
         between historical data and other variables to calcu-
         late an estimate for activity parameters such as cost,
         budget, and duration. The activity durations then are
         determined quantitatively by multiplying the quantity
         of work to be performed by the labor hours per unit
         of work. This technique can produce higher levels of
         accuracy depending on the reliability of the data in
         the model. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 170
                                                 Answer Key      475


110. d. Performing
        The performing stage of team development is noted
        by a theme of productivity. Management skills
        involve consensus building, problem solving, deci-
        sion making, and rewarding, with leadership shown
        through management by walking around, steward-
        ship delegation, mentoring, being a futurist, and
        being a cheerleader/champion. [Executing]
        Verma 1997, 40
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276

111. b. Terms and conditions in the contract
        The terms and conditions can prescribe specific
        procedures for the various ways that a contract could
        be terminated. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 378, 387

112. d. Behavioral-oriented reasons
        Behavioral reasons, rather than quantitative reasons,
        account for more project terminations because it is
        much more difficult to manage people than things.
        Issues such as poor morale, poor human relations,
        poor labor productivity, and no commitment from
        those involved in the project combine to thwart
        project success in many industries. [Closing]
        Kerzner 2009, 452-453

113. c. Implementation
        Regardless of the many terms used across many
        industries, implementation would be considered a
        term used in the executing phase in which the work
        is carried out and done. [Closing]
        Kerzner 2009, 69
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 39
476      Answer Key


114. c. Project charter and stakeholder register
          The project charter signifies official sanction by top
          management and starts the planning, or develop-
          ment, phase. This document formally recognizes
          the existence of the project and provides the project
          manager with the authority to apply organizational
          resources to project activities. The stakeholder
          registeris an output of identify stakeholders and also
          an output during the initiating processes. [Initiating]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72, 398

115. b. Initiator
          To initiate something means to get it started. In the
          project environment, that typically means a task.
          [Executing]
          Verma 1997, 78-79

116. a. A kickoff meeting is recommended
          Even if team members already know one another,
          a kickoff meeting should still be held because the
          meeting always includes more than meeting team
          members. Specific expectations for the project can
          be discussed as well as other important administra-
          tive details. It also gives people an opportunity to
          express their commitment to the project's objectives.
          [Executing]
          Verma 1997, 135
          Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 224-225
                                              Answer Key       477


117. a. Consider every meeting a team meeting, not the
        project manager's meeting
        Team building should be made as important a part
        of every project activity as possible. Given that there
        are many meetings on projects, each team member
        should be made to feel that it is his or her meeting
        and not just the project manager's meeting. This will
        foster greater contribution by each team member.
        [Executing]
        Verma 1997, 137
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 278

118. c. Influencing
        All are useful skills for project managers. In this
        situation influencing was necessary as the project
        manager has little or no direct control over tem
        members as they work in a weak matrix. The ability
        of the project manager to influence stakeholders in a
        timely basis is critical to project success. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 284

119. b. Realism
        A project selection model should reflect the objec-
        tives of the company and its managers; consider the
        realities of the organization's limitations on facilities,
        capital, and personnel; and include factors for
        risk--the technical risks of performance, cost, and
        time as well as the market risk of customer rejection.
        [Initiating]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 64-65
478      Answer Key


120. a. Conduct a risk audit
          The risk audit is a tool and technique in the control
          risks process with two purposes: to assess the effec-
          tiveness of risk responses and to evaluate the effec-
          tiveness of the risk management process. [Monitoring
          and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 351

121. c. Not be viewed as part of the project life cycle
          Projects are efforts that occur within a finite period
          of time with clearly defined beginnings and ends.
          Maintenance is ongoing and of an indefinite duration.
          A maintenance activity, such as revision of an
          organization's purchasing guidelines, may be viewed
          as a project but is a separate and distinct undertaking
          from the initial project that generated it. At this point,
          the project has been completed, and its deliverables
          are transferred to operations for implementation.
          [Initiating]
          Frame 2003, 16-17
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 13

122. c. Technical performance measurement
          Technical performance measurement compares tech-
          nical accomplishments to date to the project plan's
          schedule of technical achievement. Deviation, such
          as less functionality than planned at a key milestone,
          can help to forecast the degree of success in achiev-
          ing the project scope. [Monitoring and Controlling]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 352
                                              Answer Key      479


123. d. Monitor and control project work and control risks
        A workaround is a form of corrective action, as it is
        a response to a threat that has occurred for which
        a prior response had not been planned or was not
        effective. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 93, 353, and 567

124. b. Demands
        Claims administration is a tool and technique in
        the control procurements process. When the buyer
        and seller cannot agree, this is also called claims,
        disputes, or appeals and should be documented,
        processed, monitored, and managed throughout the
        contract life cycle. [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 384

125. a. Procurement performance review
        These reviews are a tool and technique of the
        control procurements process, which can include a
        review of seller-prepared documentation and buyer
        inspections. They seek to identify performance suc-
        cesses or failures, progress with respect to the con-
        tract statement of work and contract noncompliance.
        [Monitoring and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383
480  Answer Key


126. a. Add a project buffer
        After the critical path is identified using the critical
        chain method, resource availability is entered and a
        resource-constrained schedule results. This schedule
        may have an altered critical path that is known as the
        critical chain. The critical chain method adds dura-
        tion buffers that are non-work schedule activities to
        manage uncertainty. To protect the target finish date
        from slippage on the critical chain, a project buffer is
        placed at the end of the critical chain. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178

127. a. Concept
        The greatest degree of uncertainty about the future is
        encountered during the concept phase or at the start
        of the project. The direction of the project is deter-
        mined in this phase, and the decisions made have
        the greatest influence on scope, quality, time, and
        cost of the project. [Initiating]
        Wideman 1992, II-1
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 40

128. c. Tight matrix
        A "tight" matrix refers to team members working
        in close proximity to one another. Studies have
        demonstrated that such a team approach facilitates
        concurrent engineering by having designers work-
        ing next to manufacturing engineers, for example,
        to help ensure that the project is designed in such a
        manner that it is also cost-effective to manufacture.
        [Executing]
        Verma 1997, 169
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 277
                                             Answer Key      481


129. b. Consultation
         Project managers tend to use four basic decision
         styles: command, consultation, consensus, and
         coin flip or random. If acceptance and quality are
         both important, the consultation style is preferred.
         It allows for some involvement of team members but
         allows project managers to maintain control over the
         final decision. In this style, team members are free
         to express their opinions, but the project manager
         makes the final decision. [Executing]
         Verma 1997, 178
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 516

130. d. As an input to develop project charter
         Historical information is an organizational process
         access in the develop project charter process. Other
         organizational process assets are organizational
         standard processes, policies, and process definitions;
         templates from other project charters; and the lessons
         learned data base. [Initiating]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 70

131. d. Direct and manage project work
         Work performance data containing these examples
         are an output of direct and manage project work.
         They are raw observations and measurements iden-
         tified as activities are being performed to complete
         the work of the project. These data often are viewed
         at the lowest level of detail from which information
         is derived by other processes. The data then are
         gathered as the work is done and passed to the
         controlling processes of the various processes for
         further analyses. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85
482    Answer Key


132. d. Forcing
        Forcing, using power or dominance, implies the
        use of position power to resolve conflict. It involves
        imposing one viewpoint at the expense of another.
        Project managers may use it when time is of the
        essence, when an issue is vital to the project's
        well-being, or when they think they are right based
        on available information. Although this approach is
        appropriate when quick decisions are required or
        when unpopular issues are an essential part of the
        project, it puts project managers at risk. [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 181-189
        Verma 1996, 157
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283

133. c. Managing remaining buffer durations against the
        remaining durations of task chains
        The purpose of the critical chain method is to
        modify the project schedule to account for limited
        resources. The schedule is built using duration esti-
        mates with required dependencies and defined con-
        straints as inputs. Then, the critical path is calculated
        and resource availability is entered, which means
        there is a resource-limited schedule with an altered
        critical path. Buffers protect the critical chain from
        slippage, and the size of each buffer accounts for the
        uncertainty in the duration of the chain of dependent
        tasks that lead up to the buffer. This method then
        focuses on managing the remaining buffer durations
        against the remaining duration of task chains.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 178
                                            Answer Key      483


134. d. Expert
        Expert power is earned/personal power when project
        personnel admire an individual's skills and want to
        follow him or her as a role model. In such situations,
        people willingly comply with the demands of such a
        person. [Executing]
        Adams et al. 1997, 174-180
        Levin, 2010, 163

135. d. Determine the philosophy and wishes of
        management
        Any selection technique must be evaluated based
        on the degree to which it will meet the organization's
        objective for the project. Management generally
        establishes the organization's objective; therefore,
        management's wishes must be identified first. Then
        the most appropriate model to support management's
        wishes should be selected. [Initiating]
        Meredith and Mantel 2012, 62

136. b. Project management plan
        Project scope is measured against the project man-
        agement plan. The project scope statement and scope
        baseline are subsets of the project management
        plan. However, the whole plan and all the b aselines
        (cost and schedule) need to be met in addition to
        part of the scope. The project management plan
        is the agreement between the project manager
        and sponsor and defines what constitutes project
        completion. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 102
484     Answer Key


137. c. Determine the formula for calculating the estimate at
        completion (EAC) for the project
         Three recognized earned value rules of performance
         measurement are to (1) determine the EAC calcula-
         tion to be used on the project as tracking methodolo-
         gies are specified and to provide a validity check on
         the bottom-up EAC, (2) establish the earned value
         measurement techniques (for example, weighted
         milestones, fixed formula or percent complete), and
         (3) define the WBS level at which the measurements
         of control accounts will be performed. Four methods
         can be used to calculate the EAC. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 199, 224

138. d. Final product, service, or result transition
         All the elements are outputs of the close project
         or phase processes, but the final product, service,
         or result transition is not part of the organizational
         process assets. It is an output on its own and
         involves the product that the project was created to
         produce. [Closing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 103-104

139. b. Acknowledge that conflict exists
         In order to address conflict, people must recognize
         and acknowledge that conflict exists. Next, it is
         important to establish common ground or shared
         goals and then to separate people from the problem.
         [Executing]
         Verma 1996, 126
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 282-283; 518
                                                  Answer Key      485


140. d. Determine the total float variance
         Performance reviews are a tool and technique used
         in control schedule and includes trend analysis, criti-
         cal path method, critical chain method, and earned
         value management. In terms of the critical path
         method, the emphasis is on comparing progress
         along the critical path to determine schedule status.
         Variance on the critical path will have a direct impact
         on the project's end date; evaluating progress of
         activities or near critical paths can identify schedule
         risk. After the variance is known, the project team
         can take corrective action to bring performance in
         line with the plan. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 176-177, 188-189

141. a. Group decision-making techniques
         Both processes use inspection. Validate scope also
         uses group-decision making techniques to reach a
         conclusion when the validation is performed by the
         project team and other stakeholders. Methods to reach
         a group decision include: unanimity, m
                                               ajority, plurality,
         and dictatorship. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 115, 135

142. d. Schedule
         In a study of sources of conflict by project life-cycle
         phase, seven different causes of conflict were iden-
         tified. In the execution phase, the highest-ranking
         sources of conflict were schedules, technical issues,
         and personnel, in this order, followed by priorities,
         administrative procedures, cost, and personalities.
         [Executing]
         Verma 1996, 103-104
         Meredith and Mantel, 2012, 152
486      Answer Key


143. d. Forcing
          Forcing and majority rule are represented by a strong
          desire to satisfy oneself rather than to satisfy others.
          It involves imposing one viewpoint at the expense
          of another and is characterized by a win-lose
          outcome in which one party overwhelms the other.
          [Executing]
          Adams et al. 1997, 181-189
          Verma 1996, 118 and 120
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283

144. a. Operations managers
          Operations managers are stakeholders on many
          projects. They deal with producing and managing the
          products and services of the organization. On many
          projects, they are responsible after the project is
          complete and has been formally handed off to them
          for incorporating the project into normal operations
          and providing long-term support for the p  roduct.
          [Initiating]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 12-14, 33

145. a. The choice of media
          The choice of media, or the way you deliver the
          information is as important as what you say. It is
          important to determine when to communicate in
          writing versus orally, when to prepare an informal
          memo or when to use a formal report, and when to
          communicate face to face or by email, as examples.
          [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 298
                                                  Answer Key      487


146. d. Collaborating
          Collaborating involves bringing people with oppos-
          ing views together to reach a solution. When there
          are too many people involved, it is more d   ifficult to
          reach a solution, given the multiplicity of perspectives.
          When the parties involved have m  utually e xclusive
          views, forcing or compromise must be used.
          [Executing]
          Adams et al. 1997, 181-189
          Verma 1996, 119
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 283

147.   c. Stakeholder register
          The stakeholder register is the main output of identify
          stakeholders and contains all the details known at the
          time related to the stakeholders. [Initiating]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 398

148. c. Change requests
          Quality improvements to processes and procedures
          as well as the project and product will result in a
          change request that will be reviewed and evaluated
          to allow full consideration of the recommended
          improvements using the perform integrated change
          control process. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 247

149. d. Basis of estimates
          Basis of estimates is an output from the estimate
          costs process. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 204-210
488  Answer Key


150. a. Develop project charter
        In the develop project charter process, an agreement
        is an input to define initial intentions for the project.
        They may take the form of a type of contract such as
        memorandums of understanding, service level agree-
        ments, letter of agreement, letter of intent, verbal
        agreement, or other written agreements. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 70

151. c. Accepted deliverables
        Accepted deliverables is an input to the close project
        or phase. The other selections are inputs or tools and
        techniques for other processes. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 102

152. d. Scope management plan
        The scope management plan is not part of the
        scope baseline. However, both the scope b
                                                 aseline
        and the scope management plan are a part of
        the larger project management plan. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 76-77 and 131-132

153. c. A high-level requirement
        The project charter formally authorizes the existence
        of the project and provides the project manager
        with the organizational resources for the project
        activities. Using agile is an example of a high-level
        requirement, which also is included in the charter.
        [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 71-72
                                              Answer Key    489


154. c. Note key stakeholders as parties in the contract
         Procurement documents are an input to the identify
         stakeholder process. If the project results from a
         procurement activity or is based on an established
         contract, the parties in the contract are key p roject
         stakeholders. Others, such as suppliers, are also
         stakeholders and should be added to the stakeholder
         list. [Initiating]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 394

155. a. Manage them closely
         You must manage them closely. High-power/
         high-interest stakeholders who do not support
         your project could have a devastating effect on
         your project. [Initiating]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 397

156. b. Maintenance requests
         Defect repairs, corrective actions, and preventive
         actions are types of change requests that occur on
         a project. Maintenance requests typically would be
         outside the scope of the project itself. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 85

157. a. Role
         The human resource plan documents roles and
         responsibilities on the project. A role is the function
         assumed by or assigned to a person in the project.
         The court liaison is an example of such a role on
         a project. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 264
490    Answer Key


158. a. Determine who decides the project is a success
        Project approval criteria should be documented in
        the project charter. These criteria include determining
        what constitutes success, who decides the p   roject
        is successful, and who signs of on the project.
        [Initiating]
        PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 72

159. a. Focus on relationships necessary to ensure success
        The project manager has limited time on a project,
        and his or her time should be used as efficiently and
        effectively as possible. Therefore, by performing a
        stakeholder analysis, the project manager can identify
        the stakeholder relationships that can be leveraged to
        build coalitions and potential partnerships to enhance
        project success and to determine relationships that
        need to be influenced differently at different stages of
        the project or phase [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 395

160. d. High-performing team
        This high-performing team is covered in develop
        project team and obviously is important and neces-
        sary. However, regarding quality management other
        key concepts are prevention over inspection and
        continuous improvement [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 229
                                              Answer Key       491


161. c. Process analysis
        Process analysis is used as a tool and technique in
        perform quality assurance. The tools and techniques
        used during plan quality management are the seven
        basic quality tools (cause-and-effect diagrams, flow-
        charts, checksheets, Pareto diagrams, histograms, con-
        trol charts, and scatter diagrams), cost-benefit analysis,
        cost of quality, benchmarking, design of experiments,
        statistical sampling, additional quality planning tools
        (brainstorming, force field analysis, nominal group
        technique, and quality management and control tools,
        [affinity diagrams, process decision program charts
        interrelationship diagraphs, tree diagrams, prioritiza-
        tion matrices, activity network diagrams, and matrix
        diagrams]), and meetings. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 235-241 and 246-247

162. c. Quality policy
        The quality policy includes the overall intentions and
        the direction of the organization regarding q  uality
        and as formally expressed by top management. When
        the performing organization lacks a formal quality
        policy or when the project involves multiple perform-
        ing organizations, as in a joint venture, the project
        management team must develop a quality policy
        for the project as an input to its quality p
                                                    lanning.
        [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 234
492      Answer Key


163. b. You may need to compensate the seller for seller
        preparations and for any completed or accepted work
          Early termination of a contract is a special case of
          procurement closure. The rights and responsibilities
          of the parties are contained in a termination clause
          of the contract. Typically such a clause allows the
          buyer to terminate the whole contract or a portion
          of it for cause or convenience at any time. In doing
          so, the buyer may need to compensate the seller
          for seller's preparations and for any completed and
          accepted work related to the terminated part of the
          contract. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 378, 387

164. d. It includes a specific contract management plan.
          A contract management plan is not part of a contract.
          It is used to identify how the contract will be admin-
          istered. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 357, 382

165. d. Project review meetings
          Bidders conferences are meetings with prospective
          sellers prior to the preparation of a bid or proposal to
          answer questions and clarify issues. They are a tool
          and technique in the conduct procurements process.
          Project review meetings are conducted to assess
          project performance and status. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375
                                            Answer Key      493


166. a. Have a meeting
        Meetings are another tool and technique in plan
        procurement management. They are held as research
        alone may not provide specific information for a
        procurement strategy without additional information
        exchange with potential bidders. Through collaborat-
        ing with potential bidders the organization purchas-
        ing the material or service may benefit. Suppliers
        may benefit to influence a mutually beneficial
        approach or product. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 366

167. c. Project expeditor
        A variation of the weak matrix organizational struc-
        ture, the project expeditor has no formal a uthority
        to make or enforce decisions. Nonetheless, the
        project expeditor must be able to persuade those in
        authority to maintain the project's visibility so that
        resources will be allocated as needed to meet the
        project's schedule, budget, and quality c onstraints.
        This approach is considered to be effective in
        high-technology and research and development
        environments. [Planning]
        Verma 1995, 153-154
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 23
494    Answer Key


168. a. Have the project manager and the functional
        manager work together to complete performance
        evaluations
         In a matrix environment, project team members
         have two bosses: the project manager and their
         functional line manager. People often are unclear as
         to which manager is their "real" boss, as there may
         be a continual shifting balance of power. To avoid
         confusion regarding performance issues, it is a best
         practice to have the project manager and functional
         line manager complete the individual's performance
         evaluations. Also, greater weight should be given to
         the project manager's assessment for the time the
         individual actually worked on the project. [Planning]
         Verma 1995, 178
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 33, 266, and 270

169. b. Acquire project team
         The resource calendar is an output from the acquire
         project team process. Other outputs are project staff
         assignments and updates to the project management
         plan, especially the human resource management
         plan. A resource calendar is also an output of the
         develop human resource plan process as part of
         the staffing management plan and the conduct
         procurements process. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 265, 271, 378
                                               Answer Key      495


170. a. Preventive action
         As a specific subset of change requests, approved
         preventive actions are an input to the direct and
         manage project work process. Such actions are inten-
         tional to ensure the future performance of the project
         work is aligned with the project management plan.
         [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 81-82

171. b. Audit project success or failure and archiving records
         Administrative closure includes step-by-step method-
         ologies that address: actions and activities necessary
         to satisfy completion or exit criteria for the phase
         or the project; actions or activities to transfer the
         products, services, or results to the next phase or
         to p
             roduction or operations; and activities to collect
         project or phase records, audit success or failure,
         gather lessons learned, and archive information for
         future use in the organization. [Closing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 101

172. d. Understanding of policies, operating procedures, and
        regulations of external stakeholder organizations
         Successful project managers have expertise and skills
         in all three following areas: leadership/interpersonal,
         project management/administration, and technical.
         The understanding of policies, operating procedures,
         and regulations of external stakeholder organizations
         is representative of project management/administrative
         skills, not leadership/interpersonal skills. [Executing]
         Verma 1995, 27; PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, Appendix X3
496      Answer Key


173. a. Adaptive life cycle
          The adaptive life cycle is one that is known as change
          driven or one with agile methods and is set up to
          respond to change and ongoing stakeholder involve-
          ment. This approach differs from iterative and incre-
          mental as durations are very rapid and are fixed in
          time and cost. This approach is preferred in a rapidly
          changing environment where requirements and
          scope are difficult to define in advance and when it
          is possible to define small incremental improvements,
          which deliver value to stakeholders. [Executing]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 46

174. c. Prepare a staff release plan
          The staff release plan determines the method
          and timing of releasing team members. Morale is
          improved if there are smooth transitions for the staff
          to upcoming projects. This staff release plan also
          helps to mitigate human resource risks that may
          occur. It is part of the staffing management plan,
          which is part of the human resource plan. [Planning]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 266

175. d. Analyze each stakeholder's impact or support and
        classify them
          The second step in the stakeholder analysis pro-
          cess is to analyze the potential impact or support
          each stakeholder could generate and then to classify
          the stakeholders to define an approach or strategy.
          [Initiating]
          PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
                                                Answer Key      497


176. b. Select communications technology
        Although all four listed are tools and techniques
        in the manage communications process (another
        is communications methods), since this project is a
        virtual one, the choice of technology is an important
        consideration. It can vary from project to project and
        throughout the life cycle, but as the project manager
        the focus is to ensure the choice is important for the
        information that is communicated.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 300-301

177. d. Storming
        During the storming stage, the team is addressing
        the work, technical decisions, and the project man-
        agement approach. However, if team members are
        not collaborating and open to different ideas and
        perspectives, the environment becomes counter
        productive. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 276

178. b. A power/influence grid
        Although a number of classification models are
        available to help prioritize the key stakeholders,
        the power/influence grid groups stakeholders based
        on their level of authority or power and their active
        involvement or interest in the project. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 396
498    Answer Key


179. b. Checklists for risk identification
         Checklists are a tool and technique of the identify
         risks process and include risks encountered on
         similar, previous projects identified through the
         lessons learned process. The project team will review
         the checklist as part of the identify risks process as
         well as during closeout. To help others in the future,
         the team will add to the list as necessary based on its
         experience. [Planning]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 325

180. b. International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
         Project quality management is intended to be
         compatible with International Organization for
         Standardization quality standards. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 228

181. b. All potential sellers are given equal standing
         Bidders conferences are conducted to ensure all
         prospective sellers have a clear and common under-
         standing of the requirements. They are not used to
         prequalify vendors. Thus, all vendors are treated
         equally. [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375
                                                 Answer Key      499


182. b. Building trust
        Building trust helps to build the foundation of the
        relationship and is a critical component in effec-
        tive team leadership. Without trust, it is difficult
        to establish positive relationships with the various
        stakeholders engaged in the project. If trust is com-
        promised, people will disengage, and collaboration
        becomes more difficult if not impossible. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 407, 517

183. d. Transference
        Risk transference is shifting some or all negative
        impact of a threat and the ownership of the response
        to the threat to a third party. It does not eliminate
        the threat posed by an adverse risk. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 344

184. a. Terminate procurements
        Termination is a word used to define a contract
        ending through mutual agreement by both parties,
        the default of one party, or for the convenience of
        the buyer. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 355, 387
500  Answer Key


185. d. Conduct a procurement audit
        The procurement audit attempts to identify successes
        and failures relative to the procurement process
        especially in terms of the preparation or administra-
        tion of other procurement contracts on the project or
        on other projects in the organization. Uncovering and
        reporting both successes and failures can c ontribute
        to the project management knowledge base and
        improve the quality of project management services.
        A procurement audit should be conducted as part of
        the close procurements process. [Closing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 388

186. c. Risk urgency assessment
        Risks that may occur in the near-term need urgent
        attention. The purpose of the risk urgency assess-
        ment is to identify those risks that have a high
        likelihood of occurring. Assessing risk urgency can
        be combined with the risk ranking that is determined
        from the probability and impact matrix for a final
        risk severity rating. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 333

187. d. Delphi technique
        When consensus is necessary, the Delphi technique
        is a frequently used information gathering technique.
        A facilitator first sends out a questionnaire to the
        experts to solicit ideas. The responses then are
        summarized and returned to the experts for further
        comment. Consensus generally is reached after a few
        such rounds. The Delphi technique helps to reduce
        bias in the data and the undue influence of one
        person on the outcome. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 324
                                             Answer Key      501


188. b. Verifying compliance in the seller's work processes
         Inspections and audits are tools and techniques in
         the control procurements process. They are required
         by the buyer and supported by the seller in the
         procurement contracts and can be conducted as
         the project is executed to verify compliance in the
         seller's work processes or deliverables. [Monitoring
         and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 383

189. d. To establish minimum requirements of performance
        for one or more of the evaluation criteria
         Weighting systems are developed and used to help
         select the best vendor as part of the proposal evalu-
         ation techniques. By assigning a numerical weight
         to each evaluation criteria, the buyer can emphasize
         one area as being more important than another.
         These proposal evaluation techniques are a tool and
         technique in the conduct procurements process.
         [Executing]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375

190. a. Hold meetings
         Meetings are a tool and technique in the control risks
         process. Risk management should be an agenda item
         at periodic status meetings. While the amount of time
         needed for risk management will vary depending on
         the identified risks, their priority, and the difficulty
         of the response, the more often risk management is
         practiced, the easier it becomes. Frequent discussions
         about risk make it more likely that risks and opportu-
         nities will be identified. [Monitoring and Controlling]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 352
502    Answer Key


191. c. Your fee is generally not subject to appeals
        This contract type reimburses the seller for all legiti-
        mate costs, but the majority of the fee is earned
        only based on the satisfaction of broad subjective
        performance criteria defined and incorporated in the
        contract. The fee determination is based on s ubjective
        determination of seller performance by the buyer;
        it generally is not subject to appeals. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 364

192. d. A mechanism to communicate and support project
        decision making is provided
        All of the answers are outputs in the control risks
        process, however, work performance information
        specifically provides a mechanism to communicate
        and support project decision making. [Monitoring
        and Controlling]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 353-354

193. c. Value delivered by vendors meeting the needs
        Other factors to consider include the core capabilities
        of the organization, the risks associated with meet-
        ing the need in a cost-effective way, and capability
        internally compared with the vendor community.
        [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 374
                                            Answer Key        503


194. a. Open items list
        Issues or an open item list are examples of inputs
        if contract negotiation is an independent process.
        Outputs are documented decisions. While contract
        negotiations may need to be a separate process for
        complex procurements, for simple procurement
        items, the terms and conditions of the contract can
        be fixed and nonnegotiable. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 377

195. a. Plan procurement management
        Enterprise environmental factors, which include
        marketplace conditions that the team needs to be
        aware of as it develops its plans for purchases and
        acquisition, are an input to the plan procurement
        management process. [Planning]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 362

196. b. Program manager
        Organizational strategy provides guidance and
        direction to project management. Portfolio managers,
        sponsors, or program managers identify alignment
        or potential conflicts between organizational strate-
        gies and project goals and communicates them to the
        project manager. [Initiating]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 15
504    Answer Key


197. c. Expert judgment and some form of proposal
        evaluation techniques
        Expert judgment is a tool and technique used in the
        conduct procurements process. It, along with some
        form of proposal evaluation techniques as developed
        during the plan procurements process and noted as
        source selection criteria, is used to rate and score
        proposals. This does not preclude the use of other
        tools and techniques, but these tools and techniques
        are used in all evaluations. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 375-376

198. a. Sender-receiver models
        Sender-receiver models incorporate feedback loops
        to provide opportunities for interaction/participation
        and remove barriers to communication. [Executing]
        PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 298

199. a. Seven percent
        Albert Meharabian, a researcher, discovered that
        words alone account for just seven percent of any
        message's impact. Vocal tones account for 38 percent
        of the impact and facial expressions account for
        55 percent of the message. Thus, project managers
        should use nonverbal ingredients to complement
        verbal message ingredients whenever possible and
        should recognize that nonverbal factors generally
        have more influence on the total impact of a message
        than verbal factors. The lack of nonverbal cues
        makes project communications in a virtual environ-
        ment more challenging. [Executing]
        Verma 1996, 19
                                            Answer Key      505


200. a. Periodically review the business case
         The business case is an input to the develop project
         charter process. On a multi-phase project, it should
         be reviewed periodically to ensure the project is on
         track to deliver the business benefits. [Initiating]
         PMI(R), PMBOK(R) Guide, 2013, 69
References

Acker, David D. Skill in Communication: A Vital Element in
     Effective Management. 2nd ed. Ft. Belvoir, Va.: Defense
     Systems Management College, 1992.
Adams, John R., and Bryan W. Campbell. Roles and Responsibilities
     of the Project Manager. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
     Institute, 1982.
Adams John R., et al. Principles of Project Management. Newton
     Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 1997.
The Associated General Contractors of America. Construction
     Planning and Scheduling. Washington, D.C.: The Associated
     General Contractors of America, 1994.
Bell, Chip R. Managing as Mentors: Building Partnerships for
     Learning. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 1996.
Bicheno, John. The Quality 50. Melbourne, Australia: Nestadt
     Consulting Party, 1994.
Bockrath, Joseph T. Contracts, Specifications, and Law for Engineers.
     4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
Brake, Terence, Danielle Medina Walker, and Thomas (Tim) Walker.
     Doing Business Internationally: The Guide to Cross-Cultural
     Success. 2nd ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
Cable, Dwayne, and John R. Adams. Organizing for Project
     Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute,
     1982.
Carter, Bruce, Tony Hancock, Jean-Marc Morin, and Ned Robins.
     Introducing RISKMAN Methodology: The European Project Risk
     Management Methodology. Oxford, England: NCC Blackwell, 1994.
Cavendish, Penny, and Martin D. Martin. Negotiating and
     Contracting for Project Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project
     Management Institute, 1987.

                                                                 507
508     References


Cibinic, John, Jr., and Ralph C. Nash, Jr. Cost-Reimbursement
     Contracting. 2nd ed. Washington, D.C.: The George
     Washington University, National Law Center, Government
     Contracts Program, 1993.
Cleland, David I., and Lewis R. Ireland. Project Management:
     Strategic Design and Implementation. 5th ed. New York:
     McGraw-Hill, 2007.
Cohen, Dennis J., and Robert J. Graham. The Project Manager's
     MBA: How to Translate Project Decisions into Business Success.
     San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2001.
Corbin, Arthur L. Corbin on Contracts. St. Paul, MN: West
     Publishing, 1952.
Covey, Stephen R. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People:
     Powerful Lessons in Personal Change. New York: Free Press,
     2004.
Crosby, Philip B. Quality Is Free: The Art of Making Quality Certain.
     New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979.
____. Quality Without Tears: The Art of Hassle-Free Management.
     New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984; reprint, New York: Penguin
     Books, 1985.
Defense Systems Management College. Risk Management: Concepts
     and Guidance. Ft. Belvoir, VA: Defense Systems Management
     College, 1989.
DeMarco, Tom, and Timothy Lister. Peopleware: Productive Projects
     and Teams. New York: Dorset House Publishing, 1987.
Dinsmore, Paul C. Human Factors in Project Management. Rev. ed.
     New York: American Management Association, 1990.
Dinsmore, Paul C., and Manuel M. Benitez. "Challenges in Managing
     International Projects." AMA Handbook of Project Management,
     edited by Paul C. Dinsmore. New York: AMACOM Books, 1993,
     463-464.
Dinsmore, Paul C., M. Dean Martin, and Gary T. Huettel. The Project
     Manager's Work Environment: Coping with Time and Stress.
     Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1985.
Dobler, Donald W., and David N. Burt. Purchasing and Supply
     Management: Text and Cases. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
     1996.
Dreger, J. Brian. Project Management: Effective Scheduling.
     New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1992.
Evans, James R., and William M. Lindsay. The Management and
     Control of Quality. 6th ed. Mason, OH: South-Western, 2005.
                                               References      509


Ferraro, Gary P. The Cultural Dimension of International Business.
     3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998.
Filley, Alan C. Interpersonal Conflict Resolution. Glenview, IL:
     Scott, Foresman, and Co., 1975.
Fisher, Roger, William Ury, and Bruce Patton. Getting to Yes:
     Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In. 2nd ed. New York:
     Penguin Books, 1991.
Fleming, Quentin W. Cost/Schedule Control Systems Criteria:
     The Management Guide to C/SCSC. Chicago: Probus Publishing,
     1988.
____. Project Procurement Management Contracting,
     Subcontracting, Teaming. Tustin, CA: FMC Press, 2003.
Fleming, Quentin W., and Joel M. Koppelman. Earned Value
     Project Management. 2nd ed. Newtown Square, PA:
     Project Management Institute, 2000.
Forsberg, Kevin, Hal Mooz, and Howard Cotterman. Visualizing
     Project Management. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1996.
Frame, J. Davidson. Managing Projects in Organizations: How to
     Make the Best Use of Time, Techniques, and People. 3rd ed.
     San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2003.
____. The New Project Management: Tools for an Age of Rapid
     Change, Corporate Reengineering, and Other Business Realities.
     2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2002.
Friedman, Jack P. Dictionary of Business Terms. 2nd ed.
     Hauppauge, NY: Barron's Educational Series, Inc., 1994.
Garrett, Gregory A. World-Class Contracting. 4th ed. Riverwoods,
     IL: CCH Incorporated, 2007.
Hirsch, William J. The Contracts Management Deskbook. Rev. ed.
     New York: American Management Association, 1986.
Imai, Masaaki. Kaizen: The Key to Japan's Competitive Success.
     New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986.
International Standards Organization. Guidance on Project
     Management. Geneva, Switzerland. ISO., 2012, ISO 21500:2012.
____. Quality Management Systems--Fundamentals and
     Vocabulary. Geneva, Switzerland. ISO., 2008, ISO 9000:2008.
____. Standardization and Related Activities--General Vocabulary.
     Geneva, Switzerland. ISO., 2004, ISO/IEC 2:2004.
____. Systems and Software Engineering--System Life Cycle
     Processes. Geneva, Switzerland. ISO/IEC., 2008, 15288:2008.
Ireland, Lewis R. Quality Management for Projects and Programs.
     Drexel Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 1991.
510      References


Jentz, Gaylord A., Kenneth W. Clarkson, and Roger LeRoy Miller. West's
        Business Law. 2nd ed. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1984.
Katzenbach, Jon R., and Douglas K. Smith. The Wisdom of Teams.
        New York: HarperBusiness, 1994.
Kerzner, Harold. Project Management: A Systems Approach to
        Planning, Scheduling, and Controlling. 10th ed. Hoboken, NJ:
        John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009.
Kirchof, Nicki S., and John R. Adams. Conflict Management for
        Project Managers. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
        Institute, 1989.
Kostner, Jaclyn. Knights of the Tele-Round Table: Third Millennium
        Leadership. New York: Warner Books, 1994.
Levin, Ginger, and Steven Flannes. Essential People Skills for Project
        Managers. Vienna, VA: Management Concepts Inc., 2005.
Levin, Ginger. Interpersonal Skills for Portfolio, Program, and Project
        Managers. Vienna, VA: Management Concepts Inc., 2010.
Lewis, James P. Project Planning, Scheduling, and Control. Chicago:
        Probus Publishing, 1991.
Mansir, Brian E., and Nicholas R. Schacht. An Introduction to the
        Continuous Improvement Process: Principles and Practices.
        Bethesda, MD.: Logistics Management Institute, 1988.
Martin, Martin D., C. Claude Teagarden, and Charles F. Lambreth.
        Contract Administration for the Project Manager. Upper Darby,
        PA: Project Management Institute, 1990.
Maslow, Abraham H. Motivation and Personality. New York:
        Harper and Row, 1954.
McGregor, Douglas. The Human Side of Enterprise. New York:
        McGraw-Hill, 1960.
Meredith, Jack R., and Samuel J. Mantel, Jr. Project Management:
        A Managerial Approach. 8th ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and
        Sons, 2012.
Pennypacker, James S., ed. Principles of Project Management:
        Collected Handbooks from the Project Management Institute.
        Sylva, NC: Project Management Institute, 1997.
PMI (see Project Management Institute).
     (R)

Pritchard, Carl L., ed. Risk Management: Concepts and Guidance.
        3rd ed. Arlington, VA: ESI International, 2005.
Project Management Institute. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional
        Conduct. www.pmi.org
____. PMI(R) Conflict of Interest Policy. www.pmi.org
                                                References      511


____. PMI(R) Lexicon of Project Management Terms. www.pmi.org/
     lexiconterms. 2012
____. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge,
     (PMBOK(R) Guide). 5th ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project
     Management Institute, 2013.
____. Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R)).
     3rd ed. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
____.PMP Credential Handbook--revised 24 September 2012.
     www.pmi.org
____.PMP Examination Content Outline, July 2011. www.pmi.org
____. Practice Standard for Earned Value Management, 2nd ed.
     Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2011.
____. Practice Standard for Project Estimating. Newtown Square,
     PA: Project Management Institute, 2011.
____. Practice Standard for Scheduling. 2nd ed. Newtown Square,
     PA: Project Management Institute, 2011.
____. Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures, 2nd ed.
     Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2006.
____. Project Management Experience and Knowledge Self-Assessment
     Manual. Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute,
     2000.
____. Project Management Professional (PMP) SM Credential
     Handbook, 2012. http://www.pmi.org/
____. The Standard for Portfolio Management--3rd Edition.
     Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
____. The Standard for Program Management--3rd Edition.
     Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
Rose, Kenneth H. Project Quality Management: Why, What and
     How. Boca Raton, FL: J. Ross Publishing, 2005.
Rosen, Robert, Patricia Digh, Marshall Singer, and Carl Phillips.
     Global Literacies: Lesson on Business Leadership and National
     Cultures. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
Schmauch, Charles H. ISO 9000 for Software Developers. Milwaukee:
     ASQC Quality Press, 1994.
Soin, Sarv Singh. Total Quality Control Essentials: Key Elements,
     Methodologies, and Managing for Success. New York:
     McGraw-Hill, 1992.
Stuckenbruck, Linn C., ed. The Implementation of Project
     Management: The Professional's Handbook. Reading, MA:
     Addison-Wesley, 1981.
512    References


Stuckenbruck, Linn C., and David Marshall. Team Building for
     Project Managers. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
     Institute, 1985.
Thamhain, Hans J., and David L. Wilemon. "Conflict Management
     in Project Life Cycles." Sloan Management Review 16, no. 3
     (Spring 1975): 31-50.
Verma, Vijay K. Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager.
     Vol. 2 of The Human Aspects of Project Management.
     Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1996.
____. Managing the Project Team. Vol. 3 of The Human Aspects of
     Project Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
     Institute, 1997.
____. Organizing Projects for Success. Vol. 1 of The Human Aspects
     of Project Management. Upper Darby, PA: Project Management
     Institute, 1995.
Verzuh, Eric. The Fast Forward MBA in Project Management.
     Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
Vroom, Victor H. Work and Motivation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
     1995.
Ward, J. LeRoy. Dictionary of Project Management Terms. 3rd ed.
     Arlington, VA: ESI International, 2008.
Wideman, R. Max, ed. Project and Program Risk Management:
     A Guide to Managing Project Risks and Opportunities.
     Preliminary ed. Drexel Hill, PA: Project Management Institute,
     1992.
Willborn, Walter, and T. C. Edwin Cheng. Global Management of
     Quality Assurance Systems. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994.
Youker, Robert. "Communication Styles Instrument: A Team
     Building Tool." In The Project Management Institute 1996
     Proceedings: Revolutions, Evolutions, Project Solutions, 27th
     Annual Seminars and Symposium, Papers Presented October
     7-9, 1996, Boston, Mass., 796-799. Upper Darby, PA: Project
     Management Institute, 1996.
Project Management


Offered by the Project Management Institute (PMI(R)), the PMP(R) Exam is quite
intensive and requires advanced knowledge of project management concepts
Rigorous and authoritative, PMP(R) Exam Practice Test and Study Guide
Ninth Edition, has been updated to cover the newest knowledge area, Stakeholder
Management, plus other updates from A Guide to the Project Management Body
of Knowledge -- Fifth Edition (PMBOK(R) Guide). This ninth edition includes 400
multiple-choice questions--40 for each of the ten knowledge areas presented in
the PMBOK(R) Guide.

As with its bestselling predecessors, the ninth edition includes a plainly written
rationale and reference for each correct answer. Each rationale indicates the five
process groups: Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, or
Closing pertaining to the answer. These references provide an understanding
of the types of exam questions that fall within each of the project management
performance domains.

This edition includes scenario-based questions, which comprise many of the
questions found on the exam as well as some challenging shorter questions. It also
includes questions specifically related to the PMBOK(R) Guide's ten knowledge
areas and the various inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs described in the
processes in the knowledge areas.

An essential self-study resource that can help to increase your chances of
passing the PMP(R) certification exam the first time around, the book includes a
completely original 200-question practice test that simulates the actual exam
This practice test is also available online so you can retake it as many times
as you need. This book further includes a complete bibliography and a study
matrix to help you key in on the specific areas where further study is needed.



                                            Zombie_rox

                                                             K21206
                                                    ISBN: 978-1-4822-0224-3
                                                                         90000


                                                  9 781482 202243
                                                 www.auerbach-publications.com
