PMP(R) Project Management
Professional Exam
Study Guide

Eighth Edition




Kim Heldman
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Kenyon Brown
Development Editor: Sara Barry
Technical Editors: Brett Feddersen and Vanina Mangano
Production Editor: Dassi Zeidel
Copy Editor: Judy Flynn
Editorial Manager: Mary Beth Wakefield
Production Manager: Kathleen Wisor
Associate Publisher: Jim Minatel
Supervising Producer: Rich Graves
Book Designers: Judy Fung and Bill Gibson
Proofreader: Amy Schneider
Indexer: Ted Laux
Project Coordinator, Cover: Brent Savage
Cover Designer: Wiley
Cover Image: (c) Getty Images Inc./Jeremy Woodhouse Copyright (c) 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Indianapolis, Indiana Published simultaneously in Canada ISBN: 978-1-119-17967-2
ISBN: 978-1-119-17964-1 (ebk.)
ISBN: 978-1-119-17965-8 (ebk.)
Manufactured in the United States of America No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically
disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is
not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Web site is referred to
in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or
the publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may provide or recommendations it
may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Web sites listed in this work may have changed or
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (877) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or fax
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If
this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may
download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015951678
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015951678
TRADEMARKS: Wiley, the Wiley logo, and the Sybex logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates, in the United States and other countries, and may not be used
without written permission. PMP is a registered trademark of Project Management Institute, Inc. All other
trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book.
To BB, my forever love.
Acknowledgments
Thank you for buying PMP(R): Project Management Professional Exam Study
Guide, Eighth Edition, to help you study and prepare for the PMP(R) exam.
Thousands of readers worldwide have used previous editions of this book to help
them study for and pass the exam. Because of their success and their
recommendations to friends and coworkers, we've been able to keep this study
guide up-to-date to match the changes made in A Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition.
I would also like to thank the countless instructors who use my book in their
PMP(R) prep classes. Thank you for your continued interest in using it in your
classes. A big thanks goes to all the PMI(R) chapters who use this book in their
classes as well.
A huge thank-you goes to Neil Edde, former vice president and publisher at
Sybex, for taking a chance way back when on the first edition of this book. I
can't thank him enough for having the foresight at that time to believe in this
little-known exam.
Publishing this book clearly fits the definition of a project, and the team at Sybex
is one of the best project teams you'll ever find. I appreciate all the hard work
and dedication everyone on the team put into producing this book. A special
thanks goes to Kenyon Brown, the acquisitions editor, for giving me the
opportunity to update the book and for his ideas on making it stronger.
Next, I'd like to thank Sara Barry, the development editor, for her diligent work
in helping me make this edition the best it can be. She has a very keen eye, and
her recommendations were always spot on and helped clarify the concepts. A big
thanks also goes to Dassi Zeidel, the production editor, for all her help on the
book. It was great to work with her. And thanks also to, Judy Flynn, the
copyeditor, for all her help.
There were many folks involved behind the scenes who also deserve my thanks,
including Amy Schneider, the proofreader, and Ted Laux, the indexer.
I have a special heartfelt thanks for Brett Feddersen, who served as the technical
editor on the book. I have had the great pleasure of working with Brett at the
State of Colorado in the past and have delighted in our friendship and in
watching him stretch and grow professionally while dealing with the many
watching him stretch and grow professionally while dealing with the many
challenges that came his way. If you are ever in need of the best leader or project
manager in the world, Brett is your man.
Last, but always the first on my list, is my best friend for a couple of decades
and counting, BB. I love you, and I would never have accomplished what I have
to date without your love and support. You're the best! And I'd be remiss if I
didn't also thank Jason and Leah, Noelle, Amanda, and Joe, and of course the
two best granddaughters on the planet, Kate and Juliette, for their support and
understanding.
About the Author
Kim Heldman, MBA, PMP(R), is the CIO for the Regional Transportation
District in Denver, Colorado. Kim directs IT resource planning, budgeting,
project prioritization, and strategic and tactical planning. She directs and
oversees IT design and development, enterprise resource planning systems, IT
infrastructure, application development, cybersecurity, the IT program
management office, intelligent transportation systems, and data center
operations.
Kim oversees the IT portfolio of projects ranging from those that are small in
scope and budget to multimillion dollar, multiyear projects. She has over 25
years of experience in information technology project management. Kim has
served in a senior leadership role for over 18 years and is regarded as a strategic
visionary with an innate ability to collaborate with diverse groups and
organizations, instill hope, improve morale, and lead her teams in achieving
goals they never thought possible.
Kim wrote the first edition of PMP(R): Project Management Professional Study
Guide, published by Sybex, in 2002. Since then, thousands of people worldwide
have used the study guide in preparation for the PMP(R) exam. Kim is also the
author of Project Management JumpStart, Third Edition, and Project Manager's
Spotlight on Risk Management and coauthor of CompTIA Project+, Second
Edition. Kim has also published several articles and is currently working on a
leadership book.
Most of the Real World Scenarios in this study guide are based on Kim's real-life
experiences. The names and circumstances have been changed to protect the
innocent.
Kim continues to write on project management best practices and leadership
topics, and she speaks frequently at conferences and events. You can contact
Kim at Kim.Heldman@gmail.com. She personally answers all her email.
CONTENTS
 Introduction
    What Is the PMP(R) Certification?
    How to Become PMP(R) Certified
    Who Should Buy This Book?
    How to Use This Book and the Test Bank
    The Exam Objectives
    How to Contact the Author
    PMP(R): Project Management Professional Exam Study Guide, 8th Edition
 Assessment Test
    Answers to Assessment Test
 Chapter 1: What Is a Project?
    Is It a Project?
    What Is Project Management?
    Skills Every Good Project Manager Needs
    Understanding Organizational Structures
    Understanding Project Life Cycles and Project Management Processes
    Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
    Summary
    Exam Essentials
    Review Questions
 Chapter 2: Creating the Project Charter
    Exploring the Project Management Knowledge Areas
    Understanding How Projects Come About
    Kicking Off the Project Charter
    Formalizing and Publishing the Project Charter
    Identifying Stakeholders
    Introducing the Kitchen Heaven Project Case Study
    Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 3: Developing the Project Scope Statement
   Developing the Project Management Plan
   Plan Scope Management
   Collecting Requirements
   Defining Scope
   Writing the Project Scope Statement
   Creating the Work Breakdown Structure
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 4: Creating the Project Schedule
   Creating the Schedule Management Plan
   Defining Activities
   Understanding the Sequence Activities Process
   Estimating Activity Resources
   Estimating Activity Durations
   Developing the Project Schedule
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 5: Developing the Project Budget and Communicating the Plan
   Creating the Project Cost Management Plan
   Estimating Costs
   Establishing the Cost Baseline
   Understanding Stakeholders
   Communicating the Plan
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 6: Risk Planning
   Planning for Risks
   Planning Your Risk Management
   Identifying Potential Risk
   Analyzing Risks Using Qualitative Techniques
   Quantifying Risk
   Developing a Risk Response Plan
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 7: Planning Project Resources
   Procurement Planning
   Developing the Human Resource Management Plan
   Quality Planning
   Bringing It All Together
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 8: Developing the Project Team
   Directing and Managing Project Work
   Acquiring the Project Team
   Developing the Project Team
   Managing Project Teams
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 9: Conducting Procurements and Sharing Information
   Conducting Procurements
   Laying Out Quality Assurance Procedures
   Managing Project Information
   Managing Stakeholder Engagement
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 10: Measuring and Controlling Project Performance
   Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
   Controlling Procurements
   Controlling Communications
   Managing Perform Integrated Change Control
   Controlling Stakeholder Engagement
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 11: Controlling Work Results
   Monitoring and Controlling Risk
   Managing Cost Changes
   Monitoring and Controlling Schedule Changes
   Utilizing Control Quality Techniques
   Validating Project Scope
   Controlling Scope
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Chapter 12: Closing the Project and Applying Professional Responsibility
   Formulating Project Closeout
   Closing Out the Project
   Closing Out the Procurements
   Balancing Stakeholders' Interests at Project Close
   Professional Responsibility
   Applying Professional Knowledge
   Understanding How This Applies to Your Next Project
   Summary
   Exam Essentials
   Review Questions
Appendices
   Appendix A: Answers to Review Questions
      Chapter 1: What Is a Project?
      Chapter 2: Creating the Project Charter
      Chapter 3: Developing the Project Scope Statement
      Chapter 4: Creating the Project Schedule
      Chapter 5: Developing the Project Budget and Communicating the
      Plan
      Chapter 6: Risk Planning
      Chapter 7: Planning Project Resources
      Chapter 8: Developing the Project Team
      Chapter 9: Conducting Procurements and Sharing Information
      Chapter 10: Measuring and Controlling Project Performance
      Chapter 11: Controlling Work Results
      Chapter 12: Closing the Project and Applying Professional
      Responsibility
     Appendix B: Process Inputs and Outputs
        Initiating Processes
        Planning Processes
        Executing Processes
        Monitoring and Controlling Processes
        Closing Processes
  Comprehensive Online Learning Environment
  EULA

List of Tables
  Chapter 1
     Table 1.1
     Table 1.2
     Table 1.3
     Table 1.4
     Table 1.5
  Chapter 2
     Table 2.1
     Table 2.2
     Table 2.3
     Table 2.4
     Table 2.5
     Table 2.6
     Table 2.7
     Table 2.8
     Table 2.9
     Table 2.10
     Table 2.11
   Table 2.12
   Table 2.13
Chapter 3
   Table 3.1
Chapter 4
   Table 4.1
   Table 4.2
   Table 4.3
Chapter 5
   Table 5.1
Chapter 6
   Table 6.1
   Table 6.2
   Table 6.3
Chapter 7
   Table 7.1
   Table 7.2
Chapter 9
   Table 9.1
Chapter 11
   Table 11.1
Appendix B
   Table B.1
   Table B.2
   Table B.3
   Table B.4
   Table B.5
List of Illustrations
  Chapter 1
     Figure 1.1 Project stakeholders
     Figure 1.2 Functional organizational chart
     Figure 1.3 Projectized organizational chart
     Figure 1.4 Strong matrix organizational chart
     Figure 1.5 Weak matrix organizational chart
     Figure 1.6 Balanced matrix organizational chart
     Figure 1.7 Project management process groups
     Figure 1.8 Project management process groups
  Chapter 3
     Figure 3.1 WBS levels one and two
     Figure 3.2 WBS levels one, two, and three
     Figure 3.3 WBS levels one, two, three, and four
  Chapter 4
     Figure 4.1 Example of a PDM or AON
     Figure 4.2 Example of an ADM method
     Figure 4.3 Critical path diagram
     Figure 4.4 Project schedule network diagram with activity dates
     Figure 4.5 Gantt chart
  Chapter 5
     Figure 5.1 Project budget
     Figure 5.2 Cost baseline
     Figure 5.3 Cost baseline, funding requirements, and cash flow
     Figure 5.4 Network communication model
  Chapter 6
     Figure 6.1 Risk breakdown structure
   Figure 6.2 Cause-and-effect diagram
   Figure 6.3 Flowchart diagram
   Figure 6.4 Influence diagram
   Figure 6.5 Tornado diagram
   Figure 6.6 Decision tree
Chapter 7
   Figure 7.1 Sample resource histogram
Chapter 11
   Figure 11.1 Earned value
   Figure 11.2 Control chart
   Figure 11.3 Pareto chart
   Figure 11.4 Scatter diagram
Introduction
This book was designed for anyone thinking of taking the Project Management
Professional (PMP(R)) exam sponsored by the Project Management Institute
(PMI(R)). This certification is growing in popularity and demand in all areas of
business. PMI(R) has experienced explosive growth in membership over the last
few years, and more and more organizations are recognizing the importance of
project management certification.




  Although this book is written primarily for those of you taking the PMP(R)
  exam, you can also use this book to study for the Certified Associate in
  Project Management (CAPM(R)) exam. The exams are similar in style, and
  the information covered in this book will help you with either exam.

This book has been updated to reflect the latest edition of A Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition. It assumes
you have knowledge of general project management practices, although not
necessarily specific to the PMBOK(R) Guide. It's written so that you can skim
through areas you are already familiar with, picking up the specific PMBOK(R)
Guide terminology where needed to pass the exam. You'll find that the project
management processes and techniques discussed in this book are defined in such
a way that you'll recognize tasks you've always done and be able to identify
them with the PMBOK(R) Guide process names or methodologies.
PMI(R) offers the most recognized certification in the field of project
management, and this book deals exclusively with its procedures and methods.
Project management consists of many methods, each with its own terminology,
tools, and procedures. If you're familiar with another organized project
management methodology, don't assume you already know the PMBOK(R) Guide
processes. I strongly recommend that you learn all of the processes--their key
inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. Take the time to memorize the key
terms found in the glossary as well. Sometimes just understanding the definition
of a term will help you answer a question. It might be that you've always done
that particular task or used the methodology described but called it by another
name. Know the name of each process and its primary purpose.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this book are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (Project Management
  Institute, 2013).



What Is the PMP(R) Certification?
PMI(R) is the leader and the most widely recognized organization in terms of
promoting project management best practices. PMI(R) strives to maintain and
endorse standards and ethics in this field and offers publications, training,
seminars, chapters, special interest groups, and colleges to further the project
management discipline.
PMI(R) was founded in 1969 and first started offering the PMP(R) certification
exam in 1984. PMI(R) is accredited as an American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) standards developer and also has the distinction of being the first
organization to have its certification program attain International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) 9001 recognition.
PMI(R) boasts a worldwide membership of more than 700,000, with members
from countries around the globe. Local PMI(R) chapters meet regularly and allow
project managers to exchange information and learn about new tools and
techniques of project management or new ways to use established techniques. I
encourage you to join a local chapter and get to know other professionals in your
field.

Why Become PMP(R) Certified?
The following benefits are associated with becoming PMP(R) certified:
   It demonstrates proof of professional achievement.
   It increases your marketability.
   It provides greater opportunity for advancement in your field.
   It raises customer confidence in you and in your company's services.

Demonstrates Proof of Professional Achievement
PMP(R) certification is a rigorous process that documents your achievements in
the field of project management. The exam tests your knowledge of the
disciplined approaches, methodologies, and project management practices as
described in the PMBOK(R) Guide.
You are required to have several years of experience in project management
before sitting for the exam, as well as 35 hours of formal project management
education. Your certification assures employers and customers that you are well
grounded in project management practices and disciplines. It shows that you
have the hands-on experience and a mastery of the processes and disciplines to
manage projects effectively and motivate teams to produce successful results.

Increases Your Marketability
Many industries are realizing the importance of project management and its role
in the organization. They are also seeing that simply proclaiming a head
technician to be a "project manager" does not make it so. Project management,
just like engineering, information technology, and a host of other trades, has its
own specific qualifications and skills. Certification tells potential employers that
you have the skills, experience, and knowledge to drive successful projects and
ultimately improve the company's bottom line.
A certification will always make you stand out above the competition. If you're a
PMP(R) credential holder and you're competing against a project manager without
certification, chances are you'll come out as the top pick. As a hiring manager,
all other things being equal, I will usually opt for the candidate who has
certification over the candidate who doesn't have it. Certification tells potential
employers you have gone the extra mile. You've spent time studying techniques
and methods as well as employing them in practice. It shows dedication to your
own professional growth and enhancement and to adhering to and advancing
professional standards.
Provides Opportunity for Advancement
PMP(R) certification displays your willingness to pursue growth in your
professional career and shows that you're not afraid of a little hard work to get
what you want. Potential employers will interpret your pursuit of this
certification as a high-energy, success-driven, can-do attitude on your part.
They'll see that you're likely to display these same characteristics on the job,
which will help make the company successful. Your certification displays a
success-oriented, motivated attitude that will open up opportunities for future
career advancements in your current field as well as in new areas you might
want to explore.

Raises Customer Confidence
Just as the PMP(R) certification assures employers that you've got the background
and experience to handle project management, it assures customers that they
have a competent, experienced project manager at the helm. Certification will
help your organization sell customers on your ability to manage their projects.
Customers, like potential employers, want the reassurance that those working for
them have the knowledge and skills necessary to carry out the duties of the
position and that professionalism and personal integrity are of utmost
importance. Individuals who hold these ideals will translate their ethics and
professionalism to their work. This enhances the trust customers will have in
you, which in turn will give you the ability to influence them on important
project issues.


How to Become PMP(R) Certified
You need to fulfill several requirements in order to sit for the PMP(R) exam.
PMI(R) has detailed the certification process quite extensively at its website. Go to
www.pmi.org and click the Certifications tab to get the latest information on
certification procedures and requirements.
As of this writing, you are required to fill out an application to sit for the PMP(R)
exam. You can submit this application online at the PMI(R) website. You also
need to document 35 hours of formal project management education. This might
include college classes, seminars, workshops, and training sessions. Be prepared
to list the class titles, location, date, and content.
In addition to filling out the application and documenting your formal project
management training, there is one set of criteria you'll need to meet to sit for the
exam. The criteria in this set fall into two categories. You need to meet the
requirements for only one of these categories:
requirements for only one of these categories:
   Category 1 is for those who have a baccalaureate degree. You'll need to
   provide proof, via transcripts, of your degree with your application. In
   addition, you'll need to complete verification forms--found at the PMI(R)
   website--that show 4,500 hours of project management experience that
   spans a minimum of three years.
   Category 2 is for those who do not have a baccalaureate degree but do hold a
   high school diploma or equivalent. You'll need to complete verification
   forms documenting 7,500 hours of project management experience that
   spans a minimum of five years.
As of this writing, the exam fee is $405 for PMI(R) members in good standing and
$555 for non-PMI(R) members. Testing is conducted at Prometric testing centers.
You can find a center near you on the Prometric center website, but you will not
be able to schedule your exam until your application is approved by PMI(R). You
have one year from the time PMI(R) receives and approves your completed
application to take the exam. You'll need to bring two forms of identification,
such as a driver's license and a credit card in your name, with you to the
Prometric testing center on the test day. You will not be allowed to take anything
with you into the testing room and will be provided with a locker to store your
personal belongings. You will be given a calculator, pencils, and scrap paper.
You will turn in all scrap paper, including the notes and squiggles you've jotted
during the test, to the center upon completion of the exam.
The exam is scored immediately, so you will know whether you've passed at the
conclusion of the test. You're given four hours to complete the exam, which
consists of 200 randomly generated questions. Only 175 of the 200 questions are
scored. Twenty-five of the 200 questions are "pretest" questions that will appear
randomly throughout the exam. These 25 questions are used by PMI(R) to
determine statistical information and to determine whether they can or should be
used on future exams. You will receive a score of Proficient, Moderately
Proficient, or Below Proficient for each exam domain, as well as a Pass or Fail
score. Because PMI(R) uses psychometric analysis to determine whether you have
passed the exam, a passing score is not published. The questions on the exam
cover the five process groups and professional responsibility. You'll answer
questions on the following:
   Initiating
   Planning
   Executing
   Monitoring and Controlling
   Closing
   Professional Responsibility




  Questions pertaining to professional responsibility on the exam will be
  intermixed with questions for all the process groups. You won't see a section
  or set of questions devoted solely to professional responsibility, but you will
  need to understand all of the concepts in this area. I've devoted a good
  portion of the last chapter of this book to discussing professional
  responsibility topics.

All unanswered questions are scored as wrong answers, so it benefits you to
guess at an answer if you're stumped on a question.
After you've received your certification, you'll be required to earn 60
professional development units (PDUs) every three years to maintain
certification. Approximately one hour of structured learning translates to one
PDU. The PMI(R) website details what activities constitute a PDU, how many
PDUs each activity earns, and how to register your PDUs with PMI(R) to maintain
your certification. As an example, attendance at a local chapter meeting earns
one PDU.

Who Should Buy This Book?
If you are serious about passing the PMP(R) exam (or the CAPM(R) exam for that
matter), you should buy this book and use it to study for the exam. This book is
unique in that it walks you through the project processes from beginning to end,
just as projects are performed in practice. When you read this book, you will
benefit from the explanations of specific PMBOK(R) Guide processes and
techniques coupled with real-life scenarios that describe how project managers
in different situations handle problems and the various issues all project
managers are bound to encounter during their careers. This study guide describes
in detail the exam objective topics in each chapter and has attempted to cover all
of the important project management concepts.

Interactive Online Learning Environment and Test Bank
The interactive online learning environment that accompanies PMP Project
Management Professional Exam Study Guide, Eighth Edition, provides a test
bank with study tools to help you prepare for the certification exam--and
increase your chances of passing it the first time! The test bank includes the
following tools:
Sample Tests All of the questions in this book are provided, including the
Assessment Test, which you'll find at the end of this introduction, and the
Chapter Tests that include the review questions at the end of each chapter. In
addition, there are two Practice Exams. Use these questions to test your
knowledge of the study guide material. The online test bank runs on multiple
devices.
Flashcards Questions are provided in digital flashcard format (a question
followed by a single correct answer). You can use the flashcards to reinforce
your learning and for last-minute test prep before the exam.
Other Study Tools Several bonus study tools are included:
   Glossary The key terms from this book and their definitions are available as
   a fully searchable PDF.
   Bonus Questions Supplement the topics in the book with bonus questions
   that'll help you test your knowledge and understanding of concepts.
   Audio Instruction and Review With over two hours of audio instruction,
   you can listen to the author review essential concepts, helping you to increase
   your understanding and fine-tune critical skills.




  Go to http://sybextestbanks.wiley.com to register and gain access to this
  interactive online learning environment and test bank with study tools.
How to Use This Book and the Test Bank
I've included several study tools, both in the book and in the test bank at
http://sybextestbanks.wiley.com. Following this introduction is an assessment
test that you can use to check your readiness for the actual exam. Take this test
before you start reading the book. It will help you identify the areas you may
need to brush up on. The answers to the assessment test appear after the last
question of the test. Each answer includes an explanation and a note telling you
in which chapter this material appears.
Exam Essentials appear at the end of every chapter to highlight the topics you'll
most likely find on the exam and help you focus on the most important material
covered in the chapter so that you'll have a solid understanding of those
concepts. However, it isn't possible to predict what questions will be covered on
your particular exam, so be sure to study everything in the chapter.




  Like the exam itself, this study guide is organized in terms of process groups
  and the natural sequence of events a project goes through in its life cycle.
  This is in contrast to other study guides, where material is organized by
  Knowledge Area (Human Resource Management, Communications
  Management, and so on); such organization can make mapping the processes
  in each Knowledge Area to process groups confusing when you're studying
  for the exam.

Review questions are also provided at the end of every chapter. You can use
them to gauge your understanding of the subject matter before reading the
chapter and to point out the areas in which you need to concentrate your study
time. As you finish each chapter, answer the review questions and then check to
see whether your answers are right--the correct answers appear on the pages
following the last question. You can go back to reread the section that deals with
each question you got wrong to ensure that you answer the question correctly the
next time you are tested on the material. If you can answer at least 80 percent of
the review questions correctly, you can probably feel comfortable moving on to
the next chapter. If you can't answer that many correctly, reread the chapter, or
the section that seems to be giving you trouble, and try the questions again.
You'll also find more than 200 flashcard questions on the website for on-the-go
You'll also find more than 200 flashcard questions on the website for on-the-go
review.




  Don't rely on studying the review questions exclusively as your study
  method. The questions you'll see on the exam will be different from the
  questions presented in the book. There are 200 randomly generated
  questions on the PMP(R) exam and 150 on the CAPM(R), so it isn't possible to
  cover every potential exam question in the review questions section of each
  chapter. Make sure you understand the concepts behind the material
  presented in each chapter and memorize all the formulas as well.

In addition to the assessment test and the review questions, you'll find bonus
exams. Take these practice exams just as if you were actually taking the exam
(that is, without any reference material). When you have finished the first exam,
move on to the next exam to solidify your test-taking skills. If you get more than
85 percent of the answers correct, you're ready to take the real exam.
Finally, you will notice various Real World Scenario sidebars throughout each
chapter. They are designed to give you insight into how the various processes
and topic areas apply to real-world situations.

The Exam Objectives
Behind every certification exam, you can be sure to find exam objectives--the
broad topics in which the exam developers want to ensure your competency.
PMP(R) exam objectives are listed at the beginning of every chapter in this book.




  Exam objectives are subject to change at any time without prior notice and at
  the sole discretion of PMI(R). Please visit the Certification page of PMI(R)'s
  website, www.pmi.org, for the most current listing of exam objectives.
How to Contact the Author
I welcome your feedback about this book or about books you'd like to see from
me in the future. You can reach me at Kim.Heldman@gmail.com. For more
information about my work, please visit my website at KimHeldman.com.


PMP(R): Project Management Professional Exam
Study Guide, 8th Edition
Updated for the 2015 Exam
Exam Objectives
Objective                                                                  Chapter
Performance Domain I: Initiating
Task 1: Perform project assessment based on available information,         2
lessons learned from previous projects, and meetings with relevant
stakeholders in order to support evaluation of the feasibility of new
products or services within the given assumptions and/or constraints.
Task 2: Identify key deliverables based on the business requirements       2
in order to manage customer expectations and direct the achievement
of project goals.
Task 3: Perform stakeholder analysis using appropriate tools and           2
techniques in order to align expectations and gain support for the
project.
Task 4: Identify high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints based      2
on the current environment, organizational factors, historical data, and
expert judgment, in order to propose an implementation strategy.
Task 5: Participate in the development of the project charter by           2
compiling and analyzing gathered information in order to ensure
project stakeholders are in agreement on its elements.
Task 6: Obtain project charter approval from the sponsor, in order to      2
formalize the authority assigned to the project manager and gain
commitment and acceptance for the project.
Task 7: Conduct benefit analysis with relevant stakeholders to             2
validate project alignment with organizational strategy and expected
business value.
business value.
Task 8: Inform stakeholders of the approved project charter to ensure 2
common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and their
roles and responsibilities.
Performance Domain II: Planning
Task 1: Review and assess detailed project requirements, constraints, 3
and assumptions with stakeholders based on the project charter,
lessons learned, and by using requirement gathering techniques in
order to establish detailed project deliverables.
Task 2: Develop a scope management plan, based on the approved            3
project scope and using scope management techniques, in order to
define, maintain, and manage the scope of the project.
Task 3: Develop the cost management plan based on the project             5
scope, schedule, resources, approved project charter and other
information, using estimating techniques, in order to manage project
costs.
Task 4: Develop the project schedule based on the approved project        4
deliverables and milestones, scope, and resource management plans in
order to manage timely completion of the project.
Task 5: Develop the human resource management plan by defining            7
the roles and responsibilities of the project team members in order to
create a project organizational structure and provide guidance
regarding how resources will be assigned and managed.
Task 6: Develop the communications management plan based on the           5
project organizational structure and stakeholder requirements, in order
to define and manage the flow of project information.
Task 7: Develop the procurement management plan based on the              7
project scope, budget, and schedule, in order to ensure that the
required project resources will be available.
Task 8: Develop the quality management plan and define the quality        7
standards for the project and its products, based on the project scope,
risks, and requirements, in order to prevent the occurrence of defects
and control the cost of quality.
Task 9: Develop the change management plan by defining how                3
changes will be addressed and controlled in order to track and manage
change.
Task 10: Plan for risk management by developing a risk management 6
plan; identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing project risks; creating the
risk register; and defining risk response strategies in order to manage
uncertainty and opportunity throughout the project life cycle.
Task 11: Present the project management plan to the relevant               7
stakeholders according to applicable policies and procedures in order
to obtain approval to proceed with project execution.
Task 12: Conduct kick-off meeting, communicating the start of the         3
project, key milestones, and other relevant information in order to
inform and engage stakeholders and gain commitment.
Task 13: Develop the stakeholder management plan by analyzing             5
needs, interests, and potential impact in order to effectively manage
stakeholders' expectations and engage them in project decisions.
Performance Domain III: Executing
Task 1: Acquire and manage project resources by following the             8
human resource and procurement management plans in order to meet
project requirements.
Task 2: Manage task execution based on the project management plan        8, 9
by leading and developing the project team in order to achieve project
deliverables.
Task 3: Implement the quality management plan using the appropriate       9
tools and techniques in order to ensure that work is performed in
accordance with required quality standards.
Task 4: Implement approved changes and corrective actions by              9
following the change management plan in order to meet project
requirements.
Task 5: Implement approved actions by following the risk                  9
management plan in order to minimize the impact of the risks and
take advantage of opportunities on the project.
Task 6: Manage the flow of information by following the                   9
communications plan in order to keep stakeholders engaged and
informed.
Task 7: Maintain stakeholder relationships by following the               9
stakeholder management plan in order to receive continued support
and manage expectations.
Performance Domain IV: Monitoring and Controlling
Performance Domain IV: Monitoring and Controlling
Task 1: Measure project performance using appropriate tools and           10
techniques in order to identify and quantify any variances and
corrective actions.
Task 2: Manage changes to the project by following the change             10
management plan in order to ensure that project goals remain aligned
with business needs.
Task 3: Verify that project deliverables conform to the quality           11
standards established in the quality management plan by using
appropriate tools and techniques to meet project requirements and
business needs.
Task 4: Monitor and assess risk by determining whether exposure has       11
changed and evaluating the effectiveness of response strategies in
order to manage the impact of risks and opportunities to the project.
Task 5: Review the issue log, update if necessary, and determine          11
corrective actions by using appropriate tools and techniques in order
to minimize the impact on the project.
Task 6: Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned using lessons        10, 11
learned management techniques in order to enable continuous
improvement.
Task 7: Monitor procurement activities according to the procurement       10
plan in order to verify compliance with project objectives.
Performance Domain V: Closing
Task 1: Obtain final acceptance of the project deliverables from          12
relevant stakeholders in order to confirm that project scope and
deliverables were achieved.
Task 2: Transfer the ownership of deliverables to the assigned            12
stakeholders in accordance with the project plan in order to facilitate
project closure.
Task 3: Obtain financial, legal, and administrative closure using         12
generally accepted practices and policies in order to communicate
formal project closure and ensure transfer of liability.
Task 4: Prepare and share the final project report according to the       12
communications management plan in order to document and convey
project performance and assist in project evaluation.
Task 5: Collate lessons learned that were documented throughout the       12
Task 5: Collate lessons learned that were documented throughout the 12
project and conduct a comprehensive project review in order to
update the organization's knowledge base.
Task 6: Archive project documents and materials using generally       12
accepted practices in order to comply with statutory requirements and
for potential use in future projects and audits.
Task 7: Obtain feedback from relevant stakeholders using appropriate 12
tools and techniques and based on the stakeholder management plan
in order to evaluate their satisfaction.




 Exam objectives are subject to change at any time without prior notice and at
 PMI(R)'s sole discretion. Please visit PMI(R)'s website (www.pmi.org) for the
 most current listing of exam objectives.
Assessment Test
1. The project sponsor has approached you with a dilemma. At the annual
   stockholders meeting, the CEO announced that the project you're managing
   will be completed by the end of this year. The problem is that this is six
   months prior to the scheduled completion date. It's too late to go back and
   correct her mistake, and now stockholders expect implementation by the
   announced date. You must speed up the delivery date of this project. Your
   primary constraint before this occurred was the budget. Choose the best
   action from the options listed to speed up the project.
   A. Hire more resources to get the work completed faster.
   B. Ask for more money so that you can contract out one of the phases you
      had planned to do with in-house resources.
   C. Utilize negotiation and influencing skills to convince the project sponsor
      to speak with the CEO and make a correction to her announcement.
   D. Examine the project management plan to see whether there are any
      phases that can be fast tracked, and then revise the project management
      plan to reflect the compression of the schedule.
2. These types of dependencies can create arbitrary total float values and limit
   your scheduling options.
   A. Discretionary
   B. External
   C. Mandatory
   D. Hard logic
3. Project managers spend what percentage of their time communicating?
   A. 90
   B. 85
   C. 75
   D. 50
4. Which of the following is not another term for inspections?
   A. Reviews
   B. Assessment
   C. Walkthrough
   D. Audits
5. The primary function of the Closing processes is to perform which of the
   following?
   A. Formalize lessons learned and distribute this information to project
      participants.
   B. Perform audits to verify the project results against the project
      requirements.
   C. Assure that project records accurately reflect the final specifications of
      the product.
   D. Perform post-implementation audits to document project successes and
      failures.
6. During your project meeting, a problem was discussed, and a resolution to
   the problem was reached. During the meeting, the participants started
   wondering why they thought the problem was such a big issue. Sometime
   after the meeting, you received an email from one of the meeting participants
   saying they've changed their mind about the solution reached in the meeting
   and need to resurface the problem. The solution reached during the initial
   project meeting is a result of which of the following conflict resolution
   techniques?
   A. Collaborate
   B. Force
   C. Smooth
   D. Storm
7. What are decision models?
   A. Project selection criteria
   B. Project selection methods
   C. Project selection committees
   D. Project resource and budget selection methods
 8. You've been assigned as a project manager on a research and development
    project for a new dental procedure. You're working in the Project Scope
    Management Knowledge Area. What is the purpose of the scope
    management plan?
    A. The scope management plan describes and documents a scope baseline to
       help make future project decisions.
    B. The scope management plan decomposes project deliverables into
       smaller units of work.
    C. The scope management plan describes how project scope will be
       developed and how changes will be managed.
    D. The scope management plan describes how cost and time estimates will
       be developed for project scope changes.
 9. Which of the following statements regarding Ishikawa diagrams in the
    Identify Risks process is not true?
    A. Ishikawa diagrams are also called cause-and-effect diagrams.
    B. Ishikawa diagrams are also called fishbone diagrams.
    C. Ishikawa diagrams are part of the diagramming tool and technique of this
       process.
    D. Ishikawa diagrams show the steps needed to identify the risk.
10. All of the following are outputs of the Perform Integrated Change Control
    process except for which one?
    A. Change log
    B. Project management plan updates
    C. Organizational process assets updates
    D. Approved change requests
11. What is one of the most important skills a project manager can have?
    A. Negotiation skills
    B. Influencing skills
    C. Communication skills
    D. Problem-solving skills
12. All of the following are a type of project ending except for which one?
    A. Extinction
    B. Starvation
    C. Desertion
    D. Addition
13. You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a
    new city and county office building in your city. Your CCB recently
    approved a scope change. You know that scope change might come about as
    a result of all of the following except which one?
    A. Schedule revisions
    B. Product scope change
    C. Changes to the agreed-on WBS
    D. Changes to the project requirements
14. You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's
    software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You're
    performing cost estimates for your project and don't have a lot of details yet.
    Which of the following techniques should you use?
    A. Analogous estimating techniques, because this is a form of expert
       judgment that uses historical information from similar projects
    B. Bottom-up estimating techniques, because this is a form of expert
       judgment that uses historical information from similar projects
    C. Monte Carlo analysis, because this is a modeling technique that uses
       simulation to determine estimates
    D. Parametric modeling, because this is a form of simulation used to
       determine estimates
15. Project managers have the highest level of authority and the most power in
    which type of organizational structure?
    A. Projectized
    B. Strong matrix
    C. Functional
    D. Balanced matrix
16. This process is concerned with determining the engagement levels of the
    stakeholders.
    A. Plan Communications Management
    B. Control Communications
    C. Plan Stakeholder Management
    D. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
17. All of the following statements are true regarding risk events except which
    one?
    A. Project risks are uncertain events.
    B. If risks occur, they can have a positive or negative effect on project
       objectives.
    C. Unknown risks can be threats to the project objectives, and nothing can
       be done to plan for them.
    D. Risks that have more perceived rewards to the organization than
       consequences should be accepted.
18. The Conduct Procurement process applies evaluation criteria to bids and
    proposals and selects a vendor. It also uses independent estimates to compare
    vendor prices. This is also known as which of the following?
    A. Independent comparisons
    B. Analytical techniques
    C. Should cost estimates
    D. Expert judgment
19. You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. This company produces
    children's software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You
    are ready to assign project roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships.
    On which project Planning process are you working?
    A. Estimate Activity Resources
    B. Plan Human Resource Management
    C. Acquire Project Team
    D. Plan Organizational Resources
20. You know that PV = 470, AC = 430, EV = 460, EAC = 500, and BAC =
    525. What is VAC?
    A. 65
    B. 20
    C. 25
    D. 30
21. You are a project manager who has recently held a project team kickoff
    meeting where all the team members were formally introduced to each other.
    Some of the team members know each other from other projects and have
    been working with you for the past three weeks. Which of the following
    statements is not true?
    A. Team building improves the knowledge and skills of team members.
    B. Team building builds feelings of trust and agreement among team
       members, which can improve morale.
    C. Team building can create a dynamic environment and cohesive culture to
       improve productivity of both the team and the project.
    D. Team building occurs throughout the life of the project and can establish
       clear expectations and behaviors for project team members, leading to
       increased productivity.
22. You are a project manager for the Swirling Seas Cruises food division.
    You're considering two different projects regarding food services on the
    cruise lines. The initial cost of Project Fish'n for Chips will be $800,000,
    with expected cash inflows of $300,000 per quarter. Project Picnic's payback
    period is six months. Which project should you recommend?
    A. Project Fish'n for Chips, because its payback period is two months
       shorter than Project Picnic's
    B. Project Fish'n for Chips, because the costs on Project Picnic are unknown
    C. Project Picnic, because Project Fish'n for Chips's payback period is four
       months longer than Project Picnic's
    D. Project Picnic, because Project Fish'n for Chips's payback period is two
       months longer than Project Picnic's
23. Which of the following schedule compression techniques increases risk?
    A. Crashing
    B. Resource leveling
    C. Fast tracking
    D. Lead and lag
24. Name the ethical code you'll be required to adhere to as a PMP(R) credential
    holder.
    A. Project Management Policy and Ethics Code
    B. PMI(R) Standards and Ethics Code of Conduct
    C. Project Management Code of Professional Ethics
    D. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
25. You have been assigned to a project that will allow job seekers to fill out
    applications and submit them via the company website. You report to the VP
    of human resources. You are also responsible for screening applications for
    the information technology division and setting up interviews. The project
    coordinator has asked for the latest version of your changes to the online
    application page for his review. Which organizational structure do you work
    in?
    A. Functional organization
    B. Weak matrix organization
    C. Projectized organization
    D. Balanced matrix organization
26. You are the project manager for Lucky Stars Candies. You've identified the
    requirements for the project and documented them where?
    A. In the requirements document, which will be used as an input to the
       Create WBS process
    B. In the project scope statement, which is used as an input to the Create
       WBS process
    C. In the product requirements document, which is an output of the Define
       Scope process
    D. In the project specifications document, which is an output of the Define
       Scope process
27. What is the purpose of the project charter?
    A. To recognize and acknowledge the project sponsor
    B. To recognize and acknowledge the existence of the project and commit
       organizational resources to the project
    C. To acknowledge the existence of the project team, project manager, and
       project sponsor
    D. To describe the selection methods used to choose this project over its
       competitors
28. Which of the following are tools and techniques of the Identify Stakeholders
    process?
    A. Stakeholder analysis, expert judgment, and meetings
    B. Stakeholder analysis, expert judgment, and stakeholder register
    C. Stakeholder analysis and expert judgment
    D. Stakeholder analysis, stakeholder management strategy, and expert
       judgment
29. You are a project manager working on a software development project.
    You've developed the risk management plan, identified risks, and determined
    risk responses for the risks. A risk event occurs, and you implement the
    response. Then, another risk event occurs as a result of the response you
    implemented. What type of risk is this?
    A. Trigger risk
    B. Residual risk
    C. Secondary risk
    D. Mitigated risk
30. You are working on a project that will upgrade the phone system in your
    customer service center. You have considered using analogous estimating,
    parametric estimating, bottom-up estimating, and three-point estimating to
    determine activity costs. Which process does this describe?
    A. Estimating Activity Resources
    B. Estimate Costs
    C. Determine Budget
    D. Estimating Activity Costs
31. Failure costs are also known as which of the following?
    A. Internal costs
    B. Cost of poor quality
    C. Cost of keeping defects out of the hands of customers
    D. Prevention costs
32. Feeding buffers and the project buffer are part of which of the following
    Develop Schedule tools and techniques?
    A. Critical path method
    B. Schedule network analysis
    C. Applying leads and lags
    D. Critical chain method
33. You are working on a project that will upgrade the phone system in your
    customer service center. You have used bottom-up estimating techniques to
    assign costs to the project activities and have determined the cost baseline.
    Which of the following statements is true?
    A. You have completed the Estimate Cost process and now need to
       complete the Determine Budget process to develop the project's cost
       baseline.
    B. You have completed the Estimate Cost process and established a cost
       baseline to measure future projects against.
    C. You have completed the Determine Budget process and now need to
       complete the Schedule Development process to establish a project
       baseline to measure future project performance against.
    D. You have completed the Determine Budget process, and the cost baseline
       will be used to measure future project performance.
34. Each of the following options describes an element of the Develop Project
    Management Plan process except for which one?
    A. Project charter
    B. Outputs from other planning processes
    C. Configuration management system
    D. Organizational process assets
35. There are likely to be team loyalty issues in a matrixed environment. All of
    the following are true regarding this situation as it pertains to the Manage
    Project Team process except for which one?
    A. Two of the tools and techniques you might use to manage these
       relationships effectively are communications methods and conflict
       management.
    B. In this type of structure, team members report to both a functional
       manager and a project manager. Both managers should have input to the
       project performance appraisal for all team members, which is a tool and
       technique of this process.
    C. The project manager is generally responsible for managing team
       members' relationships.
    D. The effective management of these reporting relationships is often a
       critical success factor for the project.
36. Monte Carlo analysis can help predict the impact of risks on project
    deliverables. This is an element of one of the tools and techniques of which
    of the following processes?
    A. Plan Risk Responses
    B. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
    C. Identify Risks
    D. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
37. Which of the following statements regarding configuration management is
    not true?
    A. Configuration management involves managing changes to the project
       baselines.
    B. Change control systems are a subset of the configuration management
       system.
    C. Configuration management focuses on the specifications of the
       deliverables of the project.
    D. Configuration management validates and improves the project by
       evaluating the impact of each change.
38. Which performance measurement tells you what the projected total cost of
    the project will be at completion?
    A. ETC
    B. EV
    C. AC
    D. EAC
39. Which of the following contracts should you use for projects that have a
    degree of uncertainty and require a large investment early in the project life
    cycle?
    A. Fixed price
    B. Cost reimbursable
    C. Lump sum
    D. T&M
40. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project manager is identified and
    assigned during which process?
    A. During the Develop Project Charter process
    B. At the conclusion of the Develop Project Charter process
    C. Prior to beginning the Planning processes
    D. Prior to beginning the Define Scope process
41. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Close Procurements
    process except for which one?
    A. Expert judgment
    B. Procurement audits
    C. Procurement negotiations
    D. Records management system
42. The inputs of the Control Communications process include all of the
    following except for which one?
    A. Work performance data
    B. Issue log
    C. Project communications
    D. Work performance information
43. All of the following statements are true regarding risks except for which
    one?
    A. Risks might be threats to the objectives of the project.
    B. Risks are certain events that may be threats or opportunities to the
       objectives of the project.
    C. Risks might be opportunities to the objectives of the project.
    D. Risks have causes and consequences.
44. Which performance measurement tells you the cost of the work that has been
    authorized and budgeted for a WBS component?
    A. PV
    B. EV
    C. AC
    D. BCWP
45. Which of the following statements is true regarding the Project Management
    Knowledge Areas?
    A. They include Initiation, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and
       Controlling, and Closing.
    B. They consist of 10 areas that bring together processes that have things in
       common.
    C. They consist of five processes that bring together phases of projects that
       have things in common.
    D. They include Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and Controlling
       processes because these three processes are commonly interlinked.
46. You have just prepared an RFP for release. Your project involves a
    substantial amount of contract work detailed in the RFP. Your favorite
    vendor drops by and offers to give you and your spouse the use of their
    company condo for your upcoming vacation. It's located in a beautiful resort
    community that happens to be one of your favorite places to go for a
    getaway. What is the most appropriate response?
    A. Thank the vendor, but decline the offer because you know this could be
       considered a conflict of interest.
    B. Thank the vendor, and accept. This vendor is always offering you
       incentives like this, so this offer does not likely have anything to do with
       the recent RFP release.
    C. Thank the vendor, accept the offer, and immediately tell your project
       sponsor so they're aware of what you're doing.
    D. Thank the vendor, but decline the offer because you've already made
       another arrangement for this vacation. Ask them whether you can take a
       rain check and arrange another time to use the condo.
47. What are the Define Scope process tools and techniques?
    A. Cost-benefit analysis, scope baseline, expert judgment, and facilitated
       workshops
    B. Product analysis, alternatives generation, and expert judgment
    C. Product analysis, alternatives generation, expert judgment, and facilitated
       workshops
    D. Alternatives generation, stakeholder analysis, and expert judgment
48. You are the project manager for Heartthrobs by the Numbers Dating
    Services. You're working on an updated Internet site that will display
    pictures as well as short bios of prospective heartbreakers. You have your
    activity list and resource requirements in hand and are planning to use
    parametric estimates and reserve analysis to determine activity durations.
    Which of the following statements is true?
    A. You are using inputs from the Estimate Activity Duration process.
    B. You are using tools and techniques of the Estimate Cost process.
    C. You are using tools and techniques of the Estimate Activity Durations
       process.
    D. You are using inputs of the Estimate Costs process.
49. Your team is developing the risk management plan. Which tool and
    technique of this process is used to develop risk cost elements and schedule
    activities that will be included in the project budget and schedule?
    A. Meetings
    B. Strategies for both threats and opportunities
    C. Information gathering techniques
    D. Risk data quality assessment
50. What type of organization experiences the least amount of stress during
    project closeout?
    A. Projectized
    B. Functional
    C. Weak matrix
    D. Strong matrix
51. You are the project manager for Xylophone Phonics. It produces children's
    software programs that teach basic reading and math skills. You are
    performing the Plan Quality Management process and are identifying
    nonproductive activities. Part of this involves capturing information such as
    process boundaries, process configurations, and process metrics. Which of
    the following does this describe?
    A. The process improvement plan
    B. The quality management plan
    C. The quality metrics
    D. The cost of quality
52. You need to convey some very complex, detailed information to the project
    stakeholders. What is the best method for communicating this kind of
    information?
    A. Verbal
    B. Vertical
    C. Horizontal
    D. Written
53. You are the project manager for Heartthrobs by the Numbers Dating
    Services. You're working on an updated Internet site that will display
    pictures as well as short bios of prospective heartbreakers. You've just
    completed your project staff assignments and published the project team
    directory. Which process are you in?
    A. Plan Human Resource Management
    B. Manage Project Team
    C. Develop Project Team
    D. Acquire Project Team
54. You are a project manager for Waterways Houseboats, Inc. You've been
    asked to perform a cost-benefit analysis for two proposed projects. Project A
    costs $2.4 million, with potential benefits of $12 million and future operating
    costs of $3 million. Project B costs $2.8 million, with potential benefits of
    $14 million and future operating costs of $2 million. Which project should
    you recommend?
    A. Project A, because the cost to implement it is cheaper than with Project B
    B. Project A, because the potential benefits plus the future operating costs
       are less in value than the same calculation for Project B
    C. Project B, because the potential benefits minus the implementation and
       future operating costs are greater in value than the same calculation for
       Project A
    D. Project B, because the potential benefits minus the costs to implement are
       greater in value than the same calculation for Project A
55. These diagrams rank-order factors for corrective action by frequency of
    occurrence. They are also a type of histogram.
    A. Control charts
    B. Process flowcharts
    C. Scatter diagrams
    D. Pareto diagrams
56. You are a project manager working in a foreign country. You observe that
    some of your project team members are having a difficult time adjusting to
    the new culture. You provided them with training on cultural differences and
    the customs of this country before they arrived, but they still seem
    uncomfortable and disoriented. Which of the following statements is true?
    A. This is the result of working with teams of people from two different
       countries.
    B. This condition is known as culture shock.
    C. This is the result of jet lag and travel fatigue.
    D. This condition is known as global culturalism.
57. Your project involves the research and development of a new food additive.
    You're ready to release the product to your customer when you discover that
    a minor reaction might occur in people with certain conditions. The reactions
    to date have been very minor, and no known long-lasting side effects have
    been noted. As project manager, what should you do?
    A. Do nothing because the reactions are so minor that very few people will
       be affected.
    B. Inform the customer that you've discovered this condition and tell them
       you'll research it further to determine its impacts.
    C. Inform your customer that there is no problem with the additive except
       for an extremely small percentage of the population and release the
       product to them.
    D. Tell the customer you'll correct the reaction problems in the next batch,
       but you'll release the first batch of product to them now to begin using.
58. The project manager has the greatest influence over quality during which
    process?
    A. Plan Quality Management
    B. Perform Quality Assurance
    C. Control Quality
    D. Monitor Quality
59. You are the project manager for a construction company that is building a
    new city and county office building in your city. You recently looked over
    the construction site to determine whether the work to date conformed to the
    requirements and quality standards. Which tool and technique of the Control
    Quality process were you using?
    A. Defect repair review
    B. Inspection
    C. Sampling
    D. Quality audit
60. All of the following statements are true of the project Closing processes
    except for which one?
    A. Probability for success is greatest in the project Closing processes.
    B. The project manager's influence is greatest in the project Closing
       processes.
    C. The stakeholders' influence is least in the project Closing processes.
    D. Risk occurrence is greatest in the project Closing processes.
61. You are refining the product description for your company's new line of ski
    boots. Which of the following statements is true?
    A. You are in the Initiating processes of your project and know that the
       product description will contain more detail in this stage and that a
       decreasing amount of detail will be added to it as the project progresses.
    B. You are in the Planning processes of your project and know that the
       product description will contain less detail in this stage and greater detail
       as the project progresses.
    C. You are in the Planning processes of your project and know that the
       product description should contain the most detail possible at this stage
       because this is critical information for the Planning process.
    D. You are in the Initiating processes of your project and know that the
       product description will contain less detail in this stage and greater detail
       as the project progresses.
62. Every status meeting should have time allotted for reviewing risks. Which of
    the following sentences is not true?
    A. Risk identification and monitoring should occur throughout the life of the
       project.
    B. Risk audits should occur toward the later phases of the project.
    C. Risks should be monitored for their status and to determine whether the
        impacts to the objectives have changed.
    D. Technical performance measurement variances may indicate that a risk is
       looming and should be reviewed at status meetings.
63. The business need, product scope description, and strategic plan together
    describe elements of which of the following?
    A. Organizational process assets
    B. Tools and techniques of the Initiating processes
    C. The project statement of work
    D. The project charter
64. Which of the following statements is true regarding constraints and
    assumptions?
    A. Constraints restrict the actions of the project team, and assumptions are
       considered true for planning purposes.
    B. Constraints are considered true for planning purposes, and assumptions
       limit the options of the project team.
    C. Constraints consider vendor availability and resource availability to be
       true for planning purposes. Assumptions limit the project team to work
       within predefined budgets or timelines.
    D. Constraints and assumptions are inputs to the Initiation process. They
       should be documented because they will be used throughout the project
       Planning process.
65. People are motivated by the need for achievement, power, or affiliation
    according to which theory?
    A. Expectancy Theory
    B. Achievement Theory
    C. Contingency Theory
    D. Theory X
66. As a result of a face-to-face meeting you recently had to discuss the items in
    your issue log; you have resolved issues and come away with an approved
    corrective action and an update to the project management plan. Which
    process does this describe?
    A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    B. Control Communications
    C. Manage Project Communications
    D. Manage Project Team
67. You've just completed the WBS. Which of the following statements is true?
    A. The WBS breaks the project deliverables down to a level where
       alternatives identification can be used to determine how level-two
       assignments should be made.
    B. The WBS breaks the project deliverables down to a level where project
       constraints and assumptions can be identified easily.
    C. The WBS breaks the project deliverables down to the work package
       level, where product analysis can be documented.
    D. The WBS breaks the project deliverables down to the work package
       level, where cost and time estimates can be easily determined.
68. As a PMP(R) credential holder, one of your responsibilities is to ensure
    integrity on the project. When your personal interests are put above the
    interests of the project or when you use your influence to cause others to
    make decisions in your favor without regard for the project outcome, this is
    considered which of the following?
    A. Conflict of interest
    B. Using professional knowledge inappropriately
    C. Culturally unacceptable
    D. Personal conflict issue
69. Which of the following describes the Executing process group?
    A. Project plans are put into action.
    B. Project performance measurements are taken and analyzed.
    C. Project plans are developed.
    D. Project plans are published.
70. Which of the following statements regarding the ADM method is not true?
    A. The ADM method is a tool and technique of Sequence Activities.
    B. The ADM method uses one time estimate to determine durations.
    C. The ADM method is also called AOA.
    D. The ADM method is rarely used today.
71. You are a project manager working on gathering requirements and
    establishing estimates for the project. Which process group are you in?
    A. Planning
    B. Executing
    C. Initiating
    D. Monitoring and Controlling
72. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, which of the following names all the
    components of a communication model?
    A. Encode, transmit, decode
    B. Encode, transmit, decode, acknowledge, feedback and/or response
    C. Encode, transmit, decode, feedback and/or response
    D. Encode, transmit, acknowledge, decode

Answers to Assessment Test
 1. Answer: D.

    Fast tracking is the best answer in this scenario. Budget was the original
    constraint on this project, so it's unlikely the project manager would get more
    resources to assist with the project. The next best thing is to compress phases
    to shorten the project duration. For more information, please see Chapter 1.
 2. Answer: A.

    Discretionary dependencies can create arbitrary total float values, and they
    can also limit scheduling options. For more information, please see Chapter
    4.
 3. Answer: A.

    Project managers spend about 90 percent of their time communicating
  Project managers spend about 90 percent of their time communicating
  through status meetings, team meetings, email, verbal communications, and
  so on. For more information, please see Chapter 9.
4. Answer: B.

  Inspections are also called reviews, peer reviews, walkthrough, and audits.
  For more information, please see Chapter 11.
5. Answer: C.

  The primary function of the Closing processes is to ensure that project
  records accurately reflect the final specifications of the product. They also
  analyze project management processes for effectiveness, and roles and
  responsibilities documentation should be updated during these processes. For
  more information, please see Chapter 12.
6. Answer: C.

  The smoothing technique (also known as accommodate) does not usually
  result in a permanent solution. The problem is downplayed to make it seem
  less important than it is, which makes the problem tend to resurface later. For
  more information, please see Chapter 8.
7. Answer: B.

  Decision models are project selection methods that include benefit
  measurement methods and mathematical models. For more information,
  please see Chapter 2.
8. Answer: C.

  The scope management plan outlines how project scope will be managed and
  how changes will be incorporated into the project. For more information,
  please see Chapter 3.
9. Answer: D.

  Cause-and-effect diagrams--also called Ishikawa or fishbone diagrams--
  show the relationship between the effects of problems and their causes.
   Kaoru Ishikawa developed cause-and-effect diagrams. For more information,
   please see Chapter 6.
10. Answer: C.

   The outputs of this process are approved change requests, change log, project
   management plan updates, and project documents updates. For more
   information, please see Chapter 10.
11. Answer: C.

   Negotiation, influencing, and problem-solving skills are all important for a
   project manager to possess. However, good communication skills are the
   most important skills a project manager can have. For more information,
   please see Chapter 1.
12. Answer: C.

   The four types of project endings are addition, integration, starvation, and
   extinction. For more information, please see Chapter 12.
13. Answer: A.

   Scope changes will cause schedule revisions, but schedule revisions do not
   change the project scope. Project requirements are part of the project scope
   statement; therefore, scope change might come about as a result of changes
   to the project requirements, as stated in Option D. For more information,
   please see Chapter 11.
14. Answer: A.

   Analogous estimating--also called top-down estimating--is a form of expert
   judgment. Analogous estimating can be used to estimate cost or time and
   considers historical information from previous, similar projects. For more
   information, please see Chapter 4.
15. Answer: A.

   Project managers have the highest level of power and authority in a
   projectized organization. They also have high levels of power and authority
   projectized organization. They also have high levels of power and authority
   in a strong matrix organization, but a matrix organization is a blend of
   functional and projectized organizations. Therefore, the project manager has
   the most authority and power in a projectized organization. For more
   information, please see Chapter 1.
16. Answer: C.

   Plan Stakeholder Management is concerned with determining the
   engagement levels of the stakeholders, understanding their needs and
   interests, and understanding how they might impact the project or how the
   project may impact them. For more information, please see Chapter 5.
17. Answer: C.

   Unknown risks might be threats or opportunities to the project, and the
   project manager should set aside contingency reserves to deal with them. For
   more information, please see Chapter 6.
18. Answer: C.

   Independent estimates are also known as should cost estimates. For more
   information, please see Chapter 9.
19. Answer: B.

   The Plan Human Resource Management process identifies project resources,
   documents roles and responsibilities of project team members, and
   documents reporting relationships. For more information, please see Chapter
   7.
20. Answer: C.

   VAC is calculated this way: VAC = BAC - EAC. Therefore, 525 - 500 = 25.
   For more information, please see Chapter 11.
21. Answer: D.

   Team building does occur throughout the life of the project, but ground rules
   are what establish clear expectations and behaviors for project team
   members. For more information, please see Chapter 8.
   members. For more information, please see Chapter 8.
22. Answer: D.

   The payback period for Project Fish'n for Chips is eight months. This project
   will receive $300,000 every three months, or $100,000 per month. The
   $800,000 will be paid back in eight months. For more information, please
   see Chapter 2.
23. Answer: C.

   Fast-tracking is a compression technique that increases risk and potentially
   causes rework. Fast-tracking is starting at the same time two activities
   previously scheduled to start one after the other, For more information,
   please see Chapter 4.
24. Answer: D.

   The PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is published by PMI(R),
   and all PMP(R) credential holders are expected to adhere to its standards. For
   more information, please see Chapter 12.
25. Answer: B.

   Functional managers who have a lot of authority and power working with
   project coordinators who have minimal authority and power characterizes a
   weak matrix organization. Project managers in weak matrix organizations are
   sometimes called project coordinators, project leaders, or project
   expeditors. For more information, please see Chapter 1.
26. Answer: A.

   The requirements document contains a list of requirements for the project
   along with other important information regarding the requirements. For more
   information, please see Chapter 3.
27. Answer: B.

   The purpose of a project charter is to recognize and acknowledge the
   existence of a project and commit resources to the project. The charter names
   the project manager and project sponsor, but that's not its primary purpose.
   the project manager and project sponsor, but that's not its primary purpose.
   For more information, please see Chapter 2.
28. Answer: A.

   Identify Stakeholders tools and techniques are stakeholder analysis, expert
   judgment, and meetings. For more information, please see Chapter 2.
29. Answer: C.

   Secondary risk events occur as a result of the implementation of a response
   to another risk. For more information, please see Chapter 6.
30. Answer: B.

   Estimate Costs is where activity costs are estimated using some of the tools
   and techniques listed in the question. The remaining tools and techniques of
   this process are expert judgment, reserve analysis, cost of quality, project
   management software, vendor bid analysis, and group decision-making
   techniques. For more information, please see Chapter 5.
31. Answer: B.

   Failure costs are associated with the cost of quality and are also known as
   cost of poor quality. For more information, please see Chapter 7.
32. Answer: D.

   The critical chain is a resource-constrained critical path that adds duration
   buffers to help protect schedule slippage. For more information, please see
   Chapter 4.
33. Answer: D.

   The Determine Budget process establishes the cost baseline, which is used to
   measure and track the project throughout the remaining process groups. For
   more information, please see Chapter 5.
34. Answer: C.

   The inputs to Develop Project Management Plan include project charter,
   The inputs to Develop Project Management Plan include project charter,
   outputs from other processes, enterprise environmental factors, and
   organizational process assets. The only tools and techniques of this process
   are expert judgment and facilitation techniques. For more information, please
   see Chapter 3.
35. Answer: A.

   The tools and techniques of the Manage Project Team process are
   observation and conversation, project performance appraisals, conflict
   management, and interpersonal skills. For more information, please see
   Chapter 8.
36. Answer: B.

   Monte Carlo analysis is a modeling and simulation technique that is part of
   the quantitative risk analysis and modeling techniques tool and technique of
   the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. For more information,
   please see Chapter 6.
37. Answer: A.

   Change control systems are a subset of the configuration management
   system. Change control systems manage changes to the deliverables and/or
   project baselines. For more information, please see Chapter 10.
38. Answer: D.

   Estimate at completion (EAC) estimates the total cost of the project at
   completion based on the performance of the project to date. For more
   information, please see Chapter 11.
39. Answer: B.

   Cost-reimbursable contracts are used when the degree of uncertainty is high
   and when the project requires a large investment prior to completion. For
   more information, please see Chapter 7.
40. Answer: A.
   According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project manager should be assigned
   during the development of the project charter, which occurs in the Develop
   Project Charter process. For more information, please see Chapter 2.
41. Answer: A.

   The tools and techniques of Close Procurements are procurement audits,
   procurement negotiations, and records management systems. For more
   information, please see Chapter 12.
42. Answer: D.

   Work performance information is an output, not an input, of the Control
   Communications process. The remaining inputs of this process are project
   management plan and organizational process assets. For more information,
   please see Chapter 10.
43. Answer: B.

   Risks are uncertain events that may be threats or opportunities to the
   objectives of the project. For more information, please see Chapter 6.
44. Answer: A.

   Planned value is the cost of work that has been authorized and budgeted for a
   schedule activity or WBS component. For more information, please see
   Chapter 11.
45. Answer: B.

   The project management Knowledge Areas bring together processes that
   have commonalities. For example, the Project Quality Management
   Knowledge Area includes the Plan Quality Management, Perform Quality
   Assurance, and Control Quality processes. For more information, please see
   Chapter 2.
46. Answer: A.

   The best response is to decline the offer. This is a conflict of interest, and
   accepting the offer puts your own integrity and the contract award process in
   accepting the offer puts your own integrity and the contract award process in
   jeopardy. For more information, please see Chapter 12.
47. Answer: C.

   The tools and techniques of the Define Scope process include product
   analysis, alternatives generation, expert judgment, and facilitated workshops.
   For more information, please see Chapter 3.
48. Answer: C.

   Parametric estimating and reserve analysis are two of the tools and
   techniques of the Estimate Activity Durations process. The other tools are
   analogous estimating, group decision-making techniques, and three-point
   estimating. For more information, please see Chapter 4.
49. Answer: A.

   The Plan Risk Management process has three tools and techniques:
   analytical techniques, expert judgment, and meetings. For more information,
   please see Chapter 6.
50. Answer: C.

   Weak matrix organizational structures tend to experience the least amount of
   stress during the project closeout processes. For more information, please see
   Chapter 12.
51. Answer: A.

   This describes the process improvement plan, which is a subsidiary of the
   project management plan and an output of the Plan Quality Management
   process. For more information, please see Chapter 7.
52. Answer: D.

   Information that is complex and detailed is best conveyed in writing. A
   verbal follow-up would be good to answer questions and clarify information.
   Vertical and horizontal are ways of communicating within the organization.
   For more information, please see Chapter 9.
53. Answer: D.

   Project staff assignments are an output of the Acquire Project Team process,
   and it includes a team directory. For more information, please see Chapter 8.
54. Answer: C.

   Project B's cost-benefit analysis is a $9.2 million benefit to the company,
   compared to $6.6 million for Project A. Cost-benefit analysis takes into
   consideration the initial costs to implement and future operating costs. For
   more information, please see Chapter 2.
55. Answer: D.

   Pareto diagrams rank-order important factors for corrective action by
   frequency of occurrence. For more information, please see Chapter 11.
56. Answer: B.

   When people work in unfamiliar environments, culture shock can occur.
   Training and researching information about the country you'll be working in
   can help counteract this. For more information, please see Chapter 12.
57. Answer: B.

   Honesty and truthful reporting are required of PMP(R) credential holders. In
   this situation, you would inform the customer of everything you know
   regarding the problem and work to find alternative solutions. For more
   information, please see Chapter 12.
58. Answer: B.

   Perform Quality Assurance is the process where project managers have the
   greatest amount of influence over quality. For more information, please see
   Chapter 9.
59. Answer: B.

   Inspection involves physically looking at, measuring, or testing results to
   determine whether they conform to your quality standards. For more
   determine whether they conform to your quality standards. For more
   information, please see Chapter 11.
60. Answer: D.

   Risk occurrence is lowest during the Closing processes because you've
   completed the work of the project at this point. However, risk impacts are the
   greatest in the Closing process because you have much more at stake. For
   more information, please see Chapter 12.
61. Answer: D.

   Product descriptions are used during the Initiating process group and contain
   less detail now and more detail as the project progresses. For more
   information, please see Chapter 1.
62. Answer: B.

   Risk audits should be performed throughout the life of the project, and you
   are specifically interested in looking at the implementation and effectiveness
   of risk strategies. For more information, please see Chapter 11.
63. Answer: C.

   These elements are part of the project statement of work used as an input to
   the Develop Project Charter process. For more information, please see
   Chapter 2.
64. Answer: A.

   Constraints limit the options of the project team by restricting action or
   dictating action. Scope, time, and cost are the three most common
   constraints, and each of these has an effect on quality. Assumptions are
   presumed to be true for planning purposes. Always validate your
   assumptions. For more information, please see Chapter 3.
65. Answer: B.

   Achievement Theory conjectures that people are motivated by the need for
   achievement, power, or affiliation. For more information, please see Chapter
   8.
   8.
66. Answer: A.

   The clues in this question are the face-to-face meetings (a communication
   method), the issue log, and the resolved issues, which is one of the primary
   purposes of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. For more
   information, please see Chapter 9.
67. Answer: D.

   The work package level is the lowest level in the work breakdown structure.
   Schedule and cost estimates are easily determined at this level. For more
   information, please see Chapter 3.
68. Answer: A.

   A conflict of interest is any situation that compromises the outcome of the
   project or ignores the impact to the project to benefit yourself or others. For
   more information, please see Chapter 12.
69. Answer: A.

   The Executing process group takes published project plans and turns them
   into actions to accomplish the goals of the project. For more information,
   please see Chapter 1.
70. Answer: B.

   The arrow diagramming method (ADM)--also called activity on arrow
   (AOA)--uses more than one time estimate to determine project duration. For
   more information, please see Chapter 4.
71. Answer: A.

   The Planning process group is where requirements are fleshed out and
   estimates on project costs and time are made.
72. Answer: B.

   The components of the communication model are encode, transmit, decode,
The components of the communication model are encode, transmit, decode,
acknowledge, and feedback and/or response.
CHAPTER 1
What Is a Project?
Congratulations on your decision to study for and take the Project Management
Institute (PMI(R)) Project Management Professional (PMP(R)) certification exam
(PMP(R) exam). This book was written with you in mind. The focus and content
of this book revolve heavily around the information contained in A Guide to the
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition,
published by PMI(R). I will refer to this guide throughout this book and elaborate
on those areas that appear on the test. Keep in mind that the test covers all the
project management processes, so don't skip anything in your study time.
When possible, I'll pass on hints and study tips that I collected while studying for
the exam. My first tip is to familiarize yourself with the terminology used in the
PMBOK(R) Guide. Volunteers from differing industries from around the globe
worked together to come up with the standards and terms used in the guide.
These folks worked hard to develop and define project management terms, and
the terms are used interchangeably among industries. For example, resource
planning means the same thing to someone working in construction, information
technology, or healthcare. You'll find many of the PMBOK(R) Guide terms
explained throughout this book. Even if you are an experienced project manager,
you might find you use specific terms for processes or actions you regularly
perform but the PMBOK(R) Guide calls them by another name. So, the first step is
to get familiar with the terminology.
The next step is to become familiar with the processes as defined in the
PMBOK(R) Guide. The process names are unique to PMI(R), but the general
principles and guidelines underlying the processes are used for most projects
across industry areas.
This chapter lays the foundation for building and managing your project. I'll
address project and project management definitions as well as organizational
structures. Good luck!

Is It a Project?
Let's start with an example of how projects come about, and later we'll look at a
definition of a project. Consider the following scenario: You work for a wireless
phone provider, and the VP of marketing approaches you with a fabulous idea
--"fabulous" because he's the big boss and because he thought it up. He wants to
set up kiosks in local grocery and big-box stores as mini-offices. These offices
will offer customers the ability to sign up for new wireless phone services, make
their wireless phone bill payments, and purchase equipment and accessories. He
believes that the exposure in grocery stores will increase awareness of the
company's offerings. After all, everyone has to eat, right? He told you that the
board of directors has already cleared the project, and he'll dedicate as many
resources to this as he can. He wants the new kiosks in place in 12 stores by the
end of this year. The best news is he has assigned you to head up this project.
Your first question should be "Is it a project?" This might seem elementary, but
projects are often confused with ongoing operations. Projects are temporary in
nature; have definite start and end dates; produce a unique product, service, or
result; and are completed when their goals and objectives have been met and
signed off by the stakeholders or when the project is terminated.
When considering whether you have a project on your hands, you need to keep
some issues in mind. First, is it a project or an ongoing operation? Next, if it is a
project, who are the stakeholders? And third, what characteristics distinguish this
endeavor as a project? We'll look at each of these next.

Projects vs. Operations
Projects are temporary in nature and have definitive start dates and definitive
end dates. The project is completed when its goals and objectives are
accomplished to the satisfaction of the stakeholders. Sometimes projects end
when it's determined that the goals and objectives cannot be accomplished or
when the product, service, or result of the project is no longer needed and the
project is canceled. Projects exist to bring about a product, service, or result that
didn't exist before. This might include tangible products, components of other
products, services such as consulting or project management, and business
functions that support the organization. Projects might also produce a result or
an outcome, such as a document that details the findings of a research study. In
this sense, a project is unique. However, don't get confused by the term unique.
For example, Ford Motor Company is in the business of designing and
assembling cars. Each model that Ford designs and produces can be considered a
project. The models differ from each other in their features and are marketed to
people with various needs. An SUV serves a different purpose and clientele than
a luxury sedan or a hybrid. The initial design and marketing of these three
models are unique projects. However, the actual assembly of the cars is
considered an operation--a repetitive process that is followed for most makes
and models.
Determining the characteristics and features of the different car models is carried
out through what the PMBOK(R) Guide terms progressive elaboration. This
means the characteristics of the product, service, or result of the project are
determined incrementally and are continually refined and worked out in detail as
the project progresses. More information and better estimates become available
the further you progress in the project. Progressive elaboration improves the
project team's ability to manage greater levels of detail and allows for the
inevitable change that occurs throughout a project's life cycle. This concept goes
along with the temporary and unique aspects of a project because when you first
start the project, you don't know all the minute details of the end product.
Product characteristics typically start out broad-based at the beginning of the
project and are progressively elaborated into more and more detail over time
until they are complete and finalized.

  Exam Spotlight
  Progressive elaboration is most often used when creating the project or
  product scope, developing requirements, determining human resources,
  scheduling, and defining risks and their mitigation plans.




         Real World Scenario

  The New Website Project
  You've just been charged with creating a new intranet site for your
  organization. At the beginning of the project, you don't know a lot of detail
  other than the high-level purpose of the project. One of the next steps is to
  discover the elements that should be included on the website. For example,
  you might need to make available human resources policies and procedures,
  travel request forms, expense reimbursement forms, and so on. At this point,
  travel request forms, expense reimbursement forms, and so on. At this point,
  you are progressively elaborating the scope of the project. Each of these
  elements will need its own progressive elaboration process to further define
  its requirements and develop estimates. For example, as you interview
  stakeholders, you discover that travel request forms require two electronic
  signatures, one from the employee's supervisor and one from the section
  manager. Progressive elaboration continues throughout the project life cycle,
  including defining the requirements and scope, delivering the end product or
  result, and obtaining acceptance from the stakeholders.

Operations are ongoing and repetitive. They involve work that is continuous
without an ending date, and you often repeat the same processes and produce the
same results. One way to think of operations is the transforming of resources
(steel and fiberglass, for example) into outputs (cars). The purpose of operations
is to keep the organization functioning, whereas the purpose of a project is to
meet its goals and to conclude. At the completion of a project, or at various
points throughout the project, the deliverables may get turned over to the
organization's operational areas for ongoing care and maintenance. For example,
let's say your company implements a new human resources software package
that tracks employees' time, expense reports, benefits, and so on, like the
example described in the sidebar "The New Website Project." Defining the
requirements and implementing the software is a project. The ongoing
maintenance of the site, updating content, and so on are ongoing operations.
It's a good idea to include some members of the operational area on the project
team when certain deliverables or the end product of the project will be
incorporated into their future work processes. They can assist the project team in
defining requirements, developing scope, creating estimates, and so on, helping
to assure that the project will meet their needs. The process of knowledge
transfer to the team is much simpler when they are involved throughout the
project; they gain knowledge as they go and the formal handoff is more efficient.
This isn't a bad strategy in helping to gain buy-ins from the end users of the
product or service either. Often, business units are resistant to new systems or
services, but getting them involved early in the project rather than simply
throwing the end product over the fence when it's completed may help gain their
acceptance.
Managing projects and managing operations require different skill sets.
Operations management involves managing the business operations that support
the goods and services the organization is producing. Operations managers may
include line supervisors in manufacturing, retail sales managers, and customer
include line supervisors in manufacturing, retail sales managers, and customer
service call center managers. The skills needed to manage a project include
general management skills, interpersonal skills, planning and organization skills,
and more. The remainder of this book will discuss project management skills in
detail.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, several examples exist where projects can
extend into operations up until and including the end of the product life cycle:
   Concluding the end of each phase of the project
   Developing new products or services
   Upgrading and/or expanding products or services
   Improving the product development processes
   Improving operations
The preceding list isn't all inclusive. Whenever you find yourself working on a
project that ultimately impacts your organization's business processes, I
recommend you get people from the business units to participate on the project.

Stakeholders
A project is successful when it achieves its objectives and meets the expectations
of the stakeholders. Stakeholders are those folks (or organizations) with a vested
interest in your project. They may be active or passive as far as participation on
the project goes, but the one thing they all have in common is that each of them
has something to either gain or lose as a result of the project. Stakeholder
identification is not a onetime process. You should continue to ask fellow team
members and stakeholders if there are other stakeholders who should be a part of
the project.




  Key stakeholders can make or break the success of a project. Even if all the
  deliverables are met and the objectives are satisfied, if your key stakeholders
  aren't happy, nobody is happy.

The project sponsor, generally an executive in the organization with the
authority to assign resources and enforce decisions regarding the project, is a
stakeholder. The project sponsor generally serves as the tie-breaking decision
maker and is one of the people on your escalation path. The project sponsor is
also the person who approves the project charter and gives the project manager
the authority to commence with the project. We will cover this topic in more
detail in Chapter 2, "Creating the Project Charter." The customer is a
stakeholder, as are contractors and suppliers. The project manager, the project
team members, and the managers from other departments, including the
operations areas, are stakeholders as well. It's important to identify all the
stakeholders in your project up front. Leaving out an important stakeholder or
their department's function and not discovering the error until well into the
project can be a project killer.
Figure 1.1 shows a sample listing of the kinds of stakeholders involved in a
typical project. The org chart view shows a hierarchical view, not an
organizational reporting view, of how the stakeholders listed in the chart and in
the box below the chart interact with the project manager.




Figure 1.1 Project stakeholders
Many times, stakeholders have conflicting interests. It's the project manager's
responsibility to understand these conflicts and try to resolve them. It's also the
project manager's responsibility to manage stakeholder expectations. Be certain
to identify and meet with all key stakeholders early in the project to understand
their expectations, needs, and constraints. When in doubt, you should always
resolve stakeholder conflicts in favor of the customer.

Project Characteristics
You've just learned that a project has several characteristics:
   Projects are unique.
   Projects are temporary in nature and have a definite beginning and ending
   date.
   Projects are completed when the project goals are achieved or it's determined
   the project is no longer viable.
   A successful project is one that meets the expectations of your stakeholders.
Using these criteria, let's examine the assignment from the VP of marketing (to
set up kiosks in local grocery and big-box stores as mini-offices) to determine
whether it is a project:
Is it unique? Yes, because the kiosks don't exist now in the local grocery
stores. This is a new way of offering the company's services to its customer base.
Although the service the company is offering isn't new, the way it is presenting
its services is.
Does the project have a limited time frame? Yes, the start date of this
project is today, and the end date is the end of this year. It is a temporary
endeavor.
Is there a way to determine when the project is completed? Yes, the kiosks
will be installed, and services will be offered from them. Once all the kiosks are
intact and operating, the project will come to a close.
Is there a way to determine stakeholder satisfaction? Yes, the expectations
of the stakeholders will be documented in the form of deliverables and
requirements during the Planning processes. Some of the requirements the VP
noted are that customers can sign up for new services, pay their bills, and
purchase equipment and accessories. These deliverables and requirements will
be compared to the finished product to determine whether it meets the
expectations of the stakeholders.
Houston, we have a project.

What Is Project Management?
You've determined that you indeed have a project. What now? The notes you
scratched on the back of a napkin during your coffee break might get you
started, but that's not exactly good project management practice.
We have all witnessed this scenario: An assignment is made, and the project
team members jump directly into the project, busying themselves with building
the product, service, or result requested. Often, careful thought is not given to
the project-planning process. I'm sure you've heard co-workers toss around
statements like, "That would be a waste of valuable time" or "Why plan when
you can just start building?" Project progress in this circumstance is rarely
measured against the customer requirements. In the end, the delivered product,
service, or result doesn't meet the expectations of the customer. This is a
frustrating experience for all those involved. Unfortunately, many projects
follow this poorly constructed path.
Project management brings together a set of tools and techniques--performed
by people--to describe, organize, and monitor the work of project activities.
Project managers are the people responsible for managing the project processes
and applying the tools and techniques used to carry out the project activities. All
projects are composed of processes, even if they employ a haphazard approach.
There are many advantages to organizing projects and teams around the project
management processes endorsed by PMI(R). We'll be examining those processes
and their advantages in depth throughout the remainder of this book.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, project management involves applying
knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques during the course of the project to meet
requirements. It is the responsibility of the project manager to ensure that project
management techniques are applied and followed.

  Exam Spotlight

  Remember that according to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the definition of project
  management is applying tools, techniques, skills, and knowledge to project
  activities to bring about successful results and meet the project requirements.
Project management is a collection of processes that includes initiating a new
project, planning, putting the project management plan into action, and
measuring progress and performance. It involves identifying the project
requirements, establishing project objectives, balancing constraints, and taking
the needs and expectations of the key stakeholders into consideration. Planning
is one of the most important functions you'll perform during the course of a
project. It sets the standard for the remainder of the project's life and is used to
track future project performance. Before we begin the Planning process, let's
look at some of the ways the work of project management is organized.

Programs
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, programs are groups of related projects,
subprograms, or other works that are managed using similar techniques in a
coordinated fashion. When projects are managed collectively as programs, it's
possible to capitalize on benefits that wouldn't be achievable if the projects were
managed separately. This would be the case where a very large program exists
with many subprojects under it--for example, building an urban live-work-
shopping development. Many subprojects exist underneath this program, such as
design and placement of living and shopping areas, architectural drawings,
theme and design, construction, marketing, facilities management, and so on.
Each of the subprojects is a project unto itself. Each subproject has its own
project manager, who reports to a project manager with responsibility over
several of the areas, who in turn reports to the head project manager who is
responsible for the entire program. All the projects are related and are managed
together so that collective benefits are realized and controls are implemented and
managed in a coordinated fashion. Sometimes programs involve aspects of
ongoing operations as well. After the shopping areas in our example are built,
the management of the buildings and common areas becomes an ongoing
operation. The management of this collection of projects--determining their
interdependencies, managing among their constraints, and resolving issues
among them--is called program management. Program management also
involves centrally managing and coordinating groups of related projects to meet
the objectives of the program.

Portfolios
Portfolios are collections of programs, subportfolios, operations, and projects
that support strategic business goals or objectives. Let's say our company is in
the construction business. Our organization has several business units: retail,
single-family residential, and multifamily residential. Collectively, the projects
within all of these business units make up the portfolio. The program I talked
about in the preceding section (the collection of projects associated with building
the new live-work-shopping urban area) is a program within our portfolio. Other
programs and projects could be within this portfolio as well. Programs and
projects within a portfolio are not necessarily related to one another in a direct
way. However, the overall objective of any program or project in this portfolio is
to meet the strategic objectives of the portfolio, which in turn should meet the
strategic objectives of the department and ultimately the business unit or
corporation.
Portfolio management encompasses centrally managing the collections of
programs, projects, other work, and sometimes other portfolios. It also entails
facilitating effective management of all the work to meet the organization's
strategic goals. The project management office (discussed in the next section) is
typically responsible for managing portfolios. This gives a central, enterprise
view to the projects for the organization as a whole and leads to more effective
management of the programs and projects within the portfolio. Maximizing the
portfolio is critical to increasing success. This includes weighing the value of
each project, or potential project, against the business's strategic objectives,
selecting the right programs and projects, eliminating projects that don't add
value, and assuring that resources are available to support the work. It also
concerns monitoring active projects for adherence to objectives, balancing the
portfolio among the other investments of the organization, and assuring the
efficient use of resources. Portfolio managers also monitor the organizational
planning activities of the organization to help prioritize projects according to
fund availability, risk, the strategic mission, and more. Portfolio management is
generally performed by a senior manager who has significant experience in both
project and program management.
Table 1.1 compares the differences between projects, programs, and portfolios
according to the PMBOK(R) Guide.
Table 1.1 Projects, programs, and portfolios
          Purpose                                                 Area of Focus
Project   Applies and uses project management processes,          Delivery of
          knowledge, and skills                                   products,
                                                                  services, or
                                                                  results
                                                                  results

Program Collections of related projects, subprojects, or work     Project
          managed in a coordinated fashion                        interdependencies
Portfolio Aligns                                                  Optimizing
          projects/programs/portfolios/subportfolios/operations   efficiencies,
          to the organization's strategic business objectives     objectives, costs,
                                                                  resources, risks,
                                                                  and schedules


  Exam Spotlight
  Projects or programs within a portfolio are not necessarily related or
  dependent on each other.


Project Management Offices
The project management office (PMO) is usually a centralized organizational
unit that oversees the management of projects and programs throughout the
organization. The most common reason a company starts a project management
office is to establish and maintain procedures and standards for project
management methodologies and to manage resources assigned to the projects in
the PMO. PMOs are often tasked with establishing an organizational project
management (OPM) framework. OPM helps assure that projects, programs, and
portfolios are managed consistently and that they support the overall goals of the
organization. OPM is used in conjunction with other organizational practices,
such as human resources, technology, and culture, to improve performance and
maintain a competitive edge.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the key purpose of a PMO is to provide
support for project managers. This may include the following types of support:
   Providing an established project management methodology, including
   templates, forms, and standards
   Mentoring, coaching, and training project managers
   Facilitating communication within and across projects
   Managing resources
Not all PMOs are the same. Some PMOs may have a great deal of authority and
control, whereas others may only serve a supporting role. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, there are three types of PMOs: supportive, controlling, and
directive. Table 1.2 describes each type of PMO, their roles, and their levels of
control.
Table 1.2 PMO organizational types
         PMO Type Role                                   Level of Control
         Supportive Consulting:                   Low
                     Templates
                     Project repository
         Controlling Compliance:                  Moderate
                     Project management framework
                     Conformance to methodologies
         Directive Controlling:                   High
                     PMO manages projects




  A PMO can exist in all organizational structures--functional, projectized, or
  matrix. (These structures will be discussed later in this chapter.) It might
  have full authority to manage projects, including the authority to cancel
  projects, or it might serve only in an advisory role. PMOs might also be
  called project offices or program management offices or Centers of
  Excellence.

The PMO usually has responsibility for maintaining and archiving project
documentation for future reference. This office compares project goals with
project progress and gives feedback to the project teams and management. It
assures that projects are aligned with the strategic objectives of the organization,
and it measures the performance of active projects and suggests corrective
actions. The PMO evaluates completed projects for their adherence to the project
management plan and asks questions like "Did the project meet the time frames
established?" and "Did it stay within budget?" and "Was the quality
acceptable?"
  Project managers are typically responsible for meeting the objectives of the
  project they are managing, controlling the resources within the project, and
  managing the individual project constraints. The PMO is responsible for
  managing the objectives of a collective set of projects, managing resources
  across the projects, and managing the interdependencies of all the projects
  within the PMO's authority.

Project management offices are common in organizations today, if for no other
reason than to serve as a collection point for project documentation. Some PMOs
are fairly sophisticated and prescribe the standards and methodologies to be used
in all project phases across the enterprise. Still others provide all these functions
and also offer project management consulting services. However, the
establishment of a PMO is not required in order for you to apply good project
management practices to your next project.

  There Ought to Be a Law
  The importance of practicing sound project management techniques has
  grown significantly over the past several years. The state of Colorado passed
  legislation requiring project managers on large projects conducted by state
  employees or vendors working on behalf of the state to be certified in project
  management best practices. This was an attempt to increase the probability
  of project success and reduce negative risk. The state of Colorado has seen
  more projects delivered on time, on budget, and within scope because of the
  application of best practices in this area and because their project managers
  are highly trained and have a great deal of experience at managing projects.


Skills Every Good Project Manager Needs
Many times, organizations will knight their technical experts as project
managers. The skill and expertise that made them stars in their technical fields
are mistakenly thought to translate into project management skills. This is not
necessarily so.
Project managers are generalists with many skills in their repertoires. They are
also problem solvers who wear many hats. Project managers might indeed
also problem solvers who wear many hats. Project managers might indeed
possess technical skills, but technical skills are not a prerequisite for sound
project management skills. Your project team should include a few technical
experts, and these are the people on whom the project manager will rely for
technical details. Understanding and applying good project management
techniques, along with a solid understanding of general management and
interpersonal skills, are career builders for all aspiring project managers.
Project managers have been likened to small-business owners. They need to
know a little bit about every aspect of management. General management skills
include every area of management, from accounting to strategic planning,
supervision, personnel administration, and more. Interpersonal skills are often
called soft skills and include, among others, communications, leadership, and
decision making. General management and interpersonal skills are called into
play on every project. But some projects require specific skills in certain
application areas. Application areas consist of categories of projects that have
common elements. These elements, or application areas, can be defined several
ways: by industry group (automotive, pharmaceutical), by department
(accounting, marketing), and by technical (software development, engineering)
or management (procurement, research and development) specialties. These
application areas are usually concerned with disciplines; regulations; and the
specific needs of the project, the customer, or the industry. For example, most
governments have specific procurement rules that apply to their projects but
wouldn't be applicable in the construction industry. The pharmaceutical industry
is acutely interested in regulations set forth by the Food and Drug
Administration. The automotive industry has little or no concern for either of
these types of regulations. Having experience in the application area you're
working in will give you a leg up when it comes to project management.
Although you can call in the experts who have application area knowledge, it
doesn't hurt for you to understand the specific aspects of the application areas of
your project.
The interpersonal skills listed in the following sections are the foundation of
good project management practices. Your mastery of them (or lack thereof) will
likely affect project outcomes. The various skills of a project manager can be
broken out in a more or less declining scale of importance. We'll look at an
overview of these skills now, and I'll discuss each in more detail in subsequent
chapters.

Communication Skills
One of the single most important characteristics of a first-rate project manager is
excellent communication skills. Written and oral communications are the
backbone of all successful projects. Many forms of communication will exist
during the life of your project. As the creator or manager of most of the project
communication (project documents, meeting updates, status reports, and so on),
it's your job to ensure that the information is explicit, clear, and complete so that
your audience will have no trouble understanding what has been communicated.
Once the information has been distributed, it is the responsibility of the people
receiving the information to make sure they understand it.




  Many forms of communication and communication styles exist. I'll discuss
  them more in depth in Chapter 8, "Developing the Project Team."


Organizational and Planning Skills
Organizational and planning skills are closely related and probably the most
important skills, after communication skills, a project manager can possess.
Organization takes on many forms. As project manager, you'll have project
documentation, requirements information, memos, project reports, personnel
records, vendor quotes, contracts, and much more to track and be able to locate
at a moment's notice. You will also have to organize meetings, put together
teams, and perhaps manage and organize media-release schedules, depending on
your project.
Time management skills are closely related to organizational skills. It's difficult
to stay organized without an understanding of how you're managing your time. I
recommend you attend a time management class if you've never been to one.
They have some great tips and techniques to help you prioritize problems and
interruptions, prioritize your day, and manage your time.
I discuss planning extensively throughout the course of this book. There isn't any
aspect of project management that doesn't first involve planning. Planning skills
go hand in hand with organizational skills. Combining these two with excellent
communication skills is almost a sure guarantee of your success in the project
management field.
Conflict Management Skills
Show me a project, and I'll show you problems. All projects have some
problems, as does, in fact, much of everyday life. Isn't that what they say builds
character? But I digress.
Conflict management involves solving problems. Problem solving is really a
twofold process. First, you must define the problem by separating the causes
from the symptoms. Often when defining problems, you end up just describing
the symptoms instead of getting to the heart of what's causing the problem. To
avoid that, ask yourself questions like, "Is it an internal or external problem? Is it
a technical problem? Are there interpersonal problems between team members?
Is it managerial? What are the potential impacts or consequences?" These kinds
of questions will help you get to the cause of the problem.
Next, after you have defined the problem, you have some decisions to make. It
will take a little time to examine and analyze the problem, the situation causing
it, and the alternatives available. After this analysis, the project manager will
determine the best course of action to take and implement the decision. The
timing of the decision is often as important as the decision itself. If you make a
good decision but implement it too late, it might turn into a bad decision.

Negotiation and Influencing Skills
Effective problem solving requires negotiation and influencing skills. We all
utilize negotiation skills in one form or another every day. For example, on a
nightly basis I am asked, "Honey, what do you want for dinner?" Then the
negotiations begin, and the fried chicken versus swordfish discussion
commences. Simply put, negotiating is working with others to come to an
agreement.
Negotiation on projects is necessary in almost every area of the project, from
scope definition to budgets, contracts, resource assignments, and more. This
might involve negotiation one on one or with teams of people, and it can occur
many times throughout the project.
Influencing is convincing the other party that swordfish is a better choice than
fried chicken, even if fried chicken is what they want. It's also the ability to get
things done through others. Influencing requires an understanding of the formal
and informal structure of all the organizations involved in the project.
Power and politics are techniques used to influence people to perform. Power is
the ability to get people to do things they wouldn't do otherwise. It's also the
ability to change minds and the course of events and to influence outcomes.




  I'll discuss power further in Chapter 8.

Politics involve getting groups of people with different interests to cooperate
creatively even in the midst of conflict and disorder.
These skills will be utilized in all areas of project management. Start practicing
now because, guaranteed, you'll need these skills on your next project.

Leadership Skills
Leaders and managers are not the same. Leaders impart vision, gain consensus
for strategic goals, establish direction, and inspire and motivate others.
Managers focus on results and are concerned with getting the job done
according to the requirements. Even though leaders and managers are not the
same, project managers must exhibit the characteristics of both during different
times on the project. Understanding when to switch from leadership to
management and then back again is a finely tuned and necessary talent.

Team-Building and Motivating Skills
Project managers will rely heavily on team-building and motivational skills.
Teams are often formed with people from different parts of the organization.
These people might or might not have worked together before, so some
component of team-building groundwork might involve the project manager.
The project manager will set the tone for the project team and will help the
members work through the various stages of team development to become fully
functional. Motivating the team, especially during long projects or when
experiencing a lot of bumps along the way, is another important role the project
manager fulfills during the course of the project.
An interesting caveat to the team-building role is that project managers many
times are responsible for motivating team members who are not their direct
reports. This has its own set of challenges and dilemmas. One way to help this
situation is to ask the functional manager to allow you to participate in your
project team members' performance reviews. Use the negotiation and
project team members' performance reviews. Use the negotiation and
influencing skills I talked about earlier to make sure you're part of this process.

  Multiple Dimensions
  Project managers are an interesting bunch. They know a little bit about a lot
  of topics and are excellent communicators. They have the ability to motivate
  people, even those who have no reason to be loyal to the project, and they
  can make the hard-line calls when necessary. Project managers can get
  caught in sticky situations that occasionally require making decisions that
  are good for the company (or the customer) but aren't good for certain
  stakeholders. The offended stakeholders will then drag their feet, and the
  project manager has to play the heavy in order to motivate and gain their
  cooperation again. Some organizations hire contract project managers to run
  their large, company-altering projects just because they don't want to burn
  out a key employee in this role. Fortunately, that doesn't happen often.


Role of a Project Manager
Project managers are responsible for assuring that the objectives of the project
are met. Projects create value, which in turn increases the business value of the
organization. Business value is the total value of all the assets of the
organization, including both tangible and intangible elements. The project
manager must be familiar with the organization's strategic plan in order to marry
those strategic objectives with the projects in the portfolio. This requires all of
the skills we covered in the preceding sections. However, according to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, applying the skills and techniques of project management to
your next project is not enough--you must also have the following capabilities:
   Knowledge (of project management techniques)
   Performance (the ability to perform as a project manager by applying your
   knowledge)
   Personal (behavioral characteristics including leadership abilities, attitudes,
   and ethics)
Now that you've been properly introduced to some of the skills you need in your
tool kit, you'll know to be prepared to communicate, solve problems, lead, and
negotiate your way through your next project.
Understanding Organizational Structures
Just as projects are unique, so are the organizations in which they're carried out.
Organizations have their own styles, cultures, and ways of communicating that
influence how project work is performed and their ability to achieve project
success. One of the keys to determining the type of organization you work in is
measuring how much authority senior management is willing to delegate to
project managers. Although uniqueness abounds in business cultures, all
organizations are structured in one of three ways: functional, projectized, or
matrix. It's helpful to know and understand the organizational structure and the
culture of the entity in which you're working. Companies with aggressive
cultures that are comfortable in a leading-edge position within their industries
are highly likely to take on risky projects. Project managers who are willing to
suggest new ideas and projects that have never been undertaken before are likely
to receive a warm reception in this kind of environment. Conversely,
organizational cultures that are risk-averse and prefer the follow-the-leader
position within their industries are highly unlikely to take on risky endeavors.
Project managers with risk-seeking, aggressive styles are likely to receive a cool
reception in a culture like this.
The level of authority the project manager enjoys is denoted by the
organizational structure and by the interactions of the project manager with
various levels of management. For example, a project manager within a
functional organization has little to no formal authority. Their title might not be
project manager; instead, they might be called a project leader, a project
coordinator, or perhaps a project expeditor. And a project manager who
primarily works with operations-level managers will likely have less authority
than one who works with middle-or strategic-level managers.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project managers' authority levels,
  the availability of resources, control over the project budget, the role of the
  project manager, and the project team makeup are influenced by the
  structure of the organization; by the level of interaction the project manager
  has with strategic-level managers, middle managers, and operations-level
  managers; and by the project management maturity levels of the
  organization.
We'll now take a look at each of these types of organizations individually to
better understand how the project management role works in each one.

Functional Organizations
One common type of organization is the functional organization. Chances are
you have worked in this type of organization. This is probably the oldest style of
organization and is, therefore, known as the traditional approach to organizing
businesses.
Functional organizations are centered on specialties and grouped by function,
which is why they're called functional organizations. As an example, the
organization might have a human resources department, finance department,
marketing department, and so on. The work in these departments is specialized
and requires people who have the skill sets and experience in these specialized
functions to perform specific duties for the department. Figure 1.2 shows a
typical organizational chart for a functional organization.




Figure 1.2 Functional organizational chart
You can see that this type of organization is set up to be a hierarchy. Staff
personnel report to managers who report to vice presidents who report to the
CEO. In other words, each employee reports to only one manager; ultimately,
one person at the top is in charge. Many companies today, as well as
governmental agencies, are structured in a hierarchical fashion. In organizations
like this, be aware of the chain of command. A strict chain of command might
exist, and the corporate culture might dictate that you follow it. Roughly
translated: Don't talk to the big boss without first talking to your boss who talks
to their boss who talks to the big boss. Wise project managers should determine
whether there is a chain of command, how strictly it's enforced, and how the
chain is linked before venturing outside it.
Each department or group in a functional organization is managed independently
and has a limited span of control. Marketing doesn't run the finance department
or its projects, for example. The marketing department is concerned with its own
functions and projects. If it were necessary for the marketing department to get
input from the finance department on a project, the marketing team members
would follow the chain of command. A marketing manager would speak to a
manager in finance to get the needed information and then pass it back down to
the project team.

Human Resources in a Functional Organization
Commonalities exist among the personnel assigned to the various departments in
a functional organization. In theory, people with similar skills and experiences
are easier to manage as a group. Instead of scattering them throughout the
organization, it is more efficient to keep them functioning together. Work
assignments are easily distributed to those who are best suited for the task when
everyone with the same skill works together. Usually, the supervisors and
managers of these workers are experienced in the area they supervise and are
able to recommend training and career enrichment activities for their employees.




  Workers in functional organizations specialize in an area of expertise--
  finance or personnel administration, for instance--and then become very
  good at their specialty.

People in a functional organization can see a clear upward career path. An
People in a functional organization can see a clear upward career path. An
assistant budget analyst might be promoted to a budget analyst and then
eventually to a department manager over many budget analysts.

The Downside of Functional Organizations
Functional organizations have their disadvantages. If this is the kind of
organization you work in, you probably have experienced some of them.
One of the greatest disadvantages for the project manager is that they have little
to no formal authority. This does not mean project managers in functional
organizations are doomed to failure. Many projects are undertaken and
successfully completed within this type of organization. Good communication
and interpersonal and influencing skills on the part of the project manager are
required to bring about a successful project under this structure.
In a functional organization, the vice president or senior department manager is
usually the one responsible for projects. The title of project manager denotes
authority, and in a functional structure, that authority rests with the VP.

Managing Projects in a Functional Organization
Projects are typically undertaken in a divided approach in a functional
organization. For example, the marketing department will work on its portion of
the project and then hand it off to the manufacturing department to complete its
part, and so on. The work the marketing department does is considered a
marketing project, whereas the work the manufacturing department does is
considered a manufacturing project.
Some projects require project team members from different departments to work
together at the same time on various aspects of the project. Project team
members in this structure will more than likely remain loyal to their functional
managers. The functional manager is responsible for their performance reviews,
and their career opportunities lie within the functional department--not within
the project team. Exhibiting leadership skills by forming a common vision
regarding the project and the ability to motivate people to work toward that
vision are great skills to exercise in this situation. As previously mentioned, it
also doesn't hurt to have the project manager work with the functional manager
in contributing to the employee's performance review.

Resource Pressures in a Functional Organization
Competition for resources and project priorities can become fierce when
multiple projects are undertaken within a functional organization. For example,
multiple projects are undertaken within a functional organization. For example,
in my organization, it's common to have competing project requests from three
or more departments all vying for the same resources. Thrown into the heap is
the requirement to make, for example, mandated tax law changes, which
automatically usurps all other priorities. This sometimes causes frustration and
political infighting. One department thinks their project is more important than
another and will do anything to get that project pushed ahead of the others.
Again, it takes great skill and diplomatic abilities to keep projects on track and
functioning smoothly. In Chapter 2 I'll discuss the importance of gaining
stakeholder buy-in, and in Chapter 5, "Developing the Project Budget and
Communicating the Plan," I'll talk about the importance of communication to
avert some of these problems.
Project managers have little authority in functional organizations, but with the
right skills, they can successfully accomplish many projects. Table 1.3 highlights
the advantages and disadvantages of this type of organization.
Table 1.3 Functional organizations
Advantages                                          Disadvantages
There is an enduring organizational structure.      Project managers have little to
                                                    no formal authority.
There is a clear career path with separation of     Multiple projects compete for
functions, allowing specialty skills to flourish.   limited resources and priority.
Employees have one supervisor with a clear          Project team members are
chain of command.                                   loyal to the functional
                                                    manager.

Projectized Organizations
Projectized organizations are nearly the opposite of functional organizations.
The focus of this type of organization is the project itself. The idea behind a
projectized organization is to develop loyalty to the project, not to a functional
manager.
Figure 1.3 shows a typical organizational chart for a projectized organization.
Figure 1.3 Projectized organizational chart
Organizational resources are dedicated to projects and project work in purely
projectized organizations. Project managers almost always have ultimate
authority over the project in this structure and report directly to the CEO. In a
purely projectized organization, supporting functions such as human resources
and accounting might report directly to the project manager as well. Project
managers are responsible for making decisions regarding the project and
acquiring and assigning resources. They have the authority to choose and assign
resources from other areas in the organization or to hire them from outside if
needed. For example, if there isn't enough money in the budget to hire additional
resources, the project manager will have to come up with alternatives to solve
this problem. This is known as a constraint. Project managers in all
organizational structures are limited by constraints such as scope, schedule, and
cost (or budget). Quality is also considered a constraint, and it's generally
affected by scope, schedule, and/or cost. We'll talk more about constraints in
Chapter 2.




  You may come across the term triple constraints in your studies. The term
  refers to scope, schedule, and cost constraints. However, please note that the
  PMBOK(R) Guide also calls constraints competing demands, and notes that
  the primary competing demands on projects are scope, schedule, cost, risk,
  resources, and quality.

Teams are formed and often co-located, which means team members physically
work at the same location. Project team members report to the project manager,
not to a functional or departmental manager. One obvious drawback to a
projectized organization is that project team members might find themselves out
of work at the end of the project. An example of this might be a consultant who
works on a project until completion and then is put on the bench or let go at the
end of the project. Some inefficiency exists in this kind of organization when it
comes to resource utilization. If you have a situation where you need a highly
specialized skill at certain times throughout the project, the resource you're using
to perform this function might be idle during other times in the project.
In summary, you can identify projectized organizations in several ways:
   Project managers have high to ultimate authority over the project.
   The focus of the organization is the project.
   The organization's resources are focused on projects and project work.
   Team members are co-located.
   Loyalties are formed to the project, not to a functional manager.
   Project teams are dissolved at the conclusion of the project.



         Real World Scenario

  The Projectized Graphic Artist
  You've been appointed project manager for your company's website design
  and implementation. You're working in a projectized organization, so you
  have the authority to acquire and assign resources. You put together your
  team, including programmers, technical writers, testers, and business
  analysts. Julianne, a highly qualified graphic arts designer, is also part of
  your team. Julianne's specialized graphic arts skills are needed only at
  certain times throughout the project. When she has completed the graphic
  design portion of the screen she's working on, she doesn't have anything else
  to do until the next page is ready. Depending on how involved the project is
  and how the work is structured, days or weeks might pass before Julianne's
  skills are needed. This is where the inefficiency occurs in a purely
  projectized organization. It's not practical to let her go and then hire her back
  when she's needed again.
  In this situation, you might assign Julianne to other project duties when she's
  not working on graphic design. Perhaps she can edit the text for the web
  pages or assist with the design of the upcoming marketing campaign. You
  might also share her time with another project manager in the organization.
  During the Planning process, you will discover the skills and abilities of all
  your team members so that you can plan their schedules accordingly and
  eliminate idle time.


Matrix Organizations
Matrix organizations came about to minimize the differences between, and take
advantage of, the strengths and weaknesses of functional and projectized
organizations. The idea at play here is that the best of both organizational
structures can be realized by combining them into one. The project objectives
are fulfilled and good project management techniques are utilized while still
maintaining a hierarchical structure in the organization.
Employees in a matrix organization oftentimes report to one functional manager
and to at least one project manager. It's possible that employees could report to
multiple project managers if they are working on multiple projects at one time.
Functional managers pick up the administrative portion of the duties and assign
employees to projects. They also monitor the work of their employees on the
various projects. Project managers are responsible for executing the project and
giving out work assignments based on project activities. Project managers and
functional managers share the responsibility of performance reviews for the
employee.




  In a nutshell, in a matrix organization, functional managers assign
  employees to projects, whereas project managers assign tasks associated
  with the project.
  with the project.

Matrix organizations have unique characteristics. We'll look at how projects are
conducted and managed and how project and functional managers share the
work in this organizational structure next.

Project Focus in a Matrix Organization
Matrix organizations allow project managers to focus on the project and project
work just as in a projectized organization. The project team is free to focus on
the project objectives with minimal distractions from the functional department.
Project managers should take care when working up activity and project
estimates for the project in a matrix organization. The estimates should be given
to the functional managers for input before publishing. The functional manager
is the one in charge of assigning or freeing up resources to work on projects. If
the project manager is counting on a certain employee to work on the project at a
certain time, the project manager should determine their availability up front
with the functional manager. Project estimates might have to be modified if it's
discovered that the employee they were counting on is not available when
needed.

Balance of Power in a Matrix Organization
As we've discussed, a lot of communication and negotiation takes place between
the project manager and the functional manager. This calls for a balance of
power between the two, or one will dominate the other.
In a strong matrix organization, the balance of power rests with the project
manager. They have the ability to strong-arm the functional managers into
giving up their best resources for projects. Sometimes, more resources than
necessary are assembled for the project, and then project managers negotiate
these resources among themselves, cutting out the functional manager
altogether, as you can see in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4 Strong matrix organizational chart
On the other end of the spectrum is the weak matrix (see Figure 1.5). As you
would suspect, the functional managers have the majority of power in this
structure. Project managers are really project coordinators or expeditors with
part-time responsibilities on projects in a weak matrix organization. Project
managers have limited authority, just as in the functional organization. On the
other hand, the functional managers have a lot of authority and make all the
work assignments. The project manager simply expedites the project.
Figure 1.5 Weak matrix organizational chart
In between the weak matrix and the strong matrix is an organizational structure
called the balanced matrix (see Figure 1.6). The features of the balanced matrix
are what I've been discussing throughout this section. The power is balanced
between project managers and functional managers. Each manager has
responsibility for their parts of the project or organization, and employees get
assigned to projects based on the needs of the project, not the strength or
weakness of the manager's position.
Figure 1.6 Balanced matrix organizational chart
Matrix organizations have subtle differences, and it's important to understand
their differences for the PMP(R) exam. The easiest way to remember them is that
the weak matrix has many of the same characteristics as the functional
organization, whereas the strong matrix has many of the same characteristics as
the projectized organization. The balanced matrix is exactly that--a balance
between weak and strong, where the project manager shares authority and
responsibility with the functional manager. Table 1.4 compares all three
structures.
Table 1.4 Comparing matrix structures
               Weak Matrix                  Balanced Matrix        Strong Matrix
Project        Project coordinator,         Project manager        Project
manager's      project leader, or project                          manager
title          expeditor
Project        Split focus between          Projects and project   Projects and
manager's      project and functional       work                   project work
focus          responsibilities
Project        Minimal authority            Balance of authority   Significant
manager's                                   and power              authority and
manager's                                  and power                authority and
power                                                               power
Project      Part-time on projects         Full-time on projects    Full-time on
manager's                                                           projects
time
Organization Most like a functional        Blend of both weak    Most like a
style        organization                  and strong matrix     projectized
                                                                 organization
Project         Functional manager         A functional manager, Manager of
manager                                    but shares authority  project
reports to                                 and power             managers
Most organizations today use some combination of the organizational structures
described here. They're a composite of functional, projectized, and matrix
structures. It's rare that an organization would be purely functional or purely
projectized. Projectized structures can coexist within functional organizations,
and most composite organizations are a mix of functional and projectized
structures.
In the case of a high-profile, critical project, the functional organization might
appoint a special project team to work only on that project. The team is
structured outside the bounds of the functional organization, and the project
manager has ultimate authority for the project. This is a workable project
management approach and ensures open communication between the project
manager and team members. At the end of the project, the project team is
dissolved, and the project members return to their functional areas to resume
their usual duties.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand the characteristics of each organizational structure and their
  strengths and weaknesses for the exam.


Project-Based Organizations
There is one more structure we should talk about called a project-based
organization (PBO). A PBO is a temporary structure an organization puts into
place to perform the work of the project. A PBO can exist in any of the
organizational structure types we've just discussed. Most of the work of a PBO is
project based and can involve an entire organization or a division within an
organization. The important thing to note about PBOs for the exam is that a PBO
measures the success of the final product, service, or result of the project by
bypassing politics and position and thereby weakening the red tape and
hierarchy within the organization because the project team works within the
PBO and takes its authority from there.
Organizations are unique, as are the projects they undertake. Understanding the
organizational structure will help you, as a project manager, with the cultural
influences and communication avenues that exist in the organization to gain
cooperation and successfully bring your projects to a close.

Understanding Project Life Cycles and Project
Management Processes
Project life cycles are similar to the life cycle that parents experience raising
their children to adulthood. Children start out as infants and generate lots of
excitement wherever they go. However, not much is known about them at first.
So, you study them as they grow, and you assess their needs. Over time, they
mature and grow (and cost a lot of money in the process) until one day the
parents' job is done.
Projects start out just like this and progress along a similar path. Someone comes
up with a great idea for a project and actively solicits support for it. The project,
after being approved, progresses through the intermediate phases to the ending
phase, where it is completed and closed out.

Project Phases and Project Life Cycles
Most projects are divided into phases, and all projects, large or small, have a
similar project life cycle structure. Project phases generally consist of segments
of work that allow for easier management, planning, and control of the work.
The work and the deliverables produced during a phase are typically unique to
that phase. Some projects may consist of one phase, and others may have many
phases.
The number of phases depends on the project complexity and the industry. For
example, information technology projects might progress through phases such as
requirements, design, program, test, and implement. All the collective phases the
project progresses through in concert are called the project life cycle. Project life
cycles are similar for all projects regardless of their size or complexity.
The phases that occur within the project life cycle are sequential and sometimes
overlap each other. Most projects consist of the following structure (not to be
confused with the project management process groups that we'll discuss in the
section "Project Management Process Groups"):
   Beginning the project
   Planning and organizing the work of the project
   Performing the work of the project
   Closing out the project

Life Cycle Categories
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are three categories of project life
cycles. Each contains the phases, or iterations, we just discussed (beginning,
planning, performing, closing). The three types of project life cycles are as
follows:
Predictive Cycles (Also Known as Fully Plan-Driven Approach or
Waterfall) The project scope is defined at the beginning of the project and
changes are monitored closely. If changes are made, you must revisit and modify
plans and formally accept the changes to the scope and subsequent project
management plan. The work of each phase is usually distinct and not repeated in
other phases. Schedules and budgets are defined early in the life cycle as well.
Each phase has an emphasis on a different portion of the project activities and
different project management process groups (described a bit later) are
performed during each phase.
Iterative and Incremental Life Cycles Project deliverables are defined early
in the life cycle and progressively elaborated as the project progresses. Schedule
and cost estimates are continually refined as the end product, service, or result of
the project is more clearly defined. Iterative life cycles are a perfect choice for
large projects, for complex projects (this life cycle process will reduce the
complexity), for projects where changing objectives and scope are known ahead
of time, or for projects where deliverables need to be delivered incrementally.
Each phase requires performing all of the project management process groups.
Adaptive Life Cycles (Also Known as Agile Methods or Change-Driven
Methods) Choose this method when active participation of your stakeholders
is required throughout the project, when you are not certain of all the
requirements at the beginning of the project, or when you work in a changing
environment. This life cycle produces deliverables, or portions of deliverables,
in short time periods of two to four weeks. Each iteration must produce
something that is ready for release at the end of the time period, and as such, the
time period and the resources are fixed. All iterations require the Planning
process group and most will perform all of the project management process
groups.
The end of each phase within the life cycle, regardless of the type of life cycle
you are using, allows the project manager, stakeholders, and project sponsor the
opportunity to determine whether the project should continue to the next phase.
To progress to the next phase, the deliverable from the phase before it must be
reviewed for accuracy and approved. As each phase is completed, it's handed off
to the next phase. We'll look at handoffs and progressions through these phases
next.

Handoffs
Project phases evolve through the life cycle in a series of phase sequences called
handoffs, or technical transfers. For projects that consist of sequential phases, the
end of one phase typically marks the beginning of the next. For example, in the
construction industry, feasibility studies often take place in the beginning phase
of a project and are completed prior to the beginning of the next phase.
The purpose of the feasibility study is to determine whether the project is worth
undertaking and whether the project will be profitable to the organization. A
feasibility study is a preliminary assessment of the viability of the project; the
viability or perhaps marketability of the product, service, or result of the project;
and the project's value to the organization. It might also determine whether the
product, service, or result of the project is safe and meets industry or
governmental standards and regulations. The completion and approval of the
feasibility study triggers the beginning of the requirements phase, where
requirements are documented and then handed off to the design phase, where
blueprints are produced. The feasibility study might also show that the project is
not worth pursuing and the project is then terminated; therefore, the next phase
never begins.

Phase Completion
You will recognize phase completion because each phase has a specific
deliverable, or multiple deliverables, that marks the end of the phase. A
deliverable is an output that must be produced, verified, and approved to bring
the phase, life cycle process, or project to completion. Deliverables are unique
and verifiable and may be tangible or intangible, such as the ability to carry out a
service. Deliverables might also include things such as design documents,
project budgets, blueprints, project schedules, prototypes, and so on.
A phase-end review allows those involved with the work to determine whether
the project should continue to the next phase. For example, a deliverable
produced in the beginning phase of a construction industry project might be the
feasibility study. Producing, verifying, and accepting the feasibility study will
signify the ending of this phase of the project. The successful conclusion of one
phase does not guarantee authorization to begin the next phase. The feasibility
study mentioned earlier might show that environmental impacts of an enormous
nature would result if the construction project were undertaken at the proposed
location. Based on this information, a go or no-go decision can be made at the
end of the phase. Phase-end reviews give the project manager the ability to
discover, address, and take corrective action against errors discovered during the
phase.




  The PMBOK(R) Guide states that phase end reviews are also known by a few
  other names: phase exits, phase gates, phase reviews, milestones, stage
  gates, and kill points.


Multi-phased Projects
Projects may consist of one or more phases. The phases of a project are often
performed sequentially, but there are situations where performing phases
concurrently, or overlapping the start date of a sequential phase, can benefit the
project. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are two types of phase-to-phase
relationships:
Sequential Relationships     One phase must finish before the next phase can
begin.
Overlapping Relationships       One phase starts before the prior phase
completes.
Sometimes phases are overlapped to shorten or compress the project schedule.
This is called fast tracking. Fast tracking means that a later phase is started prior
to completing and approving the phase, or phases, that comes before it. This
technique is used to shorten the overall duration of the project.
Project phases are performed within a project life cycle, as I mentioned earlier.
Project life cycles typically consist of initiating the project, performing the work
of the project, and so on. As a result, most projects have the following
characteristics in common:
   In the beginning of the project life cycle, when the project is initiated, costs
   are low, and few team members are assigned to the project.
   As the project progresses, costs and staffing increase and then taper off at
   closing.
   The potential that the project will come to a successful ending is lowest at
   the beginning of the project; its chance for success increases as the project
   progresses through its phases and life cycle stages.
   Risk is highest at the beginning of the project and gradually decreases the
   closer the project comes to completion.
   Stakeholders have the greatest chance of influencing the project and the
   characteristics of the product, service, or result of the project in the
   beginning phases and have less and less influence as the project progresses.
This same phenomenon exists within the project management processes as well.
We'll look at those next.

Project Management Process Groups
Project management processes organize and describe the work of the project.
The PMBOK(R) Guide describes five process groups used to accomplish this end.
These processes are performed by people and are interrelated and dependent on
one another.
These are the five project management process groups that the PMBOK(R) Guide
documents:
   Initiating
   Planning
   Executing
   Monitoring and Controlling
   Closing
All these process groups have individual processes that collectively make up the
group. For example, the Initiating process group has two processes called
Develop Project Charter and Identify Stakeholders. Collectively, these process
groups--including all their individual processes--make up the project
management process. Projects, or each phase of a project, start with the Initiating
process and progress through all the processes in the Planning process group, the
Executing process group, and so on, until the project is successfully completed
or it's canceled. All projects must complete the Closing processes, even if a
project is killed.
Let's start with a high-level overview of each process group. The remainder of
this book will cover each of these processes in detail. If you want to peek ahead,
Appendix B, "Process Inputs and Outputs," lists each of the process groups, the
individual processes that make up each process group, and the Knowledge Areas
in which they belong. (I'll introduce Knowledge Areas in the section "Exploring
the Project Management Knowledge Areas," in Chapter 2.)

  Project Phases vs. Project Management Process
  Groups
  Don't confuse project phases and life cycles with the project management
  process groups. Project phases and life cycles describe how the work
  associated with the product of the project will be completed. For example, a
  construction project might have phases such as feasibility study, design,
  build, inspection, and turnover. The five project management process groups
  (Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing)
  organize and describe how the project activities will be conducted in order to
  meet the project requirements. These processes are generally performed for
  each phase of a large project. The five process groups are the heart of the
  PMBOK(R) Guide and the exam. As you progress through this book, be
  certain you understand each of these processes as they're described in the
  PMBOK(R) Guide.

Initiating The Initiating process group, as its name implies, occurs at the
beginning of the project and at the beginning of each project phase for large
projects. Initiating acknowledges that a project, or the next project phase, should
begin. This process group grants the approval to commit the organization's
resources to working on the project or phase and authorizes the project manager
to begin working on the project. The outputs of the Initiating process group,
including the project charter and identification of the stakeholders, become
inputs into the Planning process group.
Planning The Planning process group includes the processes for formulating
and revising project goals and objectives and creating the project management
plan that will be used to achieve the goals the project was undertaken to address.
The Planning process group also involves determining alternative courses of
action and selecting from among the best of those to produce the project's goals.
This process group is where the project requirements are fleshed out. Planning
has more processes than any of the other project management process groups. To
carry out their functions, the Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and
Closing process groups all rely on the Planning processes and the documentation
produced during the Planning processes. Project managers will perform frequent
iterations of the Planning processes prior to project completion. Projects are
unique and, as such, have never been done before. Therefore, planning must
encompass all areas of project management and consider budgets, activity
definition, scope planning, schedule development, risk identification, staff
acquisition, procurement planning, and more. The greatest conflicts a project
manager will encounter in this process group are project prioritization issues.
Executing The Executing process group involves putting the project
management plan into action. It's here that the project manager will coordinate
and direct project resources to meet the objectives of the project management
plan. The Executing processes keep the project on track and ensure that future
execution of project plans stays in line with project objectives. This process
group is typically where approved changes are implemented. The Executing
process group will utilize the most project time and resources, and as a result,
costs are usually highest during the Executing processes. Project managers will
experience the greatest conflicts over schedules in this cycle.
Monitoring and Controlling The Monitoring and Controlling process group
is where project performance measurements are taken and analyzed to determine
whether the project is staying true to the project management plan. The idea is to
identify problems as soon as possible and apply corrective action to control the
work of the project and assure successful outcomes. For example, if you
discover that variances exist, you'll apply corrective action to get the project
activities realigned with the project management plan. This might require
additional passes through the Planning processes to adjust project activities,
resources, schedules, budgets, and so on.




  Monitoring and Controlling is used to track the progress of work being
  performed and identify problems and variances within a process group as
  well as the project as a whole.

Closing The Closing process group is probably the most often skipped process
group in project management. Closing brings a formal, orderly end to the
activities of a project phase or to the project itself. Once the project objectives
have been met, most of us are ready to move on to the next project. However,
Closing is important because all the project information is gathered and stored
for future reference. The documentation collected during the Closing process
group can be reviewed and used to avert potential problems on future projects.
Contract closeout occurs here, and formal acceptance and approval are obtained
from project stakeholders.

  Exam Spotlight
  The project manager and project team are responsible for determining which
  processes within each process group are appropriate for the project on which
  you're working. This is called tailoring. You should consider the size and
  complexity of the project and the various inputs and outputs of each of the
  processes when determining which processes to implement and perform.
  Small projects might not require all of the processes within a process group
  or the same level of rigor of a large project. Every process should be
  addressed, and it should be determined whether the process is appropriate for
  the project at hand and, if so, what level of implementation is required. Use
  your judgment when deciding which processes to follow, particularly for
  small projects.


Characteristics of the Process Groups
The progression through the project management process groups exhibits the
same characteristics as progression through the project phases. That is, costs are
lowest during the Initiating processes, and few team members are involved.
Costs and staffing increase in the Executing process group and then decrease as
you approach the Closing process group. The chances for success are lowest
during Initiating and highest during Closing. The chances for risks occurring are
higher during Initiating, Planning, and Executing, but the impacts of risks are
greater during the later processes. Stakeholders have the greatest influence
during the Initiating and Planning processes and less and less influence as you
progress through Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing. For a
better idea of when certain characteristics influence a project, refer to Table 1.5.
Table 1.5 Characteristics of the project process groups
                         Initiating Planning Executing Monitoring          Closing
                                                       and
                                                       Controlling
Costs                    Low        Low      Highest   Lower               Lowest
Staffing levels          Lowest Low          High      High                Low
Chance for               Lowest Low          Medium High                   Highest
successful
completion
Stakeholder              Highest    High       Medium      Low             Lowest
influence
Risk probability of      Highest    High       Medium      Low             Lowest
occurrence

The Process Flow
You should not think of the five process groups as onetime processes that are
performed as discrete elements. Rather, these processes interact and overlap with
each other. They are iterative and might be revisited and revised several times as
the project is refined throughout its life. The PMBOK(R) Guide calls this process
of going back through the process groups an iterative process. The conclusion of
each process group allows the project manager and stakeholders to reexamine
the business needs of the project and determine whether the project is satisfying
those needs--and it is another opportunity to make a go or no-go decision.
Figure 1.7 shows the five process groups in a typical project. Keep in mind that
during phases of a project, the Closing process group outputs can provide inputs
to the Initiating process group. For example, once the feasibility study discussed
earlier is accepted or closed, it becomes an input to the Initiating process group
of the design phase.




Figure 1.7 Project management process groups
It's important to understand the flow of these processes for the exam. If you
remember the processes and their inputs and outputs, it will help you when
you're trying to decipher an exam question. The outputs of one process group
may in some cases become the inputs into the next process group (or the outputs
might be a deliverable of the project). Sometimes just understanding which
process the question is asking about will help you determine the answer. One
trick you can use to memorize these processes is to remember syrup of ipecac.
This is an old-fashioned remedy for accidental poisoning that is no longer used
today. If you think of the Monitoring and Controlling process group as simply
"Controlling," when you sound out the first initial of each of the process, it
sounds like IPECC (Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling,
and Closing).
As I stated earlier, individual processes make up each of the process groups. For
example, the Closing process group consists of two processes: Close Project or
Phase and Close Procurements. Each process takes inputs and uses them in
conjunction with various tools and techniques to produce outputs.




  It's outside the scope of this book to explain all the inputs, tools and
  techniques, and outputs for each process in each process group (although
  each is listed in Appendix B). You'll find all the inputs, tools and techniques,
  and outputs detailed in the PMBOK(R) Guide, and I highly recommend you
  become familiar with them.




  Exam Spotlight
  Understand each project management process group and all the processes
  that make up these groups. Appendix B contains a table of all the processes,
  their inputs, their tools and techniques, their outputs, and the Knowledge
  Area in which they each belong.

You'll likely see test questions regarding inputs, tools and techniques, and
outputs of many of the processes within each process group. One way to keep
them all straight is to remember that tools and techniques usually require action
of some sort, be it measuring, applying some skill or technique, planning, or
using expert judgment. Outputs are usually in the form of a deliverable.
Remember that a deliverable is characterized with results or outcomes that can
be verified. Last but not least, outputs from one process oftentimes serve as
inputs to another process.

Process Interactions
We've covered a lot of material, but I'll explain one more concept before
concluding. As stated earlier, project managers must determine the processes
that are appropriate for effectively managing a project based on the complexity
and scope of the project, available resources, budget, and so on. As the project
progresses, the project management processes might be revisited and revised to
update the project management plan as more information becomes known.
Underlying the concept that process groups are iterative is a cycle the PMBOK(R)
Guide describes as the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle, which was originally defined
by Walter Shewhart and later modified by Edward Deming. The idea behind this
concept is that each element in the cycle is results oriented. The results from the
Plan cycle become inputs into the Do cycle, and so on, much like the way the
project management process groups interact. The cycle interactions can be
mapped to work with the five project management process groups. For example,
the Plan cycle maps to the Planning process group. Before going any further,
here's a brief refresher:
   Project phases describe how the work required to produce the product of the
   project will be completed.
   Project management process groups organize and describe how the project
   activities will be completed in order to meet the goals of the project.
   The Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle is an underlying concept that shows the
   integrative nature of the process groups.
Figure 1.8 shows the relationships and interactions of the concepts you've
learned so far. Please bear in mind that a simple figure can't convey all the
interactions and iterative nature of these interactions; however, I think you'll see
that the figure ties the basic elements of these concepts together.
Figure 1.8 Project management process groups

Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
As you can tell from this first chapter, managing projects is not for the faint of
heart. You must master multiple skills and techniques in order to complete
projects successfully. In your day-to-day work environment, it probably doesn't
matter much if you're working in a functional or strong matrix organization.
More important are your communication, conflict management, and negotiation
and influencing skills. Good communication is the hallmark of successful
projects. (We'll talk more about communication and give you some
projects. (We'll talk more about communication and give you some
communication tips in the coming chapters.)
In any organizational structure, you'll find leaders and you'll find people who
have the title of leader. Again, the organizational structure itself probably isn't as
important as knowing who the real leaders and influencers are in the
organization. These are the people you'll lean on to help with difficult project
decisions and hurdles.
I talked about the definition of a project in this chapter. You'd be surprised how
many people think ongoing operations are projects. Here's a tip to help you
explain the definition to your stakeholders: projects involve the five project
management process groups (Initiating through Closing). Ongoing operations
typically involve the Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and Controlling
processes. But here's the differentiator--ongoing operations don't include
Initiating or Closing process groups because ongoing operations don't have a
beginning or an end.
Most projects I've worked on involved more than one stakeholder, and
stakeholders often have conflicting interests. On your next project, find out what
those stakeholder interests are. Resolving conflicts is easier at the beginning of
the project than at the end. You'll likely need both negotiating and influencing
skills.
I've made the mistake of thinking the project management process groups are
overkill for a small project. My team once embarked on a small project and
thought that within a matter of weeks we'd have it wrapped up and delivered. We
neglected to get signatures from the project requestor on the agreed-upon scope,
and you guessed it, the scope grew and grew and changed several times before
we were able to get the project back under control. If you're reading between the
lines here, you can also tell we didn't have adequate change control in place. As
you progress through the book, I'll highlight the important processes you'll want
to include on all projects, large and small, so you don't get caught in this trap.

Summary
Phew! I covered a lot of ground in this chapter. You learned that projects exist to
bring about a unique product, service, or result. Projects are temporary in nature
and have definite beginning and ending dates.
Stakeholders are those people or organizations that have a vested interest in the
outcome of the project. Stakeholders include people such as the project sponsor,
the customer, key management personnel, operations managers, the project
manager, contractors, suppliers, and more. Projects are considered complete
when the project meets or exceeds the expectations of the stakeholders.
Project management is a discipline that brings together a set of tools and
techniques to describe, organize, and monitor the work of project activities.
Project managers are the ones responsible for carrying out these activities.
Projects might be organized into programs or portfolios and might be managed
centrally by a PMO.
Project managers have a wide variety of skills. They should be versed not only
in the field they're working in but in general management skills as well.
Communication is the most important skill a project manager will use in the
course of a project.
Organizational structures come in variations of three forms: functional,
projectized, and matrix. Functional organizations are traditional, with
hierarchical reporting structures. Project managers have little to no authority in
this kind of organization. Projectized organizations are structured around project
work, and personnel report to project managers. Project managers have full
authority in this organizational structure. Matrix organizations are a combination
of the functional and projectized. A project manager's authority varies depending
on the structure of the matrix, be it a weak matrix, a balanced matrix, or a strong
matrix.
A project manager's authority level, ability to manage the project budget, and
availability of staff are also influenced by the project manager's interactions
within the hierarchy of management (strategic, middle, and operations
management) and the project management maturity level of the organization.
Projects progress through phases along a life cycle path to complete the product
of the project. The project management process groups are performed
throughout the project's life cycle. The process groups described in the
PMBOK(R) Guide are Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and
Controlling, and Closing.

Exam Essentials
Be able to describe the difference between projects and operations. A
project is temporary in nature with a definite beginning and ending date. Projects
produce unique products, services, or results. Operations are ongoing and use
repetitive processes that typically produce the same result over and over.
Be able to denote some of the interpersonal skills every good project
manager should possess. Communication, organizational, problem solving,
negotiation and influencing, leading, and team building are skills a project
manager should possess.
Be able to denote the three skills every project manager needs beyond their
ability to apply project management skills, tools, and techniques. The three
skills are knowledge (of project management techniques), performance (the
ability to perform as a project manager by applying your knowledge), and
personal (behavioral characteristics including leadership abilities, attitudes,
ethics, and more).
Be able to differentiate the organizational structures and the project
manager's authority in each. Organizations are usually structured in some
combination of the following: functional, projectized, and matrix (including
weak matrix, balanced matrix, and strong matrix). Project managers have the
most authority in a projectized organization and the least amount of authority in
a functional organization.
Be able to name the five project management process groups. The five
project management process groups are Initiating, Planning, Executing,
Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. Which organization has set the de facto standards for project management
   techniques?
   A. PMBOK(R)
   B. PMO
   C. PMI(R)
   D. PBO
2. The VP of marketing approaches you and requests that you change the
   visitor logon screen on the company's website to include a username with at
   least six characters. This is considered which of the following?
   A. Project initiation
   B. Ongoing operations
   C. A project
   D. Project execution
3. Your company manufactures small kitchen appliances. It is introducing a
   new product line of appliances in designer colors with distinctive features for
   kitchens in small spaces. These new products will be offered indefinitely
   starting with the spring catalog release. Which of the following is true?
   A. This is a project because this new product line has never been
      manufactured and sold by this company before.
   B. This is an ongoing operation because the company is in the business of
      manufacturing kitchen appliances. Introducing designer colors and
      features is simply a new twist on an existing process.
   C. This is an ongoing operation because the new product line will be sold
      indefinitely. It's not temporary.
   D. This is not a project or an ongoing operation. This is a new product
      introduction not affecting ongoing operations.
4. Your company manufactures small kitchen appliances. It is introducing a
   new product line of appliances in designer colors with distinctive features for
   kitchens in small spaces. These new products will be offered indefinitely
   starting with the spring catalog release. To determine the characteristics and
   features of the new product line, you will have to perform which of the
   following?
   A. Fast tracking
   B. Consulting with the stakeholders
   C. Planning the project life cycle
   D. Progressive elaboration
5. A project is considered successful when __________________.
   A. The product of the project has been manufactured.
   B. The project sponsor announces the completion of the project.
   C. The product of the project is turned over to the operations area to handle
       the ongoing aspects of the project.
   D. The project meets the expectations of the stakeholders.
6. The VP of customer service has expressed concern over a project in which
   you're involved. His specific concern is that if the project is implemented as
   planned, he'll have to purchase additional equipment to staff his customer
   service center. The cost was not taken into consideration in the project
   budget. The project sponsor insists that the project must go forward as
   originally planned or the customer will suffer. Which of the following is
   true?
   A. The VP of customer service is correct. Since the cost was not taken into
      account at the beginning of the project, the project should not go forward
      as planned. Project initiation should be revisited to examine the project
      plan and determine how changes can be made to accommodate customer
      service.
   B. The conflict should be resolved in favor of the customer.
   C. The conflict should be resolved in favor of the project sponsor.
   D. The conflict should be resolved in favor of the VP of customer service.
7. Which of the following applies a set of tools and techniques used to describe,
   organize, and monitor the work of project activities to meet the project
   requirements?
   A. Project managers
   B. The PMBOK(R) Guide
   C. Project management
   D. Stakeholders
8. All of the following are true regarding phase-to-phase relationships except
   for which one?
   A. Planning for an iterative phase begins when the work of the previous
      phase is progressing.
   B. Handoffs occur after a phase-end review in an overlapping phased
      project.
   C. During sequentially phased projects, the previous phase must finish
      before the next phase can begin.
    D. Fast tracking is a compression technique that can be applied as a phase-
       to-phase relationship.
 9. All of the following statements are true except for which one?
    A. Programs are groups of related projects.
    B. Project life cycles are collections of sequential and occasionally
       overlapping project phases.
    C. A project may or may not be part of a program.
    D. Portfolios are collections of interdependent projects or programs.
10. You are the project manager for a large construction project. The project
    objective is to construct a set of outbuildings to house the Olympic support
    team that will be arriving in your city 18 months from the project start date.
    Resources are not readily available because they are currently assigned to
    other projects. Jack, an expert crane operator, is needed for this project two
    months from today. Which of the following skills will you use to get Jack
    assigned to your project?
    A. Negotiation and influencing skills
    B. Communication and organizational skills
    C. Communication skills
    D. Problem-solving skills
11. You've decided to try your hand at project management in the entertainment
    industry. You're working on a movie production and the phases are
    performed sequentially. The team has just completed the storyboard phase of
    the project. Which of the following is true?
    A. The storyboard is a deliverable that marks the end of the phase.
    B. The storyboard phase marks the end of the Initiating process group, and
       the next phase of the project should begin.
    C. The writing phase can begin once the majority of the storyboard phase is
       complete.
    D. The division of phases and determining which processes to use in each
       phase is called tailoring.
12. You are managing a project to install a new postage software system that
    will automatically print labels and administer postage for certified mailings,
    overnight packages, and other special mailing needs. You've attempted to
    gain the cooperation of the business analyst working on this project, and you
    need some answers. She is elusive and tells you that this project is not her
    top priority. What should you do to avoid situations like this in the future?
    A. Establish the business analyst's duties well ahead of due dates, and tell
       her you'll be reporting on her performance to her functional manager.
    B. Establish the business analyst's duties well ahead of due dates, and tell
       her you are expecting her to meet these expectations because the
       customer is counting on the project meeting due dates to save significant
       costs on their annual mailings.
    C. Negotiate with the business analyst's functional manager during the
       planning process to establish expectations and request to participate in
       the business analyst's annual performance review.
    D. Negotiate with the business analyst's functional manager during the
       planning process to establish expectations, and inform the functional
       manager of the requirements of the project. Agreement from the
       functional manager will assure the cooperation of the business analyst.
13. The amount of authority a project manager possesses can be related to all of
    following except which one?
    A. The organizational structure
    B. The key stakeholder's influence on the project
    C. The interaction with various levels of management
    D. The project management maturity level of the organization
14. What is one of the advantages of a functional organization?
    A. All employees report to one manager and have a clear chain of
       command.
    B. All employees report to two or more managers, but project team
       members show loyalty to functional managers.
    C. The organization is focused on projects and project work.
    D. Teams are co-located.
15. You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to direct
    customer calls to an interactive voice response system before they are
    connected to a live agent. You are in charge of the media communications
    for this project. You report to the project manager in charge of this project
    and the VP of marketing, who share responsibility for this project. Which
    organizational structure do you work in?
    A. Functional organization
    B. Weak matrix organization
    C. Projectized organization
    D. Balanced matrix organization
16. You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand
    three miles of the north-to-south highway through your city by two lanes in
    each direction. You are in charge of the demolition phase of this project, and
    you report to the project manager in charge of this project. You have been
    hired on contract and will be released at the completion of the demolition
    phase. What type of organizational structure does this represent?
    A. Functional organization
    B. Weak matrix organization
    C. Projectized organization
    D. Balanced matrix organization
17. What are the five project management process groups, in order?
    A. Initiating, Executing, Planning, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing
    B. Initiating, Monitoring and Controlling, Planning, Executing, and Closing
    C. Initiating, Planning, Monitoring and Controlling, Executing, and Closing
    D. Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing
18. You have been assigned to a project in which the objectives are to expand
    three miles of the north-to-south highway through your city by two lanes in
    each direction. You are interested in implementing a new project process
    called Design-Build in order to speed up the project schedule. The idea is
    that the construction team will work on the first mile of the highway
    reconstruction at the same time the design team is coming up with plans for
    the third mile of the reconstruction rather than completing all design before
    any construction begins. This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Managing the projects as a program
    B. An overlapping phase-to-phase relationship
    C. Progressive elaboration
    D. Handoffs
19. During which project management process group are risk and stakeholder's
    ability to influence project outcomes the highest?
    A. Planning
    B. Executing
    C. Initiating
    D. Monitoring and Controlling
20. All of the following are true regarding a PMO except for which one?
    A. There are three types of PMOs: supportive, controlling, and
       collaborative.
    B. The PMO is often responsible for implementing the OPM.
    C. The key purpose of the PMO is to provide support to project managers.
    D. The PMO facilitates communication within and across projects.
CHAPTER 2
Creating the Project Charter
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE INITIATING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
   Task 1: Perform project assessment based on available information,
  lessons learned from previous projects, and meetings with the relevant
  stakeholders in order to support the evaluation of the feasibility of new
  products or services within the given assumptions and/or constraints.
   Task 2: Identify key deliverables based on the business requirements
  in order to manage customer expectations and direct the achievement of
  project goals.
   Task 3: Perform stakeholder analysis using appropriate tools and
  techniques in order to align expectations and gain support for the
  project.
   Task 4: Identify high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints based
  on the current environment, organizational factors, historical data, and
  expert judgment, in order to propose an implementation strategy.
   Task 5: Participate in the development of the project charter by
  compiling and analyzing gathered information in order to ensure
  project stakeholders are in agreement on its elements.
   Task 6: Obtain project charter approval from the sponsor, in order to
  formalize the authority assigned to the project manager and gain
  commitment and acceptance for the project.
   Task 7: Conduct benefit analysis with relevant stakeholders to
  validate project alignment with organizational strategy and expected
  business value.
   Task 8: Inform stakeholders of the approved project charter to
  ensure common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and
  their roles and responsibilities.
 Knowledge and Skills:
    Analytical skills
    Benefit analysis techniques
    Elements of a project charter
    Estimation tools and techniques
    Strategic management
Now that you're armed with a detailed overview of project management, you can
easily determine whether your next assignment is a project or an ongoing
operation. You've learned some of the basics of good project management
techniques. Now you can start putting those techniques into practice during the
Initiating process group, which is where all projects start. As you've probably
already guessed, you'll be using some of the general management skills outlined
in Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?"
One of the first skills you will put to use will be your communication skills. Are
you surprised? Of course you're not. It all starts with communication. You can't
start defining the project until you've first talked to the project sponsor, key
stakeholders, and management personnel. All good project managers have honed
their communication skills to a nice sharp edge.
You'll remember from Chapter 1 that Initiating is the first process group in the
five project management process groups. You can think of it as the official
project kickoff. Initiating acknowledges that the project, or the next phase in an
active project, should begin. This process group culminates in the publication of
a project charter and a stakeholder register. I'll cover each in this chapter. But
before we dive into the Initiating processes, we have one more preliminary topic
to cover: the 10 Knowledge Areas.
At the end of this chapter, I'll introduce a case study that will illustrate the main
points of the chapter. I'll expand on this case study from chapter to chapter, and
you'll begin building a project using each of the skills you learn.

Exploring the Project Management Knowledge
Areas
We talked about the five process groups in Chapter 1. They are Initiating,
Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing. Each process
group is made up of a collection of processes used throughout the project life
cycle. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R)
Guide), Fifth Edition, groups these processes into 10 categories that it calls the
Project Management Knowledge Areas. These groupings, or Knowledge Areas,
bring together processes that have characteristics in common. For example, the
Project Cost Management Knowledge Area involves all aspects of the budgeting
process, as you would suspect. Therefore, processes such as Estimate Costs,
Determine Budget, and Control Costs belong to this Knowledge Area. Here's the
tricky part: These processes don't belong to the same project management
process groups (Estimate Costs and Determine Budget are part of the Planning
process group, and Control Costs is part of the Monitoring and Controlling
process group). Think of it this way: Knowledge Areas bring together processes
by commonalities, whereas project management process groups are more or less
the order in which you perform the project management processes (although
remember that you can come back through these processes more than once). The
PMBOK(R) Guide names the 10 Knowledge Areas as follows:
   Project Integration Management
   Project Scope Management
   Project Time Management
   Project Cost Management
   Project Quality Management
   Project Human Resource Management
   Project Communications Management
   Project Risk Management
   Project Procurement Management
   Project Stakeholder Management
Let's take a closer look at each Knowledge Area so you understand how they
relate to the process groups. Included in each of the following sections are tables
that illustrate the processes that make up the Knowledge Area and the project
management process group to which each process belongs. This will help you
see the big picture in terms of process groups compared to Knowledge Areas. I'll
discuss each of the processes in the various Knowledge Areas throughout the
book, but for now, you'll take a high-level look at each of them.

  Exam Spotlight
 Exam Spotlight

 The PMP(R) exam may have a question or two regarding the processes that
 make up a Knowledge Area. Remember that Knowledge Areas bring
 together processes by commonalities, so thinking about the Knowledge Area
 itself should tip you off to the processes that belong to it. Projects are
 executed in process group order, but the Knowledge Areas allow a project
 manager to think about groups of processes that require specific skills. This
 makes the job of assigning resources easier because team members with
 specific skills might be able to work on and complete several processes at
 once. To broaden your understanding of the Knowledge Areas, cross-
 reference the purposes and the processes that make up each Knowledge Area
 with the PMBOK(R) Guide.




 The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
 the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
 this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
 Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Project Integration Management
The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area comprises six processes,
as shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Project Integration Management
  Process Name                        Project Management Process Group
  Develop Project Charter             Initiating
  Develop Project Management Plan     Planning
  Direct and Manage Project Work      Executing
  Monitor and Control Project Work    Monitoring and Controlling
  Perform Integrated Change Control   Monitoring and Controlling
  Close Project or Phase              Closing
   Close Project or Phase              Closing
The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area is concerned with
coordinating all aspects of the project management plan and is highly interactive.
This Knowledge Area involves identifying and defining the work of the project
and combining, unifying, and integrating the appropriate processes. It is
concerned with choosing from among alternative projects and performing trade-
offs among the competing objectives of several projects. This Knowledge Area
also takes into account satisfactorily meeting the requirements of the customer
and stakeholder and managing their expectations.
Project planning, executing, monitoring, and change control occur throughout
the project and are repeated continuously while you're working on the project.
Project planning and executing involve weighing the objectives of the project
against the alternatives to bring the project to a successful completion. This
includes making choices about how to effectively use resources and coordinating
the work of the project on a continuous basis. Monitoring the work of the project
involves anticipating potential problems and issues and dealing with them before
they reach the critical point. Change control can impact the project schedule,
which in turn impacts the work of the project, which in turn can impact the
project management plan, so you can see that these processes are tightly linked.
The processes in this area, as with all the Knowledge Areas, also interact with
other processes in the remaining Knowledge Areas. For example, the Identify
Stakeholders process uses an output from the Develop Project Charter process as
an input.
The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area has two tools for
assisting with process integration: earned value management (EVM) and project
management software. EVM is a project-integrating methodology used in this
Knowledge Area to integrate the processes and measure project performance
through a project's life cycle. I'll further define EVM in Chapter 5, "Developing
the Project Budget and Communicating the Plan," and talk more about project
management software tools in Chapter 4, "Creating the Project Schedule."

Project Scope Management
The Project Scope Management Knowledge Area has six processes, as shown in
Table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Project Scope Management
        Process Name          Project Management Process Group
        Plan Scope Management Planning
        Plan Scope Management Planning
        Collect Requirements      Planning
        Define Scope              Planning
        Create WBS                Planning
        Validate Scope            Monitoring and Controlling
        Control Scope             Monitoring and Controlling
Project Scope Management is concerned with defining all the work of the project
and only the work needed to successfully produce the project goals. These
processes are highly interactive. They define and control what is and what is not
part of the project. Each process occurs at least once--and often many times--
throughout the project's life.
Project Scope Management encompasses both product scope and project scope.
Product scope concerns the characteristics of the product, service, or result of
the project. It's measured against the product requirements to determine
successful completion or fulfillment. The application area usually dictates the
process tools and techniques you'll use to define and manage product scope.
Project scope involves managing the work of the project and only the work of
the project. Project scope is measured against the project management plan. The
scope baseline is made up of the project scope statement, the work breakdown
structure (WBS), and the WBS dictionary.




  To ensure a successful project, both product and project scope must be well
  integrated. This implies that Project Scope Management is well integrated
  with the other Knowledge Area processes.

Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create WBS, Validate Scope, and Control
Scope involve the following:
   Defining and detailing the deliverables and requirements of the product of
   the project
   Creating a WBS
   Validating deliverables using measurement techniques
   Controlling changes to the scope of the project

Project Time Management
The Project Time Management Knowledge Area has seven processes, as shown
in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3 Project Time Management
      Process Name                  Project Management Process Group
      Plan Schedule Management      Planning
      Define Activities             Planning
      Sequence Activities           Planning
      Estimate Activity Resources   Planning
      Estimate Activity Durations   Planning
      Develop Schedule              Planning
      Control Schedule              Monitoring and Controlling

This Knowledge Area is concerned with estimating the duration of the project
activities, devising a project schedule, and monitoring and controlling deviations
from the schedule. Collectively, this Knowledge Area deals with completing the
project in a timely manner. Time management is an important aspect of project
management because it concerns keeping the project activities on track and
monitoring those activities against the project management plan to ensure that
the project is completed on time.
Although most processes in this Knowledge Area occur at least once in every
project (and sometimes more), in many cases--particularly on small projects--
Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Durations, and Develop Schedule are
completed as one activity. Only one person is needed to complete these
processes for small projects, and they're all worked on at the same time.

Project Cost Management
As its name implies, the Project Cost Management Knowledge Area centers
costs and budgets. Table 2.4 shows the processes that make up this Knowledge
Area.
Table 2.4 Project Cost Management
         Process Name             Project Management Process Group

         Plan Cost Management Planning
         Estimate Costs       Planning
         Determine Budget     Planning
         Control Costs            Monitoring and Controlling
The activities in the Project Cost Management Knowledge Area establish cost
estimates for resources, establish budgets, and keep watch over those costs to
ensure that the project stays within the approved budget. The earlier you can
develop and agree on the scope of the project, the earlier you can estimate costs.
The benefit of this practice is that costs are more easily influenced early in the
project.
This Knowledge Area is primarily concerned with the costs of resources, but you
should think about other costs as well. For example, be certain to examine
ongoing maintenance and support costs for software or equipment that may be
handed off to the operations group at the end of the project.
Depending on the complexity of the project, these processes might need the
involvement of more than one person. For example, the finance person might not
have expertise about the resources documented in the staffing management plan,
so the project manager will need to bring in a staff member with those skills to
assist with the activities in this process.
Two techniques are used in this Knowledge Area to decide among alternatives
and improve the project process: life cycle costing and value engineering. The
life cycle costing technique considers a group of costs collectively (such as
acquisition, operations, disposal, and so on) when deciding among or comparing
alternatives. The value engineering technique helps improve project schedules,
profits, quality, and resource usage and optimizes life cycle costs, among others.
Value engineering, in a nutshell, involves optimizing project performance and
cost and is primarily concerned with eliminating unnecessary costs. By
examining the project processes, performance, or even specific activities, the
project manager can identify those elements that are not adding value and could
be eliminated, modified, or reduced to realize cost savings. These techniques can
improve decision making, reduce costs, reduce activity durations, and improve
the quality of the deliverables. Some application areas require additional
financial analysis to help predict project performance. Techniques such as
payback analysis, return on investment, and discounted cash flows are a few of
the tools used to accomplish this.

Project Quality Management
The Project Quality Management Knowledge Area is composed of three
processes, as shown in Table 2.5.
Table 2.5 Project Quality Management
       Process Name                  Project Management Process Group
       Plan Quality Management       Planning
       Perform Quality Assurance     Executing
       Control Quality               Monitoring and Controlling

The Project Quality Management Knowledge Area assures that the project meets
the requirements that it was undertaken to produce. This Knowledge Area
focuses on product quality as well as on the quality of the project management
processes used during the project. These processes measure overall performance
and monitor project results and compare them to the quality standards set out in
the project-planning process to ensure that the customers will receive the
product, service, or result they commissioned.

Project Human Resource Management
The Project Human Resource Management Knowledge Area consists of four
processes, as shown in Table 2.6.
Table 2.6 Project Human Resource Management
  Process Name                          Project Management Process Group
  Plan Human Resource Management        Planning
  Acquire Project Team                  Executing
  Develop Project Team                  Executing
  Manage Project Team                   Executing
Project Human Resource Management involves all aspects of people
management and personal interaction, including leading, coaching, dealing with
conflict, conducting performance appraisals, and more. These processes ensure
that the human resources assigned to the project are used in the most effective
way possible. Some of the project participants on whom you'll practice these
skills are stakeholders, team members, and customers. Each requires the use of
skills are stakeholders, team members, and customers. Each requires the use of
different communication styles, leadership skills, and team-building skills. A
good project manager knows when to enact certain skills and communication
styles based on the situation.
Projects are unique and temporary, and project teams usually are too. Teams are
built based on the skills and resources needed to complete the activities of the
project, and many times project team members might not know one another. The
earlier you can involve team members on the project, the better because you'll
want the benefit of their knowledge and expertise during the planning processes.
Their participation early on will also help assure their buy-in to the project.
Because the makeup of each team is different and the stakeholders involved in
the various stages of the project might change, you'll use different techniques at
different times throughout the project to manage the processes in this
Knowledge Area.

Project Communications Management
The processes in the Project Communications Management Knowledge Area are
related to general communication skills, but they encompass much more than an
exchange of information. Communication skills are considered interpersonal
skills that the project manager utilizes on a daily basis. The processes in the
Project Communications Management Knowledge Area seek to ensure that all
project information--including plans, risk assessments, meeting notes, and more
--is collected, organized, stored, and distributed to stakeholders, management,
and project members at the proper time. When the project is closed, the
information is archived and used as a reference for future projects. This is
referred to as historical information in several project processes.
Everyone on the project has some involvement with this Knowledge Area
because all project members will send and/or receive project communication
throughout the life of the project. It is important that all team members and
stakeholders understand how communication affects the project.
Three processes make up the Project Communications Management Knowledge
Area, as shown in Table 2.7.
Table 2.7 Project Communications Management
  Process Name                   Project Management Process Group
  Plan Communications Management Planning
  Manage Communications          Executing
  Manage Communications                Executing

  Control Communications               Monitoring and Controlling


 Time to Communicate
 Project Communications Management is probably the most important
 Knowledge Area on any project, and most project managers understand the
 importance of good communication skills and making sure stakeholders are
 informed of project status. I know a project manager who had difficulties
 getting time with the project sponsor. The project sponsor agreed to meet
 with the project manager, even set up the meetings himself, and then
 canceled them or simply didn't show up. The poor project manager was at
 her wits' end about how to communicate with the sponsor and get some
 answers to the questions she had. Her desk was not far outside the project
 sponsor's office. One day as she peeked around the corner of her cube, she
 decided if the sponsor wouldn't come to her, she would go to him. From then
 on, every time the sponsor left his office, she would jump up from her chair
 and ride with him on the elevator. He was a captive audience. She was able
 to get some easy questions answered and finally convince him, after the
 fourth or fifth elevator ride, that they needed regular face-to-face meetings.
 She understood the importance of communication and went to great lengths
 to make certain the sponsor did too.


Project Risk Management
TheProject Risk Management Knowledge Area, as shown in Table 2.8, contains
six processes.
Table 2.8 Project Risk Management
  Process Name                         Project Management Process Group
  Plan Risk Management                 Planning
  Identify Risks                       Planning
  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis    Planning
  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis   Planning
  Plan Risk Responses                  Planning
  Control Risk                         Monitoring and Controlling
  Control Risk                         Monitoring and Controlling
Risks include both threats to and opportunities to the project. The processes in
this Knowledge Area are concerned with identifying, analyzing, and planning for
potential risks, both positive and negative, that might impact the project. This
means minimizing the probability and impact of negative risks while
maximizing the probability and impact of positive risks. These processes are also
used to identify the positive consequences of risks and exploit them to improve
project objectives or discover efficiencies that might improve project
performance.
Project managers will often combine several of these processes into one step.
For example, Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis might be
performed at the same time. The important factor of the Project Risk
Management Knowledge Area is that you should strive to identify all the risks
and develop responses for those with the greatest consequences to the project
objectives.

Project Procurement Management
Four processes are in the Project Procurement Management Knowledge Area, as
shown in Table 2.9.
Table 2.9 Project Procurement Management
     Process Name                    Project Management Process Group
     Plan Procurement Management     Planning
     Conduct Procurements            Executing
     Control Procurements            Monitoring and Controlling
     Close Procurements              Closing
The Project Procurement Management Knowledge Area includes the processes
involved with purchasing goods or services from vendors, contractors, suppliers,
and others outside the project team. As such, these processes involve negotiating
and managing contracts and other procurement vehicles and managing changes
to the contract or work order. When discussing the Project Procurement
Management processes, it's assumed that the discussion is taking place from
your perspective as a buyer, while sellers are external to the project team.
Interestingly, the seller might manage their work as a project, particularly when
the work is performed on contract, and you as the buyer become a key
stakeholder in their project.
Project Stakeholder Management
There are four processes in the Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge
Area, as shown in Table 2.10.
Table 2.10 Project Stakeholder Management
    Process name                        Project management process group
    Identify Stakeholders               Initiating
    Plan Stakeholder Management         Planning
    Manage Stakeholder Engagement Executing
    Control Stakeholder Engagement Monitoring and Controlling

The Project Stakeholder Management Knowledge Area is concerned with
identifying all of the stakeholders associated with the project, both internal and
external to the organization. These processes also assess stakeholder needs,
expectations, and involvement on the project and seek to keep the lines of
communication with stakeholders open and clear. Remember from Chapter 1
that the definition of a successful project is one where the stakeholders are
satisfied. These processes assure that stakeholder expectations are met and that
their satisfaction is a successful deliverable of the project.
The remainder of this book will deal with processes and process groups as they
occur in order (that is, Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and
Controlling, and Closing), because this is the way you will encounter and
manage them during a project.

Understanding How Projects Come About
Your company's quarterly meeting is scheduled for today. You take your seat,
and each of the department heads gets up and gives their usual "We can do it"
rah-rah speech, one after the other. You sit up a little straighter when the CEO
takes the stage. He starts his part of the program pretty much the same way the
other department heads did, and before long, you find yourself drifting off. You
are mentally reviewing the status of your current project when suddenly your
daydreaming trance is shattered. You perk up as you hear the CEO say, "And the
new phone system will be installed by Thanksgiving."
Wait a minute. You work in the telecom department and haven't heard a word
about this project until today. You also have a funny feeling that you've been
elected to manage this project. It's amazing how good communication skills are
so important for project managers but not for . . . well, we won't go there.
Project initiation is the formal recognition that a project, or the next phase in an
existing project, should begin and resources should be committed to the project.
Unfortunately, many projects are initiated the way the CEO did in this example.
Each of us, at one time or another, has experienced being handed a project with
little to no information and told to "make it happen." The new phone system
scenario is an excellent example of how not to initiate a project.
Taking one step back leads you to ask, "How do projects come about in the first
place? Do CEOs just make them up like in this example?" Even though your
CEO announced this new project at the company meeting with no forewarning,
no doubt it came about as a result of a legitimate need. Believe it or not, CEOs
don't dream up projects just to give you something to do. They're concerned
about the future of the company and the needs of the business and its customers.
The business might drive the need for a project, customers might demand
changes to products, or legal requirements might create the need for a new
project. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, projects come about as a result of
one of seven needs or demands. Once those needs and demands are identified,
the next logical step might include performing a feasibility study to determine
the viability of the project. I'll cover these topics next.

Needs and Demands
Organizations exist to generate profits or serve the public. To stay competitive,
organizations are always examining new ways of creating business, gaining
efficiencies, or serving their customers. Sometimes laws are passed to force
organizations to make their products safer or to make them less harmful to the
environment. Projects might result from any of these needs as well as from
business requirements, opportunities, or problems. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, most projects will fit one of the seven needs and demands described next.
The needs and demands are documented in the business case, which is an input
to the Develop Project Charter process. Let's take a closer look at each of these
areas:
Market Demand The demands of the marketplace can drive the need for a
project. For example, a bank initiates a project to offer customers the ability to
apply for mortgage loans over the Internet because of a drop in interest rates and
an increase in demand for refinancing and new home loans.
Strategic Opportunity/Business Need The new phone system talked about
earlier that was announced at the quarterly meeting came about as a result of a
business need. The CEO, on advice from his staff, was advised that call volumes
were maxed on the existing system. Without a new system, customer service
response times would suffer, and that would eventually affect the bottom line.
Customer Request Customer requests run the gamut. Generally speaking,
most companies have customers, and their requests can drive new projects.
Customers can be internal or external to the organization. Government agencies
don't have external customers per se (we're captive customers at any rate), but
there are internal customers within departments and across agencies.
Perhaps you work for a company that sells remittance-processing equipment and
you've just landed a contract with a local utility company. This project is driven
by the need of the utility company to automate its process or upgrade its existing
process. The utility company's request to purchase your equipment and
consulting services is the project driver.
Technological Advance Many of us own a smartphone that keeps names and
addresses handy along with a calendar, a to-do list, and a plethora of other apps
to help organize our day or add a little fun in between meetings. I couldn't live
without mine. However, a newer, better version is always coming to market.
Satellite communications, bigger screens, thinner bodies, touch screens, video
streaming, and more are all examples of technological advances. Electronics
manufacturers are continually revamping and reinventing their products to take
advantage of new technology (thank you!).
Legal Requirement Private industry and government agencies both generate
new projects as a result of laws passed during every legislative season. For
example, new sales tax or healthcare laws might require changes to the computer
programs that support these systems. The requirement that food labels on
packaging describe the ingredients in the product, the calories, and the
recommended daily allowances is another example of legal requirements that
drive a project.
Environmental Considerations Many organizations today are undergoing a
"greening" effort to reduce energy consumption, save fuel, reduce their carbon
footprint, and so on. Another example might include manufacturing or
processing plants that voluntarily remove their waste products from water prior
to putting the water back into a local river or stream to prevent contamination.
These are examples of environmental considerations that result in projects.
Social Need The last need is a result of social demands. For example, perhaps
a developing country is experiencing a fast-spreading disease that's infecting
large portions of the population. Medical supplies and facilities are needed to
vaccinate and treat those infected with the disease.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand the needs and demands that bring about a project. All of these
  needs and demands represent opportunities, business requirements, or
  problems that need to be solved. Each may also introduce risk to the project.
  Management must decide how to respond to these needs and demands,
  which will more often than not initiate new projects.




         Real World Scenario

  Project Initiation
  Corey is an information technology manager who works for the National
  Park Service. One warm spring Sunday morning he is perusing the local
  newspaper online and comes across an article about new services being
  offered at some of the national parks. He perks up when he sees his boss's
  name describing the changing nature of technology and how it impacts the
  types of services the public would like to see at the parks. Corey knows that
  the public has been asking when wireless Internet services will be available
  in some of the larger parks and has also been involved in the discussions
  about the resources needed to make this happen, but the project never has
  enough steam to get off the ground. It seems that a higher-priority project
  always takes precedence. However, all that changes when Corey sees the
  next sentence in the article: his boss promising wireless access in two of the
  largest parks in their region by July 4th. It looks like the customer requests
  have finally won out, and Corey has just learned he has a new project on his
  hands.
Feasibility Studies
After the opportunity for a project becomes evident, the next step might be to
initiate it, which means you're ready to jump right into creating a project charter
for the project. Before you take that plunge, you should know that some
organizations will require a feasibility study prior to making a final decision
about starting the project.
Feasibility studies are undertaken for several reasons. One is to determine
whether the project is a viable project. A second reason is to determine the
probability of the project succeeding. Feasibility studies can also examine the
viability of the product, service, or result of the project. For example, the study
might ask, "Will the new lemon-flavored soda be a hit? Is it marketable?" The
study might also look at the technical issues related to the project and determine
whether the technology proposed is feasible, reliable, and easily assimilated into
the organization's existing technology structure.
Feasibility studies might be conducted as separate projects, as subprojects, or as
the first phase of a project. Sometimes, you'll have a basic feel for the way the
study may turn out and you could consider making the feasibility study the first
phase of the project. When you don't have any preconceived ideas about the
outcome of the study, it's best to treat it as a separate project. The group of
people conducting the feasibility study should not be the same people who will
work on the project. Project team members might have built-in biases toward the
project and will tend to influence the feasibility outcome toward those biases.




  It's always a good idea to meet with the sponsor, customer, and other subject
  matter experts when evaluating the feasibility of new products or services.




         Real World Scenario

  The Interactive Voice Response (IVR) Tax-Filing System
 Jason, Sam, and Kate are web programmers working for the Department of
 Revenue in the State of Bliss. Ron, their manager, approaches them one day
 with an idea.
 "Team, business unit managers think it would be a great idea to offer
 taxpayers the ability to file their income tax returns over the telephone. We
 already offer them the ability to file on the Internet, thanks to all your efforts
 on that project last year. It has been a fabulous success. No other state has
 had the success that Bliss has had with our Internet system."
 "Kate, I know you've had previous experience with IVR technology, but I'm
 not sure about you guys, so this is new territory for us. I'd like to hear what
 each of you thinks about this project."
 Jason speaks up first. "I think it's a great idea. You know me; I'm always up
 for learning new things, especially when it comes to programming. When
 can we start?"
 Sam echoes Jason's comments.
 "This technology is pretty sophisticated," Kate says. "Jason and Sam are
 excellent coders and could work on the programming side of things, but I
 would have to pick up the telephony piece on my own. After we're up and
 running, we could go over the telephony portions step-by-step, so Jason and
 Sam could help me support it going forward. I'd really like to take on this
 project. It would be good for the team and good for the department."
 Ron thinks for a minute. "Let's not jump right into this. I know you're
 anxious to get started, but I think a feasibility study is in order. The senior
 director of the tax business unit doesn't know whether this project is cost
 justified and has some concerns about its life span. A feasibility study will
 tell us the answers to those questions. It should also help us determine
 whether we're using the right technology to accomplish our goals, and it will
 outline alternative ways of performing the project that we haven't
 considered. I don't want Kate going it alone without first examining all the
 issues and potential impacts to the organization."


Performing Project Selection and Assessment
Most organizations don't have the luxury of performing every project that's
proposed. Even consulting organizations that sell their project management
services must pick and choose the projects on which they want to work.
Selection and evaluation methods help organizations decide among alternative
Selection and evaluation methods help organizations decide among alternative
projects and determine the tangible benefits to the company of choosing or not
choosing a project.
How projects are assessed will vary depending on the company, the people
serving on the selection committee, the criteria used, and the project.
Assessments are usually performed first by examining the information presented
about the project and developing an understanding of the key deliverables
required for success. Reviewing past projects of similar size and scope,
including reviewing the lessons learned while performing those projects, will
help in determining whether the project is achievable given the known
assumptions and constraints. Sometimes the criteria for selection methods will
be purely financial, sometimes purely marketing, and sometimes they'll be based
on public perception or political perception. In most cases, the decision is based
on a combination of all these and more.
Most organizations have a formal, or at least semiformal, process for selecting
and prioritizing projects. In my organization, a steering committee is responsible
for project review, selection, and prioritization. A steering committee is a group
of folks consisting of senior managers and sometimes mid-level managers who
represent each of the functional areas in the organization.
Here's how our process works: The steering committee requests project ideas
from the business staff and other subject matter experts prior to the beginning of
the fiscal year. These project ideas are submitted in writing and contain a high-
level overview of the project goals, a description of the deliverables, the business
justification for the project, a desired implementation date, what the organization
stands to gain from implementing the project, a list of the functional business
areas affected by the project, and (if applicable) a cost-benefit analysis (I'll talk
about that in a bit).
A meeting is called to review the projects, and a determination is made on each
project about whether it will be included on the upcoming list of projects for the
new year. Once the no-go projects have been weeded out, the remaining projects
are prioritized according to their importance and benefit to the organization. The
projects are documented on an official project list, and progress is reported on
the active projects at the regular monthly steering committee meetings.
In theory, it's a great idea. In practice, it works only moderately well. Priorities
can and do change throughout the year. New projects come up that weren't
originally submitted during the call for projects, and they must be added to the
list. Reprioritization begins anew, and resource alignment and assignments are
shuffled. But again, I'm getting ahead of myself. Just be aware that organizations
shuffled. But again, I'm getting ahead of myself. Just be aware that organizations
usually have a process to recognize and screen project requests, accept or reject
those requests based on some selection criteria, and prioritize the projects based
on some criteria.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to PMI(R), project selection is outside the scope of the project
  manager's role. In reality, the project manager often participates in the
  decision and assists with analysis and selection methods. For the exam,
  remember that project selection is performed by the project sponsor,
  customer, or subject matter experts.

I'll discuss several project selection methods next. You may encounter a question
or two on the exam regarding these methods, but keep in mind that while you
will conduct selection analysis with your stakeholders using the techniques
outlined next, the actual selection of the projects is outside the scope of the
project manager's duties. The stakeholders and or the project sponsor will select
the projects the organization will undertake.
Selection methods are one way the stakeholders may choose between projects.
The individual opinions, and power, of selection committee members also play a
part in the projects the organization chooses to perform. Don't underestimate the
importance of the authority, political standing, and individual aspirations of
selection committee members. Those committee members who happen to carry a
lot of weight in company circles, so to speak, are likely to get their projects
approved just because they are who they are. This is sometimes how project
selection works in my organization. How about yours?

Using Project Selection Methods
Project selection methods are concerned with the advantages or merits of the
product of the project. In other words, selection methods measure the value of
what the product, service, or result of the project will produce and how it will
benefit the organization. Selection methods involve the types of concerns about
which executive managers are typically thinking. This includes factors such as
market share, financial benefits, return on investment, customer retention and
loyalty, and public perceptions. Most of these are reflected in the organization's
strategic goals. Projects, whether large or small, should always be weighed
against the strategic plan. If the project doesn't help the organization reach its
goals (increased market share, for example), or if it doesn't align with the
organization's expected business values, then the project probably shouldn't be
undertaken.
There are generally two categories of selection methods: mathematical models
(also known as calculation methods) and benefit measurement methods (also
known as benefit analysis techniques and decision models). Decision models
examine different criteria used in making decisions regarding project selection,
whereas calculation methods provide a way to calculate the value of the project,
which is then used in project-selection decision making.

Mathematical Models
For the exam, all you need to understand about mathematical models is that they
use linear, dynamic, integer, nonlinear, and/or multi-objective programming in
the form of algorithms--or in other words, a specific set of steps to solve a
particular problem. These are complicated mathematical formulas and
algorithms that are beyond the scope of this book and require an engineering,
statistical, or mathematical background to fully understand. Organizations
considering undertaking projects of enormous complexity might use
mathematical modeling techniques to make decisions regarding these projects.
Mathematical models are also known as constrained optimization methods. The
vast majority of project selection techniques will use the benefit measurement
methods to make project selection decisions.

  Exam Spotlight
  Project selection methods are also used to evaluate and choose between
  alternative ways of performing the project.


Benefit Measurement Methods
Benefit measurement methods employ various forms of analysis and
comparative approaches to make project decisions. These methods include
comparative approaches such as cost-benefit analysis, scoring models, and
benefit contribution methods that include various cash flow techniques and
economic models. You'll examine several of these methods, starting with cost-
benefit analysis.
  Exam Spotlight
  Benefit analysis is used to ensure that the project undergoing evaluation
  aligns with the organization's strategic goals and returns the business value
  the stakeholders are expecting.


Cost-Benefit Analysis
One common benefit measurement method is the cost-benefit analysis. The
name of this method implies what it does--it compares the cost to produce the
product, service, or result of the project to the benefit (usually financial in the
form of savings or revenue generation) that the organization will receive as a
result of executing the project. Obviously, a sound project choice is one where
the costs to implement or produce the product of the project are less than the
financial benefits. How much less is the organization's decision. Some
companies are comfortable with a small margin, whereas others are comfortable
with a much larger margin between the two figures.




  Cost-benefit analysis is also known as benefit/cost analysis. The techniques
  are the same. Benefit/cost has a more positive connotation because it shows
  the benefit, or the good stuff, before the cost, which is the not-so-good stuff.

When examining costs for a cost-benefit analysis, include the costs to produce
the product or service, the costs to take the product to market, and the ongoing
operational support costs. For example, let's say your company is considering
writing and marketing a database software product that will allow banks to
dissect their customer base, determine which types of customers buy which types
of products, and then market more effectively to those customers. You will take
into account some of the following costs:
   The costs to develop the software, such as programmer costs, hardware costs,
   and testing costs
   Marketing costs such as advertising, traveling costs to perform demos at
   potential customer sites, and so on
   Ongoing costs such as having a customer support staff available during
   business hours to assist customers with product questions and problems
Let's say the cost to produce this software, plus the ongoing support costs, total
$5 million. Initial projections look like the demand for this product is high. Over
a three-year period, which is the potential life of the software in its proposed
form, projected revenues are $12 million. Taking only the financial information
into account, the benefits outweigh the costs of this project. This project should
receive a go recommendation.




  Projects of significant cost or complexity usually involve more than one
  benefit measurement method when go or no-go decisions are being made or
  one project is being chosen over another. Keep in mind that selection
  methods can take subjective considerations into account as well--the project
  is a go because it's the new CEO's pet project; nothing else needs to be said.


Scoring Models
Another project selection technique in the benefit measurement category is a
scoring model, or weighted scoring model. My organization uses weighted
scoring models not only to choose between projects but also as a method to
choose between competing bids on outsourced projects.
Weighted scoring models are quite simple. The project selection committee
decides on the criteria that will be used on the scoring model--for example,
profit potential, marketability of the product or service, ability of the company to
quickly and easily produce the product or service, and so on. Each of these
criteria is assigned a weight depending on its importance to the project
committee. More important criteria should carry a higher weight than less
important criteria.
Then each project is rated on a scale from 1 to 5 (or some such assignment), with
the higher number being the more desirable outcome to the company and the
lower number having the opposite effect. This rating is then multiplied by the
weight of the criteria factor and added to other weighted criteria scores for a total
weighted score. Table 2.11 shows an example that brings this together.
Table 2.11 Weighted scoring model
Criteria         Weight Project     Project   Project   Project   Project   Project
                        A           A         B         B         C         C
                        Score*      Totals    Score*    Totals    Score*    Totals
Profit potential 5      5           25        5         25        3         15
Marketability 3         4           12        3         9         4         12
Ease to         1          4        4         3         3         2         2
produce/support
Weighted score --          --       41        --        37        --        29
*5 = highest

In this example, Project A is the obvious choice.

Cash Flow Analysis Techniques
The remaining benefit measurement methods involve a variety of cash flow
analysis techniques, including payback period, discounted cash flows, net
present value, and internal rate of return. We'll look at each of these techniques
individually, and I'll provide you with a crash course on their meanings and
calculations.

Payback Period
The payback period is the length of time it takes the company to recoup the
initial costs of producing the product, service, or result of the project. This
method compares the initial investment to the cash inflows expected over the life
of the product, service, or result. For example, say the initial investment on a
project is $200,000, with expected cash inflows of $25,000 per quarter every
quarter for the first two years and $50,000 per quarter from then on. The
payback period is two years and can be calculated as follows:
   Initial investment = $200,000
   Cash inflows = $25,000 x 4 (quarters in a year) = $100,000 per year total
   inflow
   Initial investment ($200,000) - year 1 inflows ($100,000) = $100,000
   remaining balance
   Year 1 inflows remaining balance - year 2 inflows = $0
   Total cash flow year 1 and year 2 = $200,000
   Total cash flow year 1 and year 2 = $200,000
The payback is reached in two years.
The fact that inflows are $50,000 per quarter starting in year 3 makes no
difference because payback is reached in two years.
The payback period is the least precise of all the cash flow calculations. That's
because the payback period does not consider the value of the cash inflows made
in later years, commonly called the time value of money. For example, if you
have a project with a five-year payback period, the cash inflows in year 5 are
worth less than they are if you received them today. The next section will
explain this idea more fully.

Discounted Cash Flows
As I just stated, money received in the future is worth less than money received
today. The reason for that is the time value of money. If I borrowed $2,000 from
you today and promised to pay it back in three years, you would expect me to
pay interest in addition to the original amount borrowed. If you were a family
member or a close friend, maybe you wouldn't, but ordinarily this is the way it
works. You would have had the use of the $2,000 had you not lent it to me. If
you had invested the money (does this bring back memories of your mom telling
you to save your money?), you'd receive a return on it. Therefore, the future
value of the $2,000 you lent me today is $2,315.25 in three years from now at
5 percent interest per year. Here's the formula for future value calculations:
   FV = PV(1 + i)n
In English, this formula says the future value (FV) of the investment equals the
present value (PV) times (1 plus the interest rate) raised to the value of the
number of time periods (n) the interest is paid. Let's plug in the numbers:
   FV = $2,000(1 + .05)3
   FV = $2,000(1.157625)
   FV = $2,315.25
The discounted cash flow technique compares the value of the future cash flows
of the project to today's dollars. To calculate discounted cash flows, you need to
know the value of the investment in today's terms, or the PV. PV is calculated as
follows:
   PV = FV/(1 + i)n
This is the reverse of the FV formula talked about earlier. So, if you ask the
This is the reverse of the FV formula talked about earlier. So, if you ask the
question, "What is $2,315.25 in three years from now worth today given a 5
percent interest rate?" you'd use the preceding formula. Let's try it:
   PV = $2,315.25/(1 + .05)3
   PV = $2,315.25/1.157625
   PV = $2,000
$2,315.25 in three years from now is worth $2,000 today.
Discounted cash flow is calculated just like this for the projects you're
comparing for selection purposes or when considering alternative ways of doing
the project. Apply the PV formula to the projects you're considering, and then
compare the discounted cash flows of all the projects against each other to make
a selection. Here is an example comparison of two projects using this technique:
   Project A is expected to make $100,000 in two years.
   Project B is expected to make $120,000 in three years.
If the cost of capital is 12 percent, which project should you choose?
Using the PV formula used previously, calculate each project's worth:
   The PV of Project A = $79,719
   The PV of Project B = $85,414
Project B is the project that will return the highest investment to the company
and should be chosen over Project A.

Net Present Value
Projects might begin with a company investing some amount of money into the
project to complete and accomplish its goals. In return, the company expects to
receive revenues, or cash inflows, from the resulting project. Net present value
(NPV) allows you to calculate an accurate value for the project in today's dollars.
The mathematical formula for NPV is complicated, and you do not need to
memorize it in that form for the test. However, you do need to know how to
calculate NPV for the exam, so I've given you some examples of a less
complicated way to perform this calculation in Table 2.12 and Table 2.13 using
the formulas you've already seen.
Table 2.12 Project A
                        Year              Inflows     PV

                        1                 10,000       8,929
                        2                 15,000      11,958
                        3                5,000    3,559
                        Total           30,000 24,446
                        Less investment       -- 24,000
                        NPV                      --        446

Table 2.13 Project B
                       Year              Inflows      PV
                       1                   7,000       6,250
                       2                  13,000      10,364
                       3                  10,000       7,118
                       Total              30,000      23,732
                       Less investment          --    24,000
                       NPV                      --       (268)
Net present value works like discounted cash flows in that you bring the value of
future monies received into today's dollars. With NPV, you evaluate the cash
inflows using the discounted cash flow technique applied to each period the
inflows are expected instead of in one sum. The initial investment is then
deducted from the sum of the present value of the cash flows to determine NPV.
NPV assumes that cash inflows are reinvested at the cost of capital.
Here's the rule: If the NPV calculation is greater than 0, accept the project. If the
NPV calculation is less than 0, reject the project.
Look at the two project examples in Table 2.12 and Table 2.13. Project A and
Project B have total cash inflows that are the same at the end of the project, but
the amount of inflows at each period differs for each project. We'll stick with a
12 percent cost of capital. Note that the PV calculations were rounded to whole
numbers.
Project A has an NPV greater than 0 and should be accepted. Project B has an
NPV less than 0 and should be rejected. When you get a positive value for NPV,
it means that the project will earn a return at least equal to or greater than the
cost of capital.
cost of capital.
Another note on NPV calculations: Projects with high returns early in the project
are better projects than projects with lower returns early in the project. In the
preceding examples, Project A fits this criterion also.

Internal Rate of Return
The internal rate of return (IRR) is the most difficult equation to calculate of all
the cash flow techniques we've discussed. It is a complicated formula and should
be performed on a financial calculator or computer. IRR can be figured
manually, but it's a trial-and-error approach to get to the answer.
Technically speaking, IRR is the discount rate when the present value of the cash
inflows equals the original investment. When choosing between projects or
when choosing alternative methods of doing the project, projects with higher
IRR values are generally considered better than projects with low IRR values.

  Exam Spotlight

  Although the PMBOK(R) Guide doesn't specifically address project selection
  methods or cash flow techniques, you may see exam questions on these
  topics.




  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, you need to know three facts concerning IRR:
      IRR is the discount rate when NPV equals 0.
      IRR assumes that cash inflows are reinvested at the IRR value.
      You should choose projects with the highest IRR value.


Applying Project Selection Methods
Now that we've discussed some of the project selection techniques, let's look at
how to apply them when choosing projects or project alternatives. You can use
one of the benefit measurement methods alone or in combination with others to
come up with a selection decision. Remember that payback period is the least
precise of all the cash flow techniques, NPV is the most conservative cash flow
technique, and NPV and IRR will generally bring you to the same accept/reject
conclusion.
You can use project selection methods, and particularly the benefit measurement
methods, to evaluate multiple projects or a single project. You might be
weighing one project against another or simply considering whether the project
you're proposing is worth performing.



         Real World Scenario

  Fun Days Vacation Resorts
  Nick is a project manager for Fun Days Vacation Resorts. He is working on
  three different project proposals to present to the executive steering
  committee for review. As part of the information-gathering process, Nick
  visits the various resorts pretending to be a guest. This gives him a feel for
  what Fun Days guests experience on their vacations, and it better prepares
  him to present project particulars and alternatives.
  Nick has prepared the project overviews for three projects and called on the
  experts in marketing to help him out with the projected revenue figures. He
  works up the numbers and finds the following:
     Project A: payback period = 5 years; IRR = 8 percent
     Project B: payback period = 3.5 years; IRR = 3 percent
     Project C: payback period = 2 years; IRR = 3 percent
  Funding exists for only one of the projects. Nick recommends Project A and
  predicts that this is the project the steering committee will choose since the
  projects are mutually exclusive.
  Nick's turn to present comes up at the steering committee. Let's listen in on
  the action:
  "On top of all the benefits I've just described, Project A provides an IRR of 8
  percent, a full 5 percent higher than the other two projects we discussed. I
  recommend the committee chooses Project A."
  "Thank you, Nick," Jane says. "Good presentation." Jane is the executive
  chairperson of the steering committee and has the authority to break ties or
  make final decisions when the committee can't seem to agree.
  "However, here at Fun Days we like to have our fun sooner rather than
  later." Chuckles ensue from the steering committee. They've all heard this
  before. "I do agree that an 8 percent IRR is a terrific return, but the payback
  is just too far out into the future. There are too many risks and unknowns for
  us to take on a project with a payback period this long. As you know, our
  industry is directly impacted by the health of the economy. Anything can
  happen in five years' time. I think we're much better off going with Project
  C. I recommend we accept Project C. Committee members, do you have
  anything to add?"


Kicking Off the Project Charter
Your first stop in the Initiating process group is a process called Develop Project
Charter. As the name of the process suggests, your purpose is to create a project
charter. As I talked about in Chapter 1, the purpose for the Initiating process
group is to authorize a project, or the next phase of a project, to begin. It also
gives the project manager the authority to apply resources to the project. These
are also the purposes of a project charter: formally authorizing the project to
begin and committing resources.




  The charter contains several elements that I'll discuss in the section
  "Formalizing and Publishing the Project Charter" later in this chapter.




  Exam Spotlight
  The project charter (which is an output of the Develop Project Charter
  process) is the written acknowledgment that the project exists. The project
  charter documents the name of the project manager and gives that person the
  authority to assign organizational resources to the project. The project is
  authority to assign organizational resources to the project. The project is
  officially authorized when the project charter is signed by the project
  sponsor.

As you'll discover, every process has inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs,
and this one is no exception. You'll start with the inputs. Let's get to it.
Inputs to the project management processes are typically documents or other
forms of information that are key to the process. They come from one of two
places: they are outputs from a previously completed process, or they are
produced outside the project. Inputs are used in combination with the tools and
techniques to produce the outputs of each process. Process outputs are usually
tangible, such as a report or an update or a list, for example. To get to the output,
you have to start with the inputs. Let's take a look at the Develop Project Charter
process inputs:
   Project statement of work
   Business case
   Agreements
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets

Project Statement of Work
The project statement of work (SOW) describes the product, service, or result the
project was undertaken to complete. When the project is internal, this document
is usually written by either the project sponsor or the initiator of the project.
When the project is external to the organization, the buyer typically writes the
SOW. For example, suppose you work for a consulting firm and have been
assigned as the project manager for a project your company is performing on
contract. The customer, the organization you'll be performing the project for, is
the one who writes the SOW.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, a project SOW should contain or consider the
following elements:
Business Need The business need for the project relates to the needs of the
organization itself. The need might be based on governmental regulation,
technological advances, market demands, or a legal requirement.
Product Scope Description The product scope description describes the
characteristics of the product, service, or result of the project. The product scope
description should be documented and should also include a description of the
relationship between the business need or demand that's driving the project and
the products being created.
Product descriptions contain less detail in the early phases of a project and more
detail as the project progresses. Product scope descriptions, like the work of the
project, are progressively elaborated. They will contain the greatest amount of
detail in the project's Executing processes.
When a project is performed under contract, typically the buyer of the product or
service will provide the product description to the vendor or contractor. The
product description can serve as a statement of work when the project is
contracted to a vendor. A statement of work describes the product, service, or
result in enough detail that the vendor can accurately price the contract and
satisfactorily fulfill the requirements of the project.
Strategic Plan Part of the responsibility of a project manager during the
Initiating processes is to take into consideration the company's strategic plan.
Perhaps the strategic plan states that one of the company goals is to build 15 new
stores by the end of the next fiscal year. If your project entails implementing a
new inventory software system, it makes sense to write the requirements for
your project with the 15 new stores in mind. Your management team will refer
to the strategic plan when choosing which new projects to initiate and which
ones to drop, depending on their relationship to the strategic vision of the
company.

Business Case
The purpose of a business case is to understand the business need for the project
and determine whether the investment in the project is worthwhile. The business
case often describes the cost-benefit analysis and the business need or demand
that brought about the project.
Performing a feasibility study is a great first step in building the business case.
The feasibility study will examine the needs and demands of the business,
marketing opportunities, costs, risks, and more while taking into account the
given assumptions and constraints of the proposed products or services. Once the
feasibility study is completed, it's easy to build a business case based on the
findings of the study. Most sound business case documents contain the following
elements:
   Description of the business need for the project, including how the project
   aligns with the organization's strategic vision. This description should
   include the business need or demand that's driving the project and may note
   the feasibility study findings. This section should also include a description
   of the impact to the organization if the project is not undertaken.
   Description of any special requirements that must be met, such as
   compliance requirements, legal requirements, government regulations, and
   so on.
   Description of alternative solutions. This should include a high-level
   description of costs, the feasibility of implementing each alternative, and a
   description of any impacts to the organization as a result of this solution.
   (Cost-benefit, payback, and other financial analyses are generally included in
   this section of the business case.)
   Description of the expected results of each alternative solution.
   Cost-benefit analysis.
   Recommended solution.




  Remember that when your selection committee is analyzing the business
  case, discussing initial funding requirements, and approving the business
  case (and thus triggering the Develop Project Charter process), they are
  completing these activities outside the boundaries of the project. Typically,
  the project team is not involved at this stage. In other words, the project isn't
  a project until the project charter is approved, and the project charter cannot
  be started until the business case is approved.


Agreements
Agreements refer to documents that define the intent of the project and are
usually legal in nature. For example, a contract is an example of an agreement.
Other agreements might include a memorandum of understanding, emails, an
intergovernmental agency agreement, a verbal commitment, and so on. A
contract is applicable when you are performing a project for a customer external
to the organization. Agreements are an input to this process because they
typically document the conditions under which the project will be executed, the
typically document the conditions under which the project will be executed, the
time frame, and a description of the work.

Enterprise Environmental Factors
Enterprise environmental factors show up as input to many of the other
processes we'll discuss throughout the book. This input refers to the factors
outside the project that have (or might have) significant influence on the success
of the project. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the environmental factors may
include the following:
Organizational Culture, Structure, and Governance I talked about
organizational structures and their influence on the organization in Chapter 1.
Governmental or Industry Standards These include elements such as
regulatory standards and regulations (for instance, doctors must be licensed to
practice medicine on people or pets), quality standards (International Standards
Organization standards, for example), product standards, and workmanship
standards.
Infrastructure This refers to the organization's facilities and capital
equipment. I'll also include information technology in this category.
Human Resources This refers to the existing staff's skills and knowledge.
Personnel Administration These are guidelines for hiring and firing, training,
and employee performance reviews.
Organization's Work Authorization System This defines how the work of
the project is authorized.
Marketplace Conditions The old supply-and-demand theory applies here
along with economic and financial factors.
Stakeholder Risk Tolerances This is the level of risk stakeholders are willing
to take on. I'll talk more about this in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning."
Political Climate This concerns both the internal and external political climate
or influences on the project or organization.
Organization's Established Communications Channels These are the
mechanisms the organization uses to communicate both internally and
externally.
Commercial Databases       These refer to industry-specific information, risk
databases, and so on.
Project Management Information Systems These refer to software tools that
assist with managing projects, collecting and distributing project data,
scheduling projects, managing and controlling changes, and more.
Some or all of these factors can influence the way you manage the project and,
in some cases, the outcomes of the project. For example, perhaps the folks
assigned to your project are junior level and don't have the skills, experience, or
knowledge needed to complete the work of the project. It's up to the project
manager to understand the organization's environmental factors and account for
and consider how they can influence the management and outcomes of the
project.

Organizational Process Assets
Organizational process assets are the organization's policies, guidelines,
processes, procedures, plans, approaches, and standards for conducting work,
including project work. Organizational process assets are divided into two
categories: processes and procedures and corporate knowledge base. Processes
and procedures refers to a wide range of elements that might affect several
aspects of the project, such as project management policies, safety policies,
performance measurement criteria, templates, financial controls, communication
requirements, issue and defect management procedures, change control
procedures, risk control procedures, and the procedures used for authorizing
work.
Corporate knowledge base refers to items such as lessons learned, process
measurement databases, project files, and the information the organization has
learned on previous projects (including how to store and retrieve that
information). For example, previous project risks, performance measurements,
earned value data, and schedules for past projects are valuable resources of
knowledge for the current project. This information is also known as historical
information and it falls into the corporate knowledge base category. If you don't
capture and store this information, however, it won't be available when you're
starting a new project. You'll want to capture and store information such as
project financial data (budgets, costs, overruns), historical information, lessons
learned, project files, issues and defects, process measurements, and
configuration management knowledge.
  There are too many organizational process assets to cover in this chapter. I'll
  discuss many of them throughout the Planning chapters when a certain
  organizational process asset pertains to a specific process.

Organizational process assets and historical information should be reviewed and
examined when a new project is starting. Historical information can be useful to
project managers and to stakeholders. When you're evaluating new projects,
historical information about previous projects of a similar nature can be handy in
determining whether the new project should be accepted and initiated. Historical
information gathered and documented during an active project is used to assist in
determining whether the project should proceed to the next phase. Historical
information will help you with the project charter, project scope statement,
development of the project management plan, the process of defining and
estimating activities, and more during the project-planning processes.
Understanding previous projects of a similar nature--their problems, successes,
issues, and outcomes--will both help you avoid repeating mistakes and help you
reuse successful techniques to accomplish the goals of this project to the
satisfaction of the stakeholders. Many of the processes in the project
management process groups have organizational process assets as an input,
implying that you should review the pertinent organizational assets that apply for
the process you're about to start. For example, when performing the Estimate
Costs process, you might find it helpful to review the activity estimates and
budgets on past projects of similar size and scope before estimating the costs for
the activities on the new project.

  Exam Spotlight
  Remember that organizational process assets encompass many elements,
  including policies, guidelines, standards, historical information, and so on,
  and that they're divided into two categories: processes and procedures and
  corporate knowledge base. For the exam, make certain you understand what
  the organizational process assets entail and that you can differentiate them
  from the enterprise environmental factors input.


Tools and Techniques
Tools and techniques are multifaceted and include elements such as
brainstorming, meetings, focus groups, alternatives analysis, and much more.
brainstorming, meetings, focus groups, alternatives analysis, and much more.
Tools and techniques are used with the inputs of every process to produce the
outputs of that process. For example, in Develop Project Charter, the SOW,
business case, agreements, and other inputs are examined using the tools and
techniques of this process (expert judgment and facilitation techniques) to
produce the project charter, which is the only output of this process. Let's look at
the two tools and techniques of this process in more detail.
The concept behind expert judgment is to rely on individuals, or groups of
people, who have training, specialized knowledge, or skills in the areas you're
assessing. These folks might be stakeholders, consultants, other experts in the
organization, subject matter experts, the PMO, industry experts, or technical or
professional organizations. Expert judgment is a tool and technique used in other
processes as well.
In the case of developing a project charter, expert judgment would be helpful in
assessing the inputs of this process, the environmental factors, organizational
assets, and historical information. For example, as the project manager, you
might rely on the expertise of your executive committee to help you understand
how the proposed project gels with the strategic plan, or you might rely on team
members who have participated on similar projects in the past to make
recommendations regarding the proposed project.
Facilitation techniques is a tool used to help derive the final content of the
project charter. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the key facilitation techniques
you'll use in this process are brainstorming, managing meetings and keeping
them on track, resolving conflict, and resolving problems. Project managers and
others who serve as meeting facilitators should hone these skills as you will use
them often throughout the course of the project.

Formalizing and Publishing the Project Charter
The approved project charter is the official, written acknowledgment and
recognition that a project exists. It ties the work of the project with the ongoing
operations of the organization. It's usually signed by the project sponsor, it gives
the project manager the authority to assign organizational resources to the
project, and it shows commitment and acceptance of the project by the business
unit or organization.
The charter documents the business need or demand that the project was initiated
to address, and it includes a description of the product, service, or result of the
project. It is usually the first official document of the project once acceptance of
the project has been granted. Project charters are often used as a means to
introduce a project to the organization. Because this document outlines the high-
level project description, the business opportunity or need, and the project's
purpose, executive managers can get a first glance at the benefits of the project.
Good project charters that are well documented will address many of the
questions your stakeholders are likely to have up front.

Pulling the Project Charter Together
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, to create a useful and well-documented
project charter, you should include elements such as these:
   Purpose or justification for the project
   Project objectives that are measurable
   High-level list of requirements
   High-level description of the project
   High-level list of risks
   Milestone schedule (summary level)
   Budget (summary level)
   Criteria for project approval
   Name of the project manager and their authority levels
   Name of the sponsor (or authorizer of the project) and their authority levels
It is also helpful to include a high-level list of assumptions and constraints that
are known at the time the charter is developed. You should examine
organizational factors such as culture and past project successes, historical data,
information from experts within the organization, and other organizational
process assets when determining assumptions and constraints. These will be
further defined and documented in the project scope statement that's written later
in the Planning process.
For the exam, the important factors to remember about the project charter are
that it authorizes the project to begin; it authorizes the project manager to assign
resources to the project; it documents the business need, justification, and
impact; it describes the customer's requirements; it identifies key deliverables
based on the business requirements; it sets stakeholder expectations; it ensures
stakeholder agreement; and it ties the project to the ongoing work of the
stakeholder agreement; and it ties the project to the ongoing work of the
organization.
Let's take a brief look at the key stakeholders who might be involved with the
project charter and the role they'll play in its development and their role in the
project in the future.

Key Stakeholders
The PMBOK(R) Guide states that the project charter forms a partnership between
the organization requesting the project and the one performing the project. The
project charter should always be written before you begin the Planning process
group.




  The project charter will help assure that stakeholders' expectations are in
  alignment with the project scope and with the final results of the project.
  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, a project charter assures a well-defined
  start date for the project and provides a way for senior management to
  formally accept the project.

According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project charter is a document issued by
the person (or organization) who initiated the project or the project sponsor. My
experience has been that the project charter requires input from the key
stakeholders and is published and signed by the project sponsor. Once the
charter is signed, the project is formally authorized and work can begin.
Let's take a look at the roles of some of the key stakeholders and how they can
help contribute to creating a comprehensive project charter. I'll explain how to
identify the right stakeholders for your project in the next main section,
"Identifying Stakeholders."

Project Manager
The project manager is the person who assumes responsibility for the success of
the project. The project manager should be identified as early as possible in the
project and ideally should participate in writing the project charter.
The project charter identifies the project manager and describes the authority the
project manager has in carrying out the project. The project manager's primary
project manager has in carrying out the project. The project manager's primary
responsibilities are project planning and then executing and managing the work
of the project. By overseeing the project charter and the project planning
documents created later in the project, the project manager is assured that
everyone knows and understands what's expected of them and what constitutes a
successful project.
Project managers are responsible for setting the standards and policies for the
projects on which they work. As a project manager, it is your job to establish and
communicate the project procedures to the project team and stakeholders. In
turn, the project team is responsible for supporting you by performing the work
of the project.
Project managers will identify activities and tasks, resource requirements,
project costs, project requirements, performance measures, and more.
Communication and documentation must become the project manager's best
friends. Keeping stakeholders, the project sponsor, the project team, and all other
interested parties informed is "job one," as the famous car manufacturer's ads
say.

Project Sponsor
Have you ever attended a conference or event that was put on by a sponsor? In
the information technology field, software development companies often
sponsor conferences and seminars. The sponsor pays for the event, the facilities,
and the goodies and provides an opportunity for vendors to display their wares.
In return, the sponsor comes out looking like a winner. Because it is footing the
bill for all this fun, the sponsor gets to call the shots on conference content, and
it gets the prime spots for discussing its particular solutions. Last but not least, it
usually provides the keynote speaker and gets to present its information to a
captive audience.
Project sponsors are similar to this. In their role as project champions, they rally
support from stakeholders and the executive management team. They keep
projects front and center at the higher levels of the organization and are the
spokespeople for projects.
The project sponsor is usually an executive in the organization who has the
power and authority to make decisions and settle disputes or conflicts regarding
the project. The sponsor takes the project into the limelight, so to speak, and gets
to call the shots regarding project outcomes. The project sponsor is also the one
with the big bucks who provides funds for your project. The project sponsor
should be named in the project charter and identified as the final authority and
should be named in the project charter and identified as the final authority and
decision maker for project issues. Ultimately, the project sponsor is responsible
for facilitating the project's success.
Sponsors are actively involved in the Initiating and Planning phases of the
project and tend to have less involvement during the Execution and Monitoring
and Controlling phases. It's up to the project manager to keep the project sponsor
informed of all project activities, project progress, and any conflicts or issues
that arise. The sponsor is the one with the authority to resolve conflicts and set
priorities when these things can't be dealt with any other way.

Functional Managers
I covered functional managers briefly in Chapter 1. Project managers must work
with and gain the support of functional managers in order to complete the
project. Functional managers fulfill the administrative duties of the organization,
provide and assign staff members to projects, and conduct performance reviews
for their staff. It's a good idea to identify the functional managers who will be
working on project tasks or assigned project responsibilities in the charter.
It's also a good idea to identify the key project stakeholders in the project
charter. Although this isn't explicitly stated as part of this process, you'll see in
the next section that stakeholder influences make up one of the components of
the project charter. To identify stakeholder influences, it's also necessary to
identify the stakeholders and describe their roles in high-level terms as I've done
here.

  Exam Spotlight
  In some organizations, the project manager might write the project charter.
  However, if you (as the project manager) are asked to write the charter,
  remember that your name should not appear as the author. Because the
  project charter authorizes the project and authorizes you as the project
  manager, it doesn't make sense for you to write a document authorizing
  yourself to manage the project. The author of the charter should be an
  executive manager in your organization with the power and authority to
  assign resources to this project. This is usually the project sponsor or project
  initiator.


Project Charter Sign-Off
The project charter isn't complete until you've received sign-off from the project
sponsor, senior management, and key stakeholders. Sign-off indicates that the
document has been read by those signing it (let's hope so, anyway) and that they
agree with its contents and are on board with the project. It also involves the
major stakeholders right from the beginning and should win their continued
acceptance and participation in the project going forward. If someone has a
problem with any of the elements in the charter, now is the time to speak up.
Prior to publishing the charter, I like to hold a kickoff meeting with the key
stakeholders to discuss the charter, inform them of the key deliverables and
milestones, ensure that they understand their roles and responsibilities in relation
to the project, and then obtain their sign-off. I think it's imperative for you to
identify your key stakeholders as soon as possible and involve them in the
creation of the project charter. Remember that stakeholder identification is an
ongoing activity.
Signing the project charter document is the equivalent of agreeing to and
endorsing the project. This doesn't mean the project charter is set in stone,
however. Project charters will change throughout the course of the project. As
more details are uncovered and outlined and as the Planning processes begin,
more project issues will come to light. This is part of the iterative process of
project management and is to be expected. The charter will occasionally be
revised to reflect these new details, project plans will be revised, and project
execution will change to incorporate the new information or direction.
The last step in this process is publishing the charter. Publishing, in this case,
means distributing a copy of the approved project charter to the key
stakeholders, the customer, the management team, and others who might be
involved with the project. Publication can take several forms, including printed
format or electronic format distributed via the company email system or on the
company's intranet.
Next, we'll look at the Identify Stakeholders process.

Identifying Stakeholders
Think of stakeholders and project participants as a highly polished orchestra.
Each participant has a part to play. Some play more parts than others, and, alas,
some don't play their parts as well as others. An integral part of project
management is getting to know your stakeholders and the parts they play. You'll
remember from Chapter 1 that stakeholders are those people or organizations
who have a vested interest in the outcome of the project. They have something to
who have a vested interest in the outcome of the project. They have something to
either gain or lose as a result of the project, and they have the ability to influence
project results.

Identify Stakeholders Inputs
The Identify Stakeholders process involves identifying and documenting all the
stakeholders on the project, including their interests, interdependencies, and
potential positive or negative impacts on the project.
Identifying key stakeholders seems like it should be fairly easy, but once you get
beyond the obvious stakeholders, the process can become difficult. Sometimes
stakeholders, even key stakeholders, will change throughout the project's life.
The key stakeholders on a project might include the project sponsor, the
customer (who might also be the project sponsor), the project manager, project
team members, management personnel, contractors, suppliers, and so on. The
stakeholders involved in the project charter and the contract are obvious picks to
be included in the stakeholder register, one output of this process.
The inputs of this process are as follows:
   Project charter
   Procurement documents
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the environmental factors you'll want to pay
particular attention to during this process are company culture, organizational
structure, and governmental or industry standards. The organization structure
will help you understand who has influence and power based on position and
where they reside in the organization. The organizational process assets you
should be concerned about include stakeholder register templates and lessons
learned, including the stakeholder registers from previous projects. We'll talk
more about stakeholder register templates later in this chapter.
The project charter and procurement documents can be helpful in identifying
stakeholders. The signature pages of these documents, along with the
descriptions and deliverables sections, may name stakeholders or business units
you wouldn't ordinarily think about.
Don't forget important stakeholders. That could be a project killer. Leaving out
an important stakeholder, or one whose business processes weren't considered
an important stakeholder, or one whose business processes weren't considered
particularly during the Initiating and Planning processes, could spell disaster for
your project.

  Exam Spotlight
  Stakeholder identification should occur as early as possible in the project
  and continue throughout its life. Likewise, the stakeholder analysis and
  strategy should be reviewed periodically throughout the project and updated
  as needed. Remember to manage stakeholder satisfaction just as you would
  any key deliverable on the project. Identifying and analyzing their needs
  throughout the project will help make certain you are managing their
  expectations, and thus their satisfaction.


Stakeholder Analysis
The tools and techniques of Identify Stakeholders are stakeholder analysis,
expert judgment, and meetings. We have already discussed expert judgment.
Meetings in this case refers to profiling and analyzing stakeholders' involvement
in the project, their roles, knowledge level, interests, and more.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, stakeholder analysis involves using
qualitative and quantitative data to analyze which stakeholders' interests should
be considered throughout the project. Those with the most influence will also
have the most impact.
During stakeholder analysis, you'll want to identify the influences stakeholders
have in regard to the project and understand their expectations, needs, and
desires. From there, you'll derive more specifics regarding the project goals and
deliverables. Be warned that stakeholders are mostly concerned about their own
interests and what they (or their organizations) have to gain or lose from the
project. In all fairness, we all fall into the stakeholder category, so we're all
guilty of focusing on those issues that impact us most.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, three steps are involved in stakeholder
analysis: identifying stakeholders, analyzing potential impact, and assessing how
stakeholders are likely to react to given situations. Let's look at each step
independently.
The first step is identifying all potential stakeholders and capturing general
information about them such as the department they work in, contact
information, knowledge levels, and influence levels. Since the output of this
information, knowledge levels, and influence levels. Since the output of this
process is the stakeholder register, you should devise a stakeholder register
template now and capture all information about the stakeholders in one place.
Here is an example of a stakeholder register template:

Name Department Knowledge              Expectations Influence        Phone Email
                Level                               Levels


When we discuss the stakeholder register output later in this chapter, I'll tell you
what additional elements you need to add to your chart.
Stakeholders can be internal or external to the organization. One way to uncover
stakeholders whom you might not have thought about at the start is to ask known
stakeholders if they know of anyone else who might be impacted by this project.
Ask team members whether they're aware of stakeholders who haven't been
identified. Stakeholders might also come to the forefront once you start
uncovering some of the goals and deliverables of the project.

Understanding Stakeholder Roles
The second step in identifying stakeholders is identifying the potential impact on
or support for the project each may have and then classifying them according to
impact. That way, you can devise a strategy to deal with those impacts should
they arise.
To determine potential impact, as project manager you must understand each
stakeholder's role in the project and in the organization. Get to know them and
their interests. Determine the relationship structure among the various
stakeholders. Start cultivating partnerships with these stakeholders now, because
it's going to get pretty cozy during the course of your project. If you establish
good working relationships up front and learn a little about their business
concerns and needs, it might be easier to negotiate or motivate them later when
you have a pressing issue that needs action. Knowing which stakeholders work
well together and which don't can also help you in the future. One stakeholder
might have the authority or influence to twist the arm of another, figuratively
speaking, of course. Conversely, you might know of two stakeholders who are
like oil and water when put into the same room together. This can be valuable
information to keep under your hat for future reference.
Some stakeholders may have a significant amount of influence over the project
and its outcomes. Understanding the organizational structure, and where the
and its outcomes. Understanding the organizational structure, and where the
stakeholders fit in that structure, should be your first step in determining the
level of influence they have. For example, if Melanie in accounting wields a
significant amount of power and influence over the organization, when you need
input or decisions from her regarding costs or budgets for the project, you better
believe that those decisions are not likely to be overridden. Conversely, if
stakeholders with little influence provide direction that you don't verify, that
input could be overridden at a later date by a more powerful stakeholder, causing
changes to the project.
You can essentially classify the power and influence of each stakeholder on a
simple four-square grid where power is on one axis and interest on the other.
The PMBOK(R) Guide lists four classification models for this task:
   Power/Interest grid
   Power/Influence grid
   Influence/Impact grid
   Salience model
The first three grids are self-explanatory. The Salience model is more
complicated than a four-square grid because it charts three factors: stakeholder
power, urgency, and legitimacy. Urgency refers to a stakeholder's level of need
for attention as immediate, occasional, or rarely. Legitimacy concerns the
appropriateness of the stakeholder's participation at given times during the
project.

Assessing Stakeholders
The third step in stakeholder analysis is assessing how your stakeholders may
respond to different situations that arise throughout the project and how you
might influence them to obtain the best possible outcome. As I said earlier, some
stakeholders may have a significant amount of influence over the project and its
outcomes and their level of influence may shed some light on how they may
respond to various situations. Your first step in determining the level of
influence they have should be to understand the organizational structure and
where they fit in. Conducting informal interviews with project team members,
other stakeholders, and the stakeholders themselves about their behaviors on past
projects will also give you some insight on how they may react to your project.
You might want to consider the following elements when assessing stakeholders:
   Identifying the key stakeholders who could have a significant impact on the
   project based on position, influence, and power
   Stakeholders' anticipated level of participation
   Stakeholders' groups or committees and their level of influence
Once the stakeholder assessment is complete, you should devise a plan to deal
with any potential impacts and/or potential strategies for gaining their support.




  Remember that the definition of a successful project is one that
  accomplishes the goals of the project and meets stakeholders' expectations.
  Understand and document those expectations and you're off to a good start.


Stakeholder Register and Strategy
Stakeholder register is the only output of this process. The stakeholder register
contains the information we discussed earlier about the stakeholder register
template. In addition to the elements we already discussed, the stakeholder
register should contain at least the following details, according to the PMBOK(R)
Guide:
Identifying Information This includes items such as contact information,
department, role in the project, and so on.
Assessment Information This includes elements regarding influence,
expectations, key requirements, and when the stakeholder involvement is most
critical.
Stakeholder Classification Stakeholders can be classified according to their
relationship to the organization (internal or external, for example) and, more
important, whether they support the project, are resistant to the project, or have
no opinion.




  Remember that project documents are usually easily accessible by the
  project team and stakeholders. Use caution when documenting sensitive
  information regarding a stakeholder and your strategy for dealing with that
  information regarding a stakeholder and your strategy for dealing with that
  stakeholder because it could become public knowledge.


Introducing the Kitchen Heaven Project Case
Study
This chapter introduces a case study that we'll follow throughout the remainder
of the book. The case study is updated at the end of every chapter. It's designed
to show you how a project manager might apply the material covered in the
chapter to a real-life project. As happens in real life, not every detail of every
process is followed during all projects. Remember that the processes from the
PMBOK(R) Guide that I'll cover in the remaining chapters are project management
guidelines. You will often combine processes during your projects, which will
allow you to perform several steps at once. The case study will present situations
or processes that you might find during your projects and describe how one
project manager resolves them.



         Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  You are a project manager for Kitchen Heaven, a chain of retail stores
  specializing in kitchen utensils, cookware, dishes, small appliances, and
  some gourmet foodstuffs, such as bottled sauces and spices. You're fairly
  new to the position, having been hired to replace a project manager who
  recently retired.
  Kitchen Heaven currently owns 49 stores in 34 states and Canada. The world
  headquarters for Kitchen Heaven is in Denver, Colorado. Counting full-time
  and part-time employees, the company employs 1,500 people, 200 of whom
  work at headquarters.
  The company's mission statement reads, "Great gadgets for people interested
  in great food."
  Recently, the vice president of marketing paid you a visit. Dirk Perrier is a
  very nice, well-dressed man with the formal air you would expect a person
  in his capacity might have. He shakes your hand and gives you a broad,
in his capacity might have. He shakes your hand and gives you a broad,
friendly smile.
"We've decided to go forward with our 50th store opening! Sales are up, and
our new line of ceramic cookware is a hot seller, no pun intended. I don't
know if you're familiar with our store philosophy, so let me take a moment
to explain it. We like to place our stores in neighborhoods that are somewhat
affluent. The plain fact is that most of our shoppers have incomes of more
than $150,000 a year. So, we make an effort to place our stores in areas
where those folks usually shop.
"We're targeting the type of customer who watches the Food Network
channel and must have all the gadgets and tools they see the famous chefs
using. So, the stores are upbeat and convey a fun, energetic feel, if you will.
"Our next store is going to be right here in our home area--Colorado
Springs. Because this is going to be our 50th store, we plan on having a 50th
grand-opening celebration, with the kind of surprises and activities you
might expect for such a notable opening.
"Our stores generally occupy from 1,500 to 2,500 square feet of retail space,
and we typically use local contractors for the build-out. A store build-out
usually takes 120 days from the date the property has been procured until the
doors open to the public. I can give you our last opening's project plan so
you have a feel for what happens. Your job will be to procure the property,
negotiate the lease, procure the shelving and associated store furnishings, get
a contractor on the job, and prepare the 50th store festivities. My marketing
folks will assist you with that last part.
"You have six months to complete the project. Any questions?"
You take in a deep breath and collect your thoughts. Dirk has just given you
a lot of information with hardly a pause between thoughts. A few initial
ideas drift through your head while you're reaching for your notebook.
You work in a functional organization with a separate projectized
department responsible for carrying out projects of this nature. You've been
with the company long enough to know that Dirk is high up there in the
executive ranks and carries the authority and power to make things happen.
Therefore, Dirk is the perfect candidate for project sponsor.
You grab your notebook and start documenting some of the things Dirk
talked about, clarifying with him as you write:
   The project objective is to open a new store in Colorado Springs six
    The project objective is to open a new store in Colorado Springs six
    months from today.
    The store should be located in an affluent area.
    The store will carry the full line of products, from utensils to gourmet
    food items.
    The grand opening will be accompanied by lots of fanfare because this is
    the 50th store opening.
You have a question or two for Dirk.
"Is there a special reason we have to open, let's see, six months from now,
which is February 1?"
He responds, "Yes, we want the store open the first week in February. Early
February is when the Garden and Home Show conference hits the Springs
area. We'll have a trade show booth there. We know from experience in
other areas that our stores generally see a surge in sales during this month as
a result of the trade show. It's a great way to get a lot of advertising out there
and let folks know where we're located."
"Another question, Dirk. Is there a budget set for this project yet?"
"We haven't set a hard figure," Dirk replies. "But again, from past
experience we know it takes anywhere from $1.5 to $2 million to open a
new store--and we don't want to forget the big bash for the grand opening."
"Thanks, Dirk. I'll get started writing the project charter right away. I'll put
your name on the document because you're the project sponsor."
Dirk concludes with, "Feel free to come to me with questions or concerns at
any time."
One week later.
You review your notes and reread the project charter you've prepared for the
Kitchen Heaven retail store one last time before looking for Dirk. You
finally run across Dirk in a hallway near the executive washroom.
"Dirk, I'm glad I caught you. I'd like to go over the project charter with you
before the kickoff meeting tomorrow. Do you have a few minutes?"
"Sure," Dirk says to you. "Let's have it."
"The project charter states the purpose of the project, which of course is to
open the 50th Kitchen Heaven store in Colorado Springs. I also documented
some of the high-level requirements, many of which we talked about last
some of the high-level requirements, many of which we talked about last
time we met. I documented the assumptions and constraints you gave me
with the understanding that we'll define these much more closely when I
create the scope statement. I've included a section that outlines a preliminary
milestone schedule, and I've included some preliminary ROI [return on
investment] calculations. Using your estimate of $2 million as our initial
budget request and based on the projected inflows you gave me last week,
I've calculated a payback period of 19 months, with an IRR [internal rate of
return] of 6 percent."
"That's impressive," replies Dirk. "That's even better than our Phoenix store.
If I recall, the payback period there was just over two years. Let's hope those
numbers hold true."
"I think they're reliable figures," you say. "I researched our data based on
recent store openings in similar-sized cities and factored in the economic
conditions of the Colorado Springs area. Since they're on a growth pattern,
we think the timing is perfect.
"As you know, the project kickoff is scheduled for tomorrow. What I'll need,
then, is for you to talk about the project and the goals, talk about the
commitment you'll need from the management team to support this project,
and introduce me as the project manager. I've already forwarded a copy of
the project charter to the meeting attendees so that they can review it before
the meeting. I included a list of the assumptions we've made so far as an
appendix to the charter. Last, I'll need you to ask everyone present to sign a
copy of the project charter."
"Sounds like you've covered everything," Dirk says. "I don't anticipate any
problems tomorrow, because everyone is looking forward to this store
opening."

Project Case Study Checklist
   Project objective: To open a new store in Colorado Springs six
   months from today.
   Business need or demand for project: Company data concludes that
   the Kitchen Heaven consumers have incomes of more than $150,000 a
   year. The Colorado Springs area is home to a large number of people
   with that income. Currently, there is no Kitchen Heaven in the area, but
   there appears to be a demand for one.
     Project sponsor: Dirk Perrier, VP of marketing.
     Organizational structure: Functional organization with a separate
     projectized department.
     Project selection methods: Payback period calculated at 19 months and
     IRR calculated at 6 percent.
     Created project charter: Project charter contains the following:
         High-level overview of project
         List of measurable project objectives
         High-level risks
         Summary milestone schedule with initial completion date of
         February 1
         Summary budget of $2 million
         Project manager authority levels
         Definition of roles of project sponsor and project manager
     Next steps: Kickoff meeting set up to discuss charter and obtain sign-
     off.


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
There are as many ways to select and prioritize projects as there are
organizations. You might be profit driven, so money will be king. You might
have a stakeholder committee that weighs the pros and cons, or you might have
an executive director who determines which project is up next. Scoring models
and cash flow analysis techniques are useful on the job. Whether your
organization uses these methods or others, an organized, consistent way to select
and prioritize projects is necessary. I know I could work the next 100 years
straight and probably still not get all the projects completed my organization
would like to see implemented. What I've found is that the selection method
must be fair and reasonable. If your organization uses an arbitrary method--say
you like Tara better than Joe, so Tara's projects always end up on the "yes" list--
it won't be long before stakeholders demand that another method be devised to
select projects that everyone can understand. Whatever method you're using,
select projects that everyone can understand. Whatever method you're using,
stick to it consistently.
If you're like me, when I'm faced with a new project I want to get right to the
heart of the matter and understand the purpose of the project. Projects come
about for many reasons. Most of the time, understanding the reason it came
about will give you some insight into its purpose. For example, if a new law is
passed that requires anyone applying for a driver's license to show two forms of
identification but the existing system has the space to record verification of only
one document, you immediately have a firm grasp on the purpose of the project
--you'll have to update the system to include additional space for recording the
second document.
It has been my experience in working with project teams that when the team
understands the reason or the need that brought about the project and it
understands the goal of the project, the project is more successful. I don't have
any scientific evidence for this, but when the teams have a clear understanding
of what they're working on and why, they tend to stay more focused and fewer
unplanned changes make their way into the project. Don't assume everyone on
the project team understands the goal of the project. It's good practice to review
the project goal early in the project and again several times after the work of the
project is under way. Reminding the team of the goal helps keep the work on
track.
I usually write a project charter for all but the smallest of projects. I believe the
most important sections of the charter are the objectives of the project, the high-
level deliverables, the summary milestone schedule, and the summary budget. If
the project is so small that a charter seems like too much, I'll write a statement of
work. It's important that the goal or objective of the project is written down, no
matter how small the project, so that the team and the stakeholders know what
they're working toward.
Identifying the stakeholders early in the project is imperative to project success.
You won't want to write the charter without their involvement. The two
processes described in this chapter are almost performed simultaneously when
you're conducting a project. I won't begin writing the charter without stakeholder
input first, and it's just as important to understand the role stakeholders will play
in the project as well as their influence. If the CFO has ultimate influence over
which projects proceed and what they'll include, you'll want the CFO's buy-in as
soon as possible. Involvement in writing the charter and developing the future
Planning process outputs helps to assure their buy-in. At a minimum, it helps
reduce surprises midway through the project.
Always, and I mean always, get approval and signatures on the project charter.
You will use this document as your basis for project planning, so you want to
make certain the sponsor, key stakeholders, and the project manager understand
the goals of the project the same way.

Summary
This chapter started with a discussion of the 10 Knowledge Areas. The
Knowledge Areas bring together processes that have characteristics in common.
They also help you understand what types of skills and resources are needed to
complete the processes within them.
Next, I detailed how projects are initiated. Projects come about as a result of one
of seven needs or demands: market demands, strategic opportunity/business
needs, customer requests, technological advances, legal requirements,
environmental considerations, or social needs.
Project selection methods include decision models in the form of benefit
measurement methods and mathematical methods (also called constrained
optimization methods). The mathematical methods utilize mathematical models.
Benefit measurement methods come in the form of cost-benefit analyses, scoring
models, and economic analyses. These are primarily comparative approaches.
Besides cost-benefit analysis, the most commonly used form of benefit
measurement methods is cash flow analysis.
Analysis of cash flows includes payback period, discounted cash flows, net
present value (NPV), and internal rate of return (IRR). These last three methods
are concerned with the time value of money--or, in other words, converting
future dollars into today's value. Generally, projects with a shorter payback
period are desired over those with longer payback periods. Projects that have an
NPV greater than 0 should be accepted. Projects with the highest IRR value are
considered a better benefit to the organization than projects with lower IRR
values.
The Develop Project Charter process is the first process in the Initiating process
group. The project statement of work (SOW) is an input to this process that
describes the product, service, or result the project was undertaken to complete.
The SOW should include the business needs of the organization as well as a
product scope description and should map to the organization's strategic plan and
the stakeholders' business value expectations. The other inputs to this process
are business case and agreements.
Enterprise environmental factors are factors outside the project that might have
significant influence on the success of the project. Organizational process assets
refer to policies, guidelines, and procedures for conducting the project work.
Expert judgment and facilitation techniques are the two tools and techniques of
this process. Experts usually have specialized knowledge or skills and can
include staff from other departments in the company, external or internal
consultants, and members of professional and technical associations or industry
groups.
The output of this process is the project charter, which is the formal recognition
that a project, or the next project phase, should begin. The charter authorizes the
project to begin, it authorizes the project manager to assign resources to the
project, it documents the business need and justification, it describes the
customer's requirements, and it ties the project to the ongoing work of the
organization.
The Identify Stakeholders process concerns identifying, assessing, and
classifying stakeholders in a stakeholder register. Stakeholder involvement is
critical to the success of the project. The more the project manager understands
stakeholder influences, expectations, and impacts, the easier it is to prepare a
strategy plan to deal with the impacts or issues, sometimes before they occur.

Exam Essentials
Be able to name the 10 Project Management Knowledge Areas. The 10
Project Management Knowledge Areas are Project Integration Management,
Project Scope Management, Project Time Management, Project Cost
Management, Project Quality Management, Project Human Resource
Management, Project Communications Management, Project Risk Management,
Project Procurement Management, and Project Stakeholder Management.
Be able to distinguish between the seven needs or demands that bring about
project creation. The seven needs or demands that bring about project
creation are market demand, strategic opportunity/business need, customer
requests, technological advances, legal requirements, environmental
considerations, and social needs.
Be able to define decision models. Decision models are project selection
methods that are used prior to the Develop Project Charter process to determine
the viability of the project. Decision models include benefit measurement
methods and mathematical models.
Be able to describe and calculate the payback period. The payback period is
the amount of time it will take the company to recoup its initial investment in the
product of the project. It's calculated by adding up the expected cash inflows and
comparing them to the initial investment to determine how many periods it takes
for the cash inflows to equal the initial investment.
Be able to denote the decision criteria for NPV and IRR. Projects with an
NPV greater than 0 should be accepted, and those with an NPV less than 0
should be rejected. Projects with high IRR values should be accepted over
projects with lower IRR values. IRR is the discount rate when NPV is equal to 0,
and IRR assumes reinvestment at the IRR rate.
Be able to list the Develop Project Charter inputs. The inputs for Develop
Project Charter are project statement of work, business case, agreements,
enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets.
Be able to describe the purpose of the business case. The purpose of a
business case is to understand the business need for the project and determine
whether the investment in the project is worthwhile. It usually includes a cost-
benefit analysis and the needs or demands that brought about the project.
Be able to describe the importance of the project charter. The approved
project charter is the document that officially recognizes and acknowledges that
a project exists. The charter authorizes the project to begin, it authorizes the
project manager to assign resources to the project, it documents the business
need and justification, it describes the customer's requirements, and it ties the
project to the ongoing work of the organization.
Understand the Identify Stakeholders process. The purpose of this process
is to identify the project stakeholders, assess their influence and level of
involvement, and record stakeholder information in the stakeholder register.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. When a project is being performed under contract, the SOW is provided by
   which of the following?
   A. The buyer
   B. The project sponsor
   C. The project manager
   D. The contractor
2. You've been hired as a manager for the adjustments department of a
   nationwide bank based in your city. The adjustments department is
   responsible for making corrections to customer accounts. This is a large
   department, with several smaller sections that deal with specific accounts,
   such as personal checking or commercial checking. You've received your
   first set of management reports and can't make heads or tails of the
   information. Each section appears to use a different methodology to audit
   their work and record the data for the management report. You request that a
   project manager from the PMO come down and get started right away on a
   project to streamline this process and make the data and reports consistent.
   This project came about as a result of which of the following?
   A. Technological advance
   B. Strategic opportunity/business need
   C. Customer request
   D. Legal requirement
3. What are the inputs to the Develop Project Charter process?
   A. Agreements, project SOW, business case, enterprise environmental
      factors, and organizational process assets
   B. Project SOW, business case, and organizational process assets
   C. Agreements, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process
      assets
   D. Project SOW, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational
      process assets
4. You work for a large manufacturing plant. Your firm is thinking of initiating
   a new project to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first
   experience in the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the
   introduction of this product. The project entails producing your product in a
   concentrated formula and packaging it in smaller containers than the US
   product uses. A new machine is needed in order to mix the first set of
   ingredients in the concentrated formula. Which of the following actions is
   the next best step the project manager should take?
   A. The project manager should document the project's high-level
      requirements in a project charter document and recommend that the
      project proceed.
   B. The project manager knows the project is a go and should document the
      description of the product in the statement of work.
   C. The project manager should document the business need for the project
      and recommend that a feasibility study be performed to determine the
      viability of the project.
   D. The project manager should document the needs and demands that are
      driving the project in a business case document.
5. You are the project manager for Fun Days Vacation Resorts. Your new
   project assignment is to head up the Fun Days resort opening in Austin,
   Texas. You are estimating the duration of the project management plan
   activities, devising the project schedule, and monitoring and controlling
   deviations from the schedule. Which of the Project Management Knowledge
   Areas are you working in?
   A. Project Scope Management
   B. Project Quality Management
   C. Project Integration Management
   D. Project Time Management
6. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project statement of work should
   contain or reference which of the following elements?
   A. Strategic plan, product scope description, measurable project objectives,
      and business need
   B. Business need, strategic plan, product scope description
   C. Project purpose, measurable project objectives, business case, and
      product scope description
   D. Product scope description, project purpose, and business need
7. Your nonprofit organization is preparing to host its first annual 5K run/walk
   in City Park. You worked on a similar project for the organization two years
   ago when it cohosted the 10K run through Overland Pass. Which of the
    organizational process assets might be most helpful to you on your new
    project?
    A. The organization's marketing plans
    B. Historical information from a previous 10K run or similar project
    C. The marketplace and political conditions
    D. The organization's project management information systems
 8. Which of the following lists of processes belongs to the Project Integration
    Management Knowledge Area?
    A. Define Scope, Close Procurements, and Perform Integrated Change
       Control
    B. Develop Project Management Plan, Direct and Manage Project Work,
       and Perform Integrated Change Control
    C. Define Scope, Direct and Manage Project Work, and Manage
       Stakeholders Expectations
    D. Define Scope, Collect Requirements, and Close Project or Phase
 9. Comparative methods, scoring methods, and economic and cash flow
    analysis are all part of which of the following?
    A. Benefit measurement methods
    B. Constrained optimization methods
    C. Benefit measurement methods, which are a component of a tool and
       technique of the Develop Project Charter process
    D. Constrained optimization methods, which are a component of a tool and
       technique of the Develop Project Charter process
10. You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain,
    with clubs in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in
    Arizona or Nevada. You have derived the following information:
        Project Arizona: The payback period is 18 months, and the NPV is (250).
        Project Nevada: The payback period is 24 months, and the NPV is 300.
    Which project would you recommend to the selection committee?
    A. Project Arizona, because the payback period is shorter than the payback
        period for Project Nevada
    B. Project Nevada, because its NPV is a positive number
    C. Project Arizona, because its NPV is a negative number
    D. Project Nevada, because its NPV is a higher number than Project
       Arizona's NPV
11. You are the project manager for the Late Night Smooth Jazz Club chain,
    with stores in 12 states. Smooth Jazz is considering opening a new club in
    Kansas City or Spokane. You have derived the following information:
        Project Kansas City: The payback period is 27 months, and the IRR is 6
        percent.
        Project Spokane: The payback period is 25 months, and the IRR is 5
        percent.
    Which project should you recommend to the selection committee?
    A. Project Spokane, because the payback period is shorter
    B. Project Kansas City, because the IRR is higher
    C. Project Spokane, because the IRR is lower
    D. Project Kansas City, because the payback period is longer
12. Which of the following is true regarding NPV?
    A. NPV assumes reinvestment at the cost of capital.
    B. NPV decisions should be made based on the lowest value for all the
       selections.
    C. NPV assumes reinvestment at the prevailing rate.
    D. NPV assumes reinvestment at the NPV rate.
13. You are the project manager for Insomniacs International. Since you don't
    sleep much, you get a lot of project work done. You're considering
    recommending a project that costs $575,000; expected inflows are $25,000
    per quarter for the first two years and then $75,000 per quarter thereafter.
    What is the payback period?
    A. 40 months
    B. 38 months
    C. 39 months
    D. 41 months
14. Which of the following is true regarding IRR?
    A. IRR assumes reinvestment at the cost of capital.
    B. IRR is not difficult to calculate.
    C. IRR is a constrained optimization method.
    D. IRR is the discount rate when NPV is equal to zero.
15. Which of the following best describes the purpose of a business case?
    A. To determine project viability and probability of success
    B. To understand the need or demand that brought about the project
    C. To understand the business need for the project and determine whether
       the investment in the project is worthwhile
    D. To perform analysis using mathematical models and benefit
       measurement methods that will assist in project selection
16. You are in the process of identifying your stakeholders. You are using one of
    the tools and techniques of this process that according to the PMBOK(R)
    Guide involves all of the following steps except for which one?
    A. Determining the level of stakeholder participation on the project
    B. Assessing how stakeholders are likely to react to certain situations
    C. Identifying stakeholders
    D. Analyzing potential impacts stakeholders may present
17. Your selection committee is debating between two projects. Project A has a
    payback period of 18 months. Project B has a cost of $125,000, with
    expected cash inflows of $50,000 the first year and $25,000 per quarter after
    that. Which project should you recommend?
    A. Either Project A or Project B, because the payback periods are equal
    B. Project A, because Project B's payback period is 21 months
    C. Project A, because Project B's payback period is 24 months
    D. Project A, because Project B's payback period is 20 months
18. Which of the following is true?
    A. Discounted cash flow analysis is the least precise of the cash flow
       techniques because it does not consider the time value of money.
    B. NPV is the least precise of the cash flow analysis techniques because it
       assumes reinvestment at the discount rate.
    C. Payback period is the least precise of the cash flow analysis techniques
       because it does not consider the time value of money.
    D. IRR is the least precise of the cash flow analysis techniques because it
       assumes reinvestment at the cost of capital.
19. You are a project manager for Zippy Tees. Your selection committee has just
    chosen a project you recommended for implementation. Your project is to
    manufacture a line of miniature stuffed bears that will be attached to your
    company's trendy T-shirts. The bears will be wearing the same T-shirt design
    as the shirt to which they're attached. Your project sponsor thinks you've
    impressed the big boss and wants you to skip to the manufacturing process
    right away. What is your response?
    A. Agree with the project sponsor because that person is your boss and has a
       lot of authority and power in the company.
    B. Require that a preliminary budget be established and a resource list be
       put together to alert other managers of the requirements of this project.
       This should be published and signed by the other managers who are
       impacted by this project.
    C. Require that a project charter be written and signed off on by all
       stakeholders before proceeding.
    D. Suggest that a preliminary statement of work be written to outline the
       objectives of the project.
20. Which of the following is true regarding the project charter?
    A. The project charter should be issued by a manager external to the project.
       Once approved, the charter formalizes the authority assigned to the
       project manager and ensures commitment and acceptance of the project
       by the stakeholders.
    B. The project charter should be issued by a key stakeholder. Once
       approved, it ensures a common understanding of the key deliverables,
   milestones, and roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders.
C. The project charter should be issued by the project manager. Once
   approved, the charter formalizes the authority assigned to the project
   manager and ensures commitment and acceptance of the project by the
   stakeholders.
D. The project charter should be issued by the project sponsor. Once
   approved, it ensures a common understanding of the key deliverables,
   milestones, and roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders.
CHAPTER 3
Developing the Project Scope Statement
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE PLANNING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 1: Review and assess detailed project requirements, constraints,
   and assumptions with stakeholders based on the project charter, lessons
   learned, and by using requirement gathering techniques in order to
   establish the project deliverables.
    Task 2: Develop a scope management plan, based on the approved
   project scope and using scope management techniques, in order to
   define, maintain, and manage the scope of the project.
    Task 9: Develop the change management plan by defining how
   changes will be addressed and controlled in order to track and manage
   change.
    Task 12: Conduct kickoff meeting, communicating the start of the
   project, key milestones, and other relevant information in order to
   inform and engage stakeholders and gain commitment.
 Knowledge and Skills:
   Requirements gathering techniques (e.g., planning sessions, brainstorming,
   and focus groups)
   Estimation tools and techniques
   Scope deconstruction (e.g., WBS, Scope Backlog) tools and techniques
   Scope management planning
Great job! You've successfully completed the project Initiating processes and
published the project charter and the stakeholder register. The project is
officially under way. Stakeholders have been identified and informed of the
project, you have management buy-in on the project, the project manager has
been assigned, and the project objectives and description have been identified. A
solid foundation for the planning process is in place.
In this chapter, we will begin the Planning processes for the project. In fact, I
In this chapter, we will begin the Planning processes for the project. In fact, I
will continue discussing the Planning processes through Chapter 7, "Planning
Project Resources." Planning is a significant activity in any project and, if done
correctly, will go a long way toward ensuring project success.
This chapter begins with the Develop Project Management Plan process. This
process will describe the overall approach you'll use to manage the project. The
result of this process is the project management plan document that describes
how you'll execute, monitor, and control the project outcomes as the project
progresses and how you'll close out the project once it concludes.
Then you'll move on to the Plan Scope Management process. Here we will
examine documenting a plan that outlines how to define, validate, and control
the project scope.
The Collect Requirements process is next. During this process, quantified
requirements are gathered and documented to assure that stakeholder needs are
met and expectations are managed.
During the Define Scope process, you'll use the project charter and the
requirements documentation--plus some other inputs--and then apply the tools
and techniques of this process to come up with the project scope statement. I'll
talk in depth about project objectives, requirements, constraints, assumptions,
and other elements of writing the project scope statement, which is an output of
this process.
Once you have the deliverables and requirements well defined, you'll begin the
process of breaking down the work of the project via a work breakdown
structure (WBS). You'll accomplish this task in the Create WBS process. The
WBS defines the scope of the project and breaks the work down into
components that can be scheduled and estimated as well as easily monitored and
controlled.
We have a lot to cover in this chapter, so let's get started.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).
Developing the Project Management Plan
The first process in the Planning process group is the Develop Project
Management Plan process. It's first for good reasons. This process is part of the
Project Integration Management Knowledge Area and is concerned with
defining, preparing, coordinating, and then integrating all the various subsidiary
project plans into an overall project management plan.
If you haven't already done so, make certain to conduct a project kickoff meeting
with the stakeholders and project team members. Before beginning the processes
we'll discuss in this chapter, you need stakeholder buy-in and commitment to the
project in order to successfully document requirements, key milestones, and
deliverables.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMI(R) Project Management Professional (PMP(R)) Examination Content
  Outline documents the official project kickoff meeting in the Planning
  process group. In reality, many of you, myself included, may perform this
  step during the Initiating process, but remember for the exam that it occurs
  in the Planning process group.

This process involves defining and documenting the processes you're going to
use to manage this project. For example, let's say you and the project team have
determined you will use project management processes involving costs, human
resources, risks, and a project schedule. (Warning: This is a demonstration only
--don't try this at home. In reality, professionals perform many more processes
than this on a typical project.) Each particular process might have a management
plan that describes it. For instance, a cost management plan (an example of a
subsidiary plan) would describe how costs will be managed and controlled and
how changes to costs will be approved and managed throughout the project. The
Develop Project Management Plan process brings all these subsidiary plans
together, along with the outputs of the Planning group processes, into one
document called the project management plan.
  In Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?," I talked about tailoring--determining
  which processes within each process group are appropriate for the project on
  which you're working. Tailoring is used in the Develop Project Management
  Plan process because it's here you'll determine what processes to use to best
  manage the project.

To create and document the plan, you need to gather some inputs and build on
the information you've already collected.

Developing Inputs
The Develop Project Management Plan process has four inputs:
   Project charter
   Outputs from other processes
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
Let's take a look at each next.
Project Charter You'll recall that the project charter describes the objectives
of the project and the high-level requirements needed to satisfy stakeholder
expectations. It's an input into this process is because the content of the project
charter--including project objectives, project description, high-level
requirements, summary milestone schedule, summary budget, and so on--will
help you and the team determine exactly which project management processes to
use on the project.
Outputs from Other Processes The project management processes include all
the individual processes that make up the process groups we're talking about
throughout this book. The Initiating group, for example, has two processes,
Planning has a zillion (okay, not that many, but it seems like it), and so on. The
outputs from other processes you use on the project become inputs to the
Develop Project Management Plan process. For example, the cost management
plan we talked about in the introduction is an input. Any processes you use that
produce a baseline (such as schedule or cost) or a subsidiary management plan
(such as a risk management plan, communication management plan, and so on)
are included as inputs to this process.




  I'll talk more about baselines and the makeup of individual subsidiary
  management plans as we discuss the various Planning processes, starting
  with this chapter and continuing through Chapter 7.

Enterprise Environmental Factors You've seen enterprise environmental
factors before. Some of the key elements of the environmental factors you
should consider when choosing the processes to perform for this project include
standards and regulations (both industry and governmental), company culture
and organizational structure, personnel administration, infrastructure, and the
project management information system (PMIS).
Organizational Process Assets Some of the critical elements of the
organizational process assets input you should consider when choosing the
processes to perform for this project include project management plan template,
change control procedures, performance measurement criteria, historical
information, and the configuration management knowledge database that
contains the official company policies, standards, procedures, and other project
documents.
The PMIS is an automated (or manual) system used to document the project
management plan and subsidiary plans, to facilitate the feedback process, and to
revise the documents. It incorporates the configuration management system and
the change control system, both of which I'll cover in Chapter 10, "Measuring
and Controlling Project Performance." Later in the project, the PMIS can be
used to control changes to any of the plans. When you're thinking about the
PMIS as an input (that is, as part of the enterprise environmental factors), think
of it as a collection and distribution point for information as well as an easy way
to revise and update documents. When you're thinking about the PMIS as a tool
and technique, think of it just that way--as a tool to facilitate the automation,
collection, and distribution of data and to help monitor processes such as
scheduling, resource leveling, budgeting, and web interfaces.
As I talked about in Chapter 1, the processes you choose to perform for the
project will be based on the complexity of the project, the project scope, and the
type of industry in which you work. Your organization's standards, guidelines,
type of industry in which you work. Your organization's standards, guidelines,
and policies or the project management office (PMO) might also dictate the
types of processes you'll use for the project. You should also consider whether
your organization has existing change control processes in place, templates that
you're required to use, or financial controls and processes. Historical information
and past project files are useful in helping you decide which processes to use for
this project.

  Exam Spotlight
  The PMIS in the Develop Project Management Plan process includes a
  subsystem called the configuration management system, and the change
  control system is a subsystem of the configuration management system.

The two tools and techniques of this process are expert judgment and facilitation
techniques. We looked at facilitation techniques in Chapter 2, "Creating the
Project Charter." According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, you'll need the following
types of expert judgment to complete this process:
   Tailoring techniques
   Understanding technical and management details that need to be included in
   the project management plan
   Determining resources and assessing skill levels needed for project work
   Determining and defining the amount of configuration management to apply
   on the project
   Determining which project documents require formal change control
   processes

Documenting the Project Management Plan
The purpose of most processes is, of course, to produce an output. Outputs are
usually a report or document of some type or a deliverable. In this case, you end
up with a document--the project management plan--that describes, integrates,
and coordinates baselines and subsidiary plans for the processes you've
determined to use for the project. The project management plan can be detailed,
or it can be a high-level summary based on the needs of the project.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project management plan defines how the
project is executed, how it's monitored, and how it's controlled. It is
progressively elaborated over the life of the project. It also documents the
outputs of the Planning group processes, which I'll cover over the next several
chapters. The project management plan should include or discuss the following
elements:
   Processes you'll use to perform each phase of the project and their level of
   implementation, the tools and techniques you'll use from these processes, and
   the interactions and dependencies among the processes. All this was
   determined as part of the tailoring exercise we talked about in Chapter 2.
   The life cycle you'll use for the project and for each phase of the project if
   applicable.
   Methods for executing the work of the project to fulfill the objectives.
   Change management plan describing methods for monitoring and controlling
   change.
   Configuration management plan.
   Methods for determining and maintaining the validity of performance
   baselines.
   Communication needs of the stakeholders and techniques to fulfill those
   needs.
   Management reviews of content, issues, and pending decisions.
In addition to these elements, the subsidiary plans that are associated with the
processes you'll be using for this project should be documented in the project
management plan. Each of these subsidiary management plans might contain the
same elements that the overall project management plan does, but they're
specifically related to the topic at hand. For example, the cost management plan
should define how changes to cost estimates will be reflected in the project
budget and how changes or variances with a significant impact should be
communicated to the project sponsor and stakeholders. The schedule
management plan describes how changes to the schedule will be managed, and
so on.
The subsidiary plans might be detailed or simply a synopsis, depending on the
needs of the project. I've listed the subsidiary plans along with a brief description
next. I will cover each of these plans in more detail throughout the remainder of
this book. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the subsidiary plans are as follows:
Scope Management Plan Describes the process for defining, maintaining, and
managing project scope, facilitates creating the work breakdown structure
(WBS), describes how the product or service of the project is validated and
accepted, and documents how changes to scope will be handled.
Requirements Management Plan Describes how requirements will be
analyzed, documented, traced, reported, and managed throughout the project.
Schedule Management Plan Describes how the project schedule will be
developed and controlled and how changes will be incorporated into the project
schedule.
Cost Management Plan Describes how costs will be managed and controlled
and how changes to costs will be approved and managed.
Quality Management Plan Describes how the organization's quality policy
will be implemented. It should address and describe quality control procedures
and measures, quality assurance procedures and measures, and continuous
process improvement.
Communications Management Plan Describes the communication needs of
the stakeholders, including timing, frequency, and methods of communications.
Risk Management Plan Describes how risks will be managed and controlled
during the project. This should include risk management methodology; roles and
responsibilities; definitions of probability and impact; when risk management
will be performed; and the categories of risk, risk tolerances, and reporting and
tracking formats.
Procurement Management Plan Describes how the procurement processes
will be managed throughout the project. This might include elements such as
type of contract, procurement documents, and lead times for purchases.
Process Improvement Plan Focuses on finding inefficiencies in a process or
activity and eliminating them.
Human Resource Management Plan Documents the roles and
responsibilities for project team members, their reporting relationships, and how
the team will be managed.
Stakeholder Management Plan Documents what strategies to use to
encourage stakeholder participation, documents the analysis of their needs and
interests and impacts, and documents the process regarding project decision
making.
The project management plan is not limited to the subsidiary plans listed here.
For example, even though the PMBOK(R) Guide does not mention the change
management plan in the list of subsidiary plans, you should develop and include
a change management plan with your project management plan. The change
management plan describes how you will document, address, track, and control
changes. You might include other plans and documentation that help describe
how the project will be executed or monitored and controlled. Perhaps you're
working on a project that requires precise calculations and exact adherence to
requirements. You could include a plan that describes these calculations, how
they'll be monitored and measured, and the processes you'll use to make changes
or corrections.
The project management plan also includes project baselines, such as these:
   Schedule baseline
   Cost baseline
   Scope baseline
I'll talk about each of these documents in the remaining chapters as well.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand that the purpose of the project management plan is to define how
  the project is executed, monitored and controlled, and closed as well as to
  document the processes you'll use during the project.

As the project progresses and more and more processes are performed, the
subsidiary plans and the project management plan itself might change. You will
manage these changes using the Perform Integrated Change Control process. All
changes should be reviewed following the processes outlined in the change
control plan, and the project management plan should be updated to reflect the
approved changes.

  Exam Spotlight
  In practice, you'll find that you'll prepare the project management plan after
  you've progressed through several of the other Planning processes. It's
  difficult to finalize some of these subsidiary plans without thinking through
  or sometimes performing the process they're associated with first. However,
  or sometimes performing the process they're associated with first. However,
  for the exam, remember that Develop Project Management Plan is the first
  process in the Planning group, and it should be performed first. Updates can
  and should occur to the project management plan as subsidiary plans are
  created or changed.


Plan Scope Management
Plan Scope Management is the first process in the Project Scope Management
Knowledge Area. You might recall from Chapter 1 that the purpose of the
Project Scope Management Knowledge Area is to describe and control what is
and what is not work of the project. Scope is collectively the product, service, or
result of the project and the deliverables the project intends to produce.
The primary purpose of this process is twofold: to write the scope management
plan and to develop the requirements management plan. The scope management
plan is a planning tool that documents how the project team will go about
defining project scope, how changes to scope will be maintained and controlled,
and how project scope will be verified. The requirements management plan
addresses analyzing, documenting, and managing the project requirements. I'll
cover the requirements management plan in detail in the section "Documenting
the Scope Management Plan" later in this chapter.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMI(R) Project Management Professional (PMP(R))
  Examination Content Outline, the activities and processes in the Planning
  process group involve defining, assessing, and reviewing detailed project
  requirements based on the project charter in order to establish the project
  deliverables. You will perform these processes with your stakeholders using
  requirements gathering techniques. Reviewing lessons learned from previous
  projects of similar size and scope and reviewing the constraints and
  assumptions of this project are all keys to documenting a detailed list of
  project deliverables.

For now you'll concentrate on the inputs to this process, which will help you get
started documenting the decisions about the Plan Scope Management process for
your project.
Understanding the Plan Scope Management Inputs
You've seen the inputs to the Plan Scope Management process before. They are
as follows:
   Project management plan
   Project charter
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
Even though I've talked about these before, you'll want to look at specific
elements of some of these inputs closely. Defining project scope, and managing
that scope as you progress through the project, has a direct relationship to the
success of the project. It's difficult to document how you'll define project scope
if you don't first understand the purpose behind the project; the product, service,
or result you're trying to produce; and the environmental factors and
organizational process assets under which you're working. The process of how
you'll go about defining and managing scope is what the scope management plan
(which is what you're ultimately getting to with this process) is about.
The project charter describes the purpose and high-level requirements of the
project. Analyzing the information in this document will help you determine the
appropriate tools and methodologies to use (as well as which processes to
perform) for the project. The idea here is that you want to understand the size
and complexity of the project so that you don't spend more time than needed
documenting how you're going to go about defining and managing scope.
One of the environmental factors that might influence the way scope is managed
is personnel administration, or more specifically, the human resources involved
on the project. Their skills, knowledge, and abilities to communicate and
escalate issues appropriately might influence the way project scope is managed.
Personnel policies governing those resources might also have an effect. For
example, you might have a team member who has a close relationship with one
of the stakeholders. Let's say the stakeholder wants a change to the project. The
stakeholder and team member grab a cup of coffee together at the corner deli,
and the next thing you know, the team member is incorporating the change into
the project. Scope can't be managed efficiently when it's being changed without
the knowledge of the project manager or project team.
Other environmental factors that might affect scope management are the
organization's culture, economic conditions, market conditions, and physical and
technological infrastructure.
technological infrastructure.
Organizational process assets typically include policies and procedures, whether
formal or informal. Your organization's policies or the policies and guidelines of
your industry might have an effect on scope management, so make certain you're
familiar with them. And don't forget historical information. You can review the
scope management plan from previous projects of similar size and scope to help
you craft the one for this project.



         Real World Scenario

  Scope Management Plan Requirements
  Phil Reid is a gifted engineer. He works as an accident reconstructionist and
  has a 90 percent success rate at assisting his clients (who are attorneys) at
  winning court cases. Phil can intuitively and scientifically determine whether
  the scene of an accident is real or is insurance fraud. Most cases Phil works
  on are managed as projects because each accident is unique, the cause of
  each accident is unique, and each investigation has a definite beginning and
  ending. The attorneys that Phil's organization works with want the final
  results of the investigation delivered in different formats. Although Phil is
  exceptionally good at determining the forensic evidence needed to prove or
  disprove how the accident occurred, he is not at all gifted in oral
  communication skills. As a result, the scope management plan requires the
  client to define how the outcome of the investigation should be presented
  and whether the engineer might be required to testify regarding the results of
  the investigation. That way, Phil's organization can plan in advance how to
  use his talents on the project and assign a resource to work with him who has
  the communication skills and ability to testify if that's required.


Using Plan Scope Management Tools and Techniques
Plan Scope Management has two tools and techniques:
Expert Judgment You'll rely on the expert judgment of people or groups with
specific skills, knowledge, or training to help assess the process inputs. One
expert you can count on in this process is the executive manager who wrote or
contributed to the project charter. This person can clarify questions you might
have about the project objectives as well as the product description.
Stakeholders, industry experts, team members, people with specialized training,
or other project managers with previous experience on projects similar to yours
can help you determine how scope management should work for this project.
Meetings You will use meetings with the experts just noted to determine and
formalize the information contained in the scope management plan.

Documenting the Scope Management Plan
The first output of the Plan Scope Management process is the scope management
plan. This plan describes how the project team will go about defining project
scope, validating the work of the project, and managing and controlling scope.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the scope management plan should contain
the following:
   The process you'll use to prepare the project scope statement. The project
   scope statement (which I'll define later in this chapter) contains a detailed
   description of what the deliverables and requirements of the project are and
   is based on the information contained in the preliminary scope.
   A process for creating, maintaining, and approving the WBS. The WBS
   further defines the work of the project (as defined in the project scope
   statement) by breaking down the deliverables into smaller pieces of work.
   A definition of how the deliverables will be validated for accuracy and the
   process used for accepting deliverables.
   A description of the process for controlling scope change requests, including
   the procedure for requesting changes and how to obtain a change request
   form.

  Exam Spotlight
  The scope management plan is a planning tool that documents how the
  project team will go about defining project scope, how the work breakdown
  structure will be developed, how changes to scope will be controlled, and
  how the work of the project will be validated and accepted. The scope
  management plan is based on the approved project scope. And don't forget,
  the scope management plan is a component of (or a subsidiary of) the project
  management plan.
  management plan.


Documenting the Requirements Management Plan
The requirements management plan is much like the scope management plan but
focuses on the project requirements. This plan details how to analyze, document,
and manage the project requirements throughout all phases of the project.
Managing the requirements is the key to this process, and the phase-to-phase
relationship you use to run the project will influence how you will manage the
project requirements. For example, a sequential phase-to-phase relationship
would dictate that all the requirements for each phase be completed before
beginning the work of the phase and most certainly before moving on to the next
phase of the project. An overlapping relationship might mean that the
requirements are not fully defined before the work begins and are progressively
elaborated as the project (or phase) progresses.




  We talked about phase-to-phase relationships in Chapter 1. There are two
  types: sequential and overlapping.




  Exam Spotlight
  Make certain you document the phase-to-phase relationship you'll use during
  the project life cycle in the requirements management plan.

There are several components of a sound requirements management plan.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, you should include the following factors in
the plan (and you are always free to add more than those noted here):
   How planning, tracking, and reporting of requirements activities will occur
   How changes to the requirements will be requested, tracked, and analyzed
   along with other configuration management activities
   How requirements will be prioritized
   What metrics will be used to trace product requirements
   What requirements attributes will be documented in the traceability matrix
   (the last output of this process)
   What elements to include on the traceability matrix

Collecting Requirements
Now we are getting into the meat of the Planning processes. In the Collect
Requirements process, we define what the final product or service of the project
will look like. You will recall that scope management describes what is and what
is not included in the project scope. In this case, we're starting off by defining
what is included in the work of the project.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that not all of the requirements gathered during
  this process will be included in the end result of the project. The Define
  Scope process is where you will determine which of the requirements
  gathered here will be included in the final project. We will look at Define
  Scope later in this chapter.

Requirements describe the characteristics of the deliverables. They might also
describe functionality that a deliverable must have or specific conditions a
deliverable must meet to satisfy the objective of the project. Requirements are
typically conditions that must be met or criteria that the product or service of the
project must possess to satisfy the objectives of the project. Requirements
quantify and prioritize the wants, needs, and expectations of the project sponsor
and stakeholders. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide (and lots of personal
experience), you must be able to measure, trace, and test requirements. It's
important that they're complete and accepted by your project sponsor and key
stakeholders.
Requirements can take many forms. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide,
requirements can be classified into the categories listed here, which may also
assist you in elaborating them further:
   Business
   Stakeholder
   Solution
   Functional
   Nonfunctional
   Transition
   Project
   Quality
The primary purpose of the Collect Requirements process is to define and
document the project sponsor's, the customer's, and the stakeholder's
expectations and needs for meeting the project objectives. In my experience,
understanding, documenting, and agreeing on requirements are critical factors to
project success. Recording the requirements and attaining stakeholder approval
of the requirements will help you define and manage their expectations
throughout the project.

  Exam Spotlight
  Requirements must be documented, analyzed, and quantified in enough
  detail that they can be measured once the work of the project begins.
  Requirements become the basis for developing the WBS and are essential in
  estimating costs, developing the project schedule, and quality planning.

You've already learned about four of the five inputs to this process: the scope
management plan, requirements management plan, project charter, and the
stakeholder register. We will discuss the fifth, the stakeholder management plan,
in Chapter 5, "Developing the Project Budget and Communicating the Plan," so
we'll move on to tools and techniques.

Using the Tools and Techniques of the Collect
Requirements Process
Your communication skills are about to come in handy. Gathering and
documenting requirements is not a task for the faint of heart. Because defining
and producing requirements are so critical to the success of the project, I
recommend using team members with excellent communication skills to perform
this task. If they have the ability to read minds, all the better. Stakeholders
this task. If they have the ability to read minds, all the better. Stakeholders
almost always know what they want the end product to look like but often have
difficulty articulating their needs. An expert communicator can read between the
lines and ask probing questions that will draw the information out of the
stakeholder.
Business process owners are those people who are experts in their particular area
of the business. They are invaluable resources to the project manager and in
gathering requirements for the project. They are usually the midlevel managers
and line managers who still have their fingers in the day-to-day portion of the
business. For example, it takes many experts in various areas to produce and
market a great bottle of beer. Machinists regulate and keep the stainless steel and
copper drums in top working order. Chemists check and adjust the secret
formulas brewing in the vats daily. Graphic artists must develop colorful and
interesting labels and ads to attract the attention of those thirsty patrons. Of
course, those great TV commercials advertising the tasty brew are produced by
yet another set of business experts and managers at all levels review and approve
the work. These are the kinds of people you'll interview and ask to assist you in
identifying requirements.
There are several tools and techniques in this process you can use to help
identify the requirements of the project. Some of these tools and techniques can
also be used during the Identify Risks process and the Plan Quality Management
process. We'll cover those processes in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning," and Chapter
7, "Planning Project Resources," respectively. The following tools and
techniques are used for the Collect Requirements process:
Interviews Interviews are typically one-on-one conversations with
stakeholders. Interviews can be formal or informal and generally consist of
questions prepared ahead of time. The advantages to this tool are that subject
matter experts and experienced project participants can impart a lot of
information in a short amount of time and typically have a good understanding
of the features and functions needed from the project deliverables. You should
record the responses during the interviews, and don't be afraid to ask
spontaneous questions as they occur to you during the interview.
Focus Groups Focus groups are usually conducted by a trained moderator.
The key to this tool lies in picking the subject matter experts and stakeholders to
participate in the focus group.
Facilitated Workshops Cross-functional stakeholders come together in a
facilitated workshop to discuss and define requirements that affect more than
one department. For example, in the information technology industry, you can
use a technique called joint application design/development (JAD) to define
requirements. Suppose you're implementing a software package that impacts
several business units. You'll need representatives from each unit together in a
workshop so that all of their needs are represented and prioritized. This way, all
the participants understand the needs of other departments involved in the
project and have a facilitated forum to discuss and resolve their issues. Other
industries have similar techniques to bring together customers and/or business
subject matter experts, such as Quality Function Deployment (QFD) sessions
used in the manufacturing industry.

  Exam Spotlight
  The primary difference between focus groups and facilitated workshops is
  that focus groups are gatherings of prequalified subject matter experts and
  stakeholders, and facilitated workshops consist of cross-functional
  stakeholders who can define cross-functional requirements. Differences
  among stakeholders can be resolved more quickly and consensus is more
  easily attained in a facilitated workshop environment.

Group Creativity Techniques Group creativity involves several techniques,
like brainstorming, the Nominal Group technique, affinity diagrams, and
multicriteria decision analysis. We will cover each of these techniques in either
the Identify Risks process (Chapter 6) or the Plan Quality Management process
(Chapter 7).
Idea/mind mapping is a another group creativity technique in which participants
first use brainstorming techniques to record their ideas. Whiteboards and flip
charts are great tools to use with this process. The facilitator uses the whiteboard
to map ideas and, using a mind-mapping layout, group similar topics together.
There are a few mind-mapping software packages available on the market that
can greatly assist with this process. Mind mapping allows the participants to gain
an understanding of common ideas and themes, create new ideas, and understand
differences.
Group Decision-Making Techniques According to the PMBOK(R) Guide,
there are many methods groups can use to reach decisions. These methods can
also be used with the group creativity techniques. The four methods mentioned
are unanimity, where everyone agrees on the resolution or course of action;
majority, where more than 50 percent of the members support the resolution;
plurality, where the largest subgroup within the group makes the decision if
majority is not reached; and dictatorship, where one person makes the decision
on behalf of the group.
Questionnaires and Surveys This technique involves querying a large group
of participants via questionnaires or surveys. These tools allow you to gather
information quickly and apply statistical analysis, if needed, to the results.
Observations This technique is typically a one-on-one experience where an
observer sits side by side with the participant to observe how the participant
interacts with the product or service. This technique is also known as job
shadowing. For example, you may use this technique to determine requirements
for an upgrade to a software product. Sitting with users and watching their
interactions with the product enables observers to uncover requirements they
would not have ordinarily discovered. This technique can also involve
participant observers who perform the job themselves in order to ascertain
requirements.
Prototypes Prototyping is a technique that involves constructing a working
model or mock-up of the final product with which the participants can
experiment. The prototype does not usually contain all the functionality the end
product does, but it gives participants enough information that they can provide
feedback regarding the mock-up. This is an iterative process where participants
experiment and provide feedback and the prototype is revised and the cycle
starts again.
Benchmarking This technique is used in the Quality processes as well and
involves comparing measurements against standards to determine performance.
It can also compare processes, operations, management practices, and so on
against other departments, organizations, or industries to help refine and promote
best practices or come up with ideas to improve current practices.
Context Diagrams Context diagrams use actors and business processes or
equipment to visually show how interactions between them take place. Actors
are people who use or interact with the business processes or equipment, which
in turn produce outputs used by the actors.
Document Analysis Document analysis comes into play when it's important to
consider the organization's business plans, marketing plans, contracts, business
rules, strategic plans, and so on when determining requirements.
Documenting Requirements
Now that you've employed the tools and techniques of this process to gather
requirements, you'll want to record them in a requirements document.
Stakeholders sometimes have short memories, particularly on long-term projects,
so documenting requirements and obtaining their approval is essential for project
success. You will use the requirements documentation throughout the project to
manage stakeholder and customer expectations. This is a lot easier to accomplish
when they've agreed to the requirements ahead of time and you have their
approval documented.
I've already mentioned the first output of this process, which is requirements
documentation. The other output of this process is the requirements traceability
matrix. I'll describe each in detail next.

Requirements Documentation
As I mentioned earlier, requirements quantify and prioritize the wants, needs,
and expectations of the project sponsor and stakeholders to achieve the project
objectives. Requirements typically start out high level and are progressively
elaborated as the project progresses. You must be able to track, measure, test,
and trace the requirements of the project. You never want to find yourself at the
end of the project (or phase) and discover you have no way to validate the
requirements. If you can't measure or test whether the requirement satisfies the
business need of the project, the definition of success is left to the subjective
opinions of the stakeholders and team members.
You've worked hard to gather and define requirements and you don't want all
that effort going to waste. This output involves recording the requirements in a
requirements document. The PMBOK(R) Guide does not dictate the format of this
document and acknowledges that it can be formal with lots of detail or a simple
list categorized by stakeholder and priority. However, it does state that the
requirements document should include at least the following elements:
   Business need for the project and why it was undertaken
   Objectives of the project and the business objectives the project hopes to
   fulfill




  The first two items in this list--business need for the project and objectives
  The first two items in this list--business need for the project and objectives
  --are also needed for the traceability matrix.

   Functional requirements
   Nonfunctional requirements




  Functional requirements is a term used often in software development. It
  typically describes a behavior, such as calculations or processes that should
  occur once data is entered. In non-software terms, functional requirements
  might describe specifications, quantities, colors, and more. Nonfunctional
  requirements refers to elements that are related to the product but doesn't
  describe the product directly. In the case of a software product, this could be
  a security requirement or performance criteria.

   Quality requirements
   Acceptance criteria
   Transition requirements for the operations area or customer receiving the end
   result of the project
   Business rules
   Organizational areas and outside entities impacted
   Support and training requirements
   Assumptions and constraints
One of the most important elements of the requirements document that isn't in
the preceding list is the signatures of the key stakeholders indicating their
acceptance of the requirements. They will also sign the scope statement, which
we'll talk about in the section "Defining Scope" later in this chapter.

Requirements Traceability Matrix
The last output of the Collect Requirements process is the requirements
traceability matrix. The idea behind the traceability matrix is to document where
the requirement originated, document what the requirement will be traced to, and
then follow it through to delivery or completion. Table 3.1 shows a sample
traceability matrix with several attributes that identify the requirement.
Table 3.1 Requirements traceability matrix
Unique Description of       Source      Priority Test         Owner      Status
ID     Requirement                               Scenario
001      Requirement one Project   B              User       HR         Approved
                         objective                acceptance specialist
Each requirement should have its own unique identifier. You could devise a
numbering system that defines both the category of the requirement and a
unique, ascending number--for example, HR (for human resources) 001--or a
simple numbering system as shown in this example may suffice.
The description should be brief but have enough information to easily identify
the requirement.
The source column refers to where the requirement originated. Requirements
may come from many sources, including project objectives, business needs,
product design, the work breakdown structure, deliverables, and so on.
Priority refers to the priority of the requirement. You can use any prioritization
process, like a simple numbering system or an alpha system as the example
shows here. The definition of a "B" priority should be included in the
requirements management plan. Perhaps an "A" is essential to project success
and a "B" is highly desirable.
The test scenario in this example is where you record how the requirement will
be tested (or during which project phase) and the owner of the test item, who
will also decide if the test scenario passes or fails.
Status may capture information about the requirement that refers to whether the
requirement has been approved to be included in the project; if it was added,
deferred, or canceled; and so on.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the requirements traceability matrix helps
  assure that business value is realized when the project is complete because
  each requirement is linked to a business and project objective.
The next process in the Planning process group is the Define Scope process.
We'll look at that next.

Defining Scope
Now that you've documented the project requirements, you're ready to further
define the needs of the project in the Define Scope process. Scope can refer to
product scope (the features and characteristics that describe the product, service,
or result of the project) or project scope (the project management work). We'll
look at both product and project scope in this part of the chapter. The project
scope statement (an output of this process) is what you'll use to develop and
document a detailed description of the deliverables of the project and the work
needed to produce them. This process is progressively elaborated as more detail
becomes known.

  Exam Spotlight
  You'll want to pay particular attention to the accuracy and completeness of
  this process. Defining project scope is critical to the success of the project
  because it spells out exactly what the product or service of the project looks
  like. Conversely, poor scope definition might lead to cost increases, rework,
  schedule delays, and poor morale.

First, you'll examine the inputs and tools and techniques of this process.
The inputs to the Define Scope process are as follows:
   Scope management plan
   Project charter
   Requirements documentation
   Organizational process assets
Some of the important elements from the project charter that you'll want to
consider when writing the project scope statement (we'll cover this output later)
are the project description, project objectives, the characteristics of the product
of the project, and the process for approving the project.
Objectives are quantifiable criteria used to measure project success. They
describe "what" you're trying to do, accomplish, or produce. Quantifiable criteria
should at least include schedule, cost, and quality measures. You might use
business measures or quality targets as well. These objectives will be broken
down shortly into deliverables that will describe the objectives outlined in the
charter.
The requirements documentation is a starting point for developing the scope
statement. During the Define Scope process, you will determine which
requirements will be included in the final product, service, or result of the
project. They will be progressively elaborated and then documented in detail in
the scope statement. The idea here is that you know some information when the
charter is being written and more information comes to light when you hold
brainstorming sessions or other meetings with stakeholders to discover the
requirements of the product of the project (during the Collect Requirements
process). Finally, those requirements are decided on, further elaborated, and
documented (again) in much more detail in the scope statement. Keep in mind
that not all of the requirements that you gathered and documented in the Collect
Requirements process may be included in the scope statement. You will
reexamine those requirements here and determine which ones are keepers and
which ones are not.
Some of the other important information you'll want to key in on from these
inputs are historical information, the product description, and the project
assumptions and constraints. I'll cover each of these in the section "Writing the
Project Scope Statement" later in this chapter.

  Exam Spotlight
  If the project charter is missing or was not created, you'll need to develop the
  information normally found in the charter (or obtain it from other sources) to
  use as the foundation for creating the project scope statement.

You'll see some new tools and techniques in this process:
   Expert judgment
   Product analysis
   Alternatives generation
   Facilitated workshops
You learned about expert judgment in Chapter 2 and about facilitated workshops
earlier in this chapter. I'll discuss product analysis and alternatives generation in
earlier in this chapter. I'll discuss product analysis and alternatives generation in
the following sections.

Product Analysis
Product analysis goes hand in hand with the product scope description and,
therefore, is most useful when the project's end result is a product. Product
analysis is a method for converting the product description and project
objectives into deliverables and requirements. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, product analysis might include performing value analysis, product
breakdown, systems-engineering techniques, systems analysis, and value-
engineering techniques to further define the product or service.

  Exam Spotlight
  It's beyond the scope of this book to go into the various analysis techniques
  used in product analysis. For exam purposes, remember that product analysis
  is a tool and technique of the Define Scope process and memorize the list of
  analysis techniques that might be performed in this process.


Alternatives Generation
Alternatives generation is a technique used for discovering different methods or
ways of accomplishing the work of the project. For example, brainstorming
might be used to discover alternative ways of achieving one of the project
objectives. Perhaps the project's budget doesn't allow for a portion of the project
that the stakeholders think needs to be included. Brainstorming might uncover an
alternative that would allow the needed portion to be accomplished.
Lateral thinking is a form of alternatives generation that can be used to help
define scope. Edward de Bono created this term and has done extensive research
and writing on the topic of lateral thinking. The simplest definition is that it's
thinking outside the box. Lateral thinking is a process of breaking apart the
problem (or in our case the components of project scope, which are the
deliverables and requirements), looking at them from angles other than their
obvious presentation, and encouraging team members to come up with ways to
solve problems or look at scope that are not apparently obvious.

  Outside the Box
  Lateral thinking is a way of reasoning and thinking about problems from
  perspectives other than the obvious. It challenges our perceptions and
  assumptions. Consider these two examples of lateral thinking that I crafted
  based on some puzzles I found at this website: www.folj.com/lateral/. Use
  your favorite search engine and run a query on "lateral thinking puzzles" to
  find many more examples.
  Question: How could your pet Yorkie fall from the window of an 18-story
  building and live?
  Answer: The question asks how your pet could fall from an 18-story
  building and live; however, the question doesn't state that your pet fell from
  the 18th floor. So, your pet Yorkie fell from the basement-level window.
  Question: Eight chocolates are arranged in an antique candy dish. Eight
  people each take one chocolate. There is one chocolate remaining in the
  dish. How can that be?
  Answer: If there are eight chocolates in an antique dish, how can the last
  person take the last chocolate yet one remains in the dish? Well, the last
  person to take a chocolate took the dish as well--therefore, the last
  chocolate remained in the dish.
  Remember these examples the next time you're defining scope or looking for
  alternative answers to a problem.

The use of pairwise comparisons is another alternatives generation technique.
This is much like it sounds in that you compare any number of items against
each other to determine which is preferred. This technique typically uses
quantitative measures to determine the preferred option.

Writing the Project Scope Statement
The purpose of the project scope statement is to document the project objectives,
deliverables, and the work required to produce the deliverables so that it can be
used to direct the project team's work and as a basis for future project decisions.
The scope statement is an agreement between the project management team and
the project customer that states precisely what the work of the project will
produce. Simply put, the scope statement tells everyone concerned with the
project exactly what they're going to get when the work is finished.
  Exam Spotlight
  Understand that the purpose of the scope statement, according to the
  PMBOK(R) Guide, is to provide all the stakeholders with a foundational
  understanding of the project and product scope. It describes the project
  deliverables in detail. Also remember that the scope statement defines and
  progressively elaborates the work of the project. It guides the work of the
  project team during the Executing process, and all change requests will be
  evaluated against the scope statement. If the change request is outside the
  bounds of the project scope as documented in the project scope statement, it
  should be denied.

Since the scope statement serves as a baseline for the project, if questions arise
or changes are proposed later in the project, they can be compared to what's
documented in the scope statement. Making change decisions is easier when the
original deliverables and requirements are well documented. You'll also know
what is out of scope for the project simply because the work isn't documented in
the scope statement (or conversely, deliverables or other elements are
documented and noted as being specifically out of scope). The criteria outlined
in the scope statement will also be used to determine whether the project was
completed successfully. I hope you're already seeing the importance of
documenting project scope.

Understanding the Scope Statement Components
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the project scope statement should include all
of the following:
   Product scope description
   Acceptance criteria
   Project deliverables
   Project exclusions
   Project constraints
   Project assumptions
If the details surrounding these are spelled out in other documents, you don't
have to reenter all the information in the scope statement. Simply reference the
other document in the scope statement so that readers know where to find it.

  Exam Spotlight
  You may be thinking that the project scope statement has some of the same
  information as the project charter. Keep in mind the project charter is a high-
  level description of the project (and it names the project manager) whereas
  the project scope statement is a detailed description of the project and
  product scope and describes how the final product or result of the project
  will be accepted, along with the other items mentioned earlier.


Product Scope Description
The product scope description describes the characteristics of the product,
service, or result of the project. I talked about this in Chapter 2. If the product
scope description is contained in the project charter, you can reference the
project charter in the project scope statement, or you can copy and paste the
information from the project charter into the scope statement. It won't hurt
anything to have it in both places and will make reading the scope statement
easier.

  Exam Spotlight
  You'll use the project management plan as your measurement of project
  scope completion, and product scope completion will be measured against
  product requirements.


Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria include the process and criteria that will be used to
determine whether the deliverables and the final product, service, or results of
the project are acceptable and satisfactory. Acceptance criteria help you describe
project success because it defines the specifications the deliverables must meet
in order to be acceptable to the stakeholder. Acceptance criteria might include
any number of elements, such as quality criteria, fitness for use, and
performance criteria. This component should also describe the process
stakeholders will use to indicate their acceptance of the deliverables.
Project Deliverables
Deliverables are measurable outcomes, measurable results, or specific items that
must be produced or performed to consider the project or project phase
completed. Deliverables should be specific and verifiable. For example, one of
your deliverables might include widgets with a 3" diameter that will in turn be
assembled into the final product. This deliverable, a 3" diameter widget, is
specific and measurable. However, if the deliverable was not documented or not
communicated to the manager or vendor responsible for manufacturing the
widgets, there could be a disaster waiting to happen. If they deliver 2" widgets
instead of the required 3" version, it would throw the entire project off schedule
or perhaps cause the project to fail. This could be a career-limiting move for the
project manager because it's the project manager's responsibility to document
deliverables and monitor the progress of those deliverables throughout the
project. Most projects have multiple deliverables. As in this example, if you are
assembling a new product with many parts, each of the parts might be
considered independent deliverables.
A project deliverable is typically a unique and verifiable product or result or a
service that's performed. The product or service must be produced or performed
in order to consider the project complete. The deliverables might also include
supplementary outcomes such as documentation or project management reports.
The bottom line is this: No matter how well you apply your project skills, if the
wrong deliverables are produced or the project is managed to the wrong
objectives, you will have an unsuccessful project on your hands.

  Critical Success Factors
  Deliverables and requirements are sometimes referred to as critical success
  factors. Critical success factors are those elements that must be completed in
  order for the project to be considered complete. For example, if you're
  building a bridge, one of the deliverables might be to produce a specific
  number of trusses that will be used to help support the bridge. Without the
  trusses, the bridge can't be completed; in fact, the bridge might not stand
  without them. The trusses, in this case, are critical success factors. Not all
  deliverables are necessarily critical success factors, but many of them will
  fall into this category and should be documented as such.
  Documenting All the Deliverables and Requirements
  One of the project manager's primary functions is to accurately document the
  deliverables and requirements of the project and then manage the project so
  that they are produced according to the agreed-upon criteria. Deliverables
  describe the components of the goals and objectives in a quantifiable way.
  Requirements are the specifications of the deliverables. (Remember for the
  exam that requirements are documented in the Collect Requirements process
  that occurs before the Define Scope process.)
  The project manager should use the project charter as a starting point for
  identifying and progressively elaborating project deliverables, but it's
  possible that only some of the deliverables will be documented there.
  Remember that the charter was signed by a manager external to the project,
  and it was the first take at defining the project objectives and deliverables.
  As the project manager, it's your job to make certain all the deliverables are
  identified and documented in the project scope statement. That's because the
  scope statement (not the project charter) serves as the agreement among
  stakeholders--including the customer of the project--regarding what
  deliverables will be produced to meet and satisfy the business needs of the
  project.
  Interview the stakeholders, other project managers, project team members,
  customers, management staff, industry experts, and any other experts who
  can help you identify all the deliverables of the project. Depending on the
  size of the project, you might be able to accomplish this in a group setting
  using simple brainstorming techniques, but large complex projects might
  have scope statements for each deliverable of the project. Remember that the
  project scope statement is progressively elaborated into finer detail and is
  used later to help decompose the work of the project into smaller tasks and
  activities.


Project Exclusions
Project exclusions are, as you'd guess, anything that isn't included as a
deliverable or work of the project. You'll want to note the project exclusions in
the project scope statement so that you can continue to manage stakeholder
expectations throughout the project.
Project Constraints
Constraints are anything that either restricts the actions of the project team or
dictates the actions of the project team. Constraints put you in a box. (I hope
you're not claustrophobic.) As a project manager, you have to manage to the
project constraints, which sometimes requires creativity.
In my organization--and I'm sure the same is true in yours--we have far more
project requests than we have resources to work on them. In this case, resources
are a constraint. You'll find that a similar phenomenon occurs on individual
projects as well. Almost every project you'll encounter must work within the
triple constraint combination of scope, time, and cost. The quality of the project
(or the outcomes of the project) is affected by how well these three constraints
are managed. Usually, one or two triple constraints apply (and sometimes all
three), which restricts the actions of the project team. You might work on
projects where you have an almost unlimited budget (don't we wish!) but time is
the limitation. For example, if the president mandated that NASA put an
astronaut on Mars by the end of 2020, you'd have a time-constrained project on
your hands.
Other projects might present the opposite scenario. You have all the time you
need to complete the project, but the budget is fixed. Still other projects might
incorporate two or more of the project constraints. Government agencies are
notorious for starting projects that have at least two and sometimes all three
constraints. For example, new tax laws are passed that impact the computer
programs, requiring new programs to calculate and track the tax changes.
Typically, a due date is given when the tax law takes effect, and the organization
responsible is required to implement the changes with no additions to budget or
staff. In other words, they are told to use existing resources to accomplish the
objectives of the project, and the specific requirements, or scope, of the project
are such that they cannot be changed to try to meet the time deadline.
As a project manager, one of your biggest jobs is to balance the project
constraints while meeting the expectations of your stakeholders. In most
projects, you usually will have to balance only one or two of the triple
constraints. For example, if one of the project objectives is to complete the
project by the end of the year and stay within a certain budget, you will need to
balance the other two triple constraints: time and cost. As the saying goes, "I can
give it to you fast or I can give it to you cheap, but I can't give it to you fast and
cheap."
Constraints can take on many forms and aren't limited to time, cost, and scope.
Constraints can take on many forms and aren't limited to time, cost, and scope.
Anything that impedes your project team's ability to perform the work of the
project or specifically dictates the way the project should be performed is
considered a constraint. Constraints can come from inside or outside the project
or organization. Let's say to fulfill some of the deliverables of your project you'll
have to purchase a large amount of materials and equipment. Procurement
processes may be so cumbersome that ordering supplies for a project adds
months to the project schedule. The procurement process itself becomes a
constraint because of the methods and procedures you're required to use to get
the materials.
You're likely to encounter the following constraints on your future projects:
Time Constraints As I said, time can be a project constraint. This usually
comes in the form of an enforced deadline, commonly known as the "make it
happen now" scenario. If you are in charge of the company's holiday bash
scheduled for December 10, your project is time constrained. Once the
invitations are out and the hall has been rented, you can't move the date. All
activities on this project are driven by the due date.
Budget Constraints Budgets, or cost, are another element of the classic triple
constraint. Budgets limit the project team's ability to obtain resources and might
potentially limit the scope of the project. For example, component X cannot be
part of this project because the budget doesn't support it.
Scope Constraints Scope is the third element of the original triple constraints.
Scope defines the deliverables of the project, and you may have situations where
scope is predefined by your project sponsor. Alternatively, sometimes budget
constraints will impact the scope of the project and require you to cut back on
the deliverables originally planned.
Quality Constraints Quality constraints typically are restricted by the
specifications of the product or service. The specifications for those 3" widgets
we talked about earlier could be considered a quality constraint. Most of the
time, if quality is a constraint, one of the other constraints--time or budget--has
to have some give. You can't produce high quality on a restricted budget and
within a tightly restricted time schedule. Of course, there are exceptions--but
only in the movies.
Schedule Constraints Schedule constraints can cause interesting dilemmas for
the project manager. For example, say you're the project manager in charge of
building a new football stadium in your city. The construction of the stadium
will require the use of cranes--and crane operators--at certain times during the
project. If crane operators are not available when your schedule calls for them,
you'll have to make schedule adjustments so that the crane operators can come in
at the right time.
Resource Constraints Resources could be a constraint from a few different
perspectives, including availability of key resources both internally and in the
marketplace, skill levels, and personality. You may also have availability issues
or quality problems with nonhuman resources, like materials and goods. Human
resources constraints are something I deal with on every project.
Technology Constraints Technology is marvelous. In fact, how did humans
survive prior to the invention of computers and cell phones? However, it can
also be a project constraint. For example, your project might require the use of
new technology that is still so new it hasn't been released on a wide-scale basis
or hasn't been adequately tested to determine stability in production. One impact
might be that the project will take an additional six months until the new
technology is ready and tested.
Directive Constraints Directives from management can be constraints as
well. Your department might have specific policies that management requires for
the type of work you're about to undertake. This might add time to the project, so
you must consider those policies when identifying project constraints. When
you're performing work on contract, the provisions of the contract can be
constraints.
Constraints, particularly the classic triple constraints, can be used to help drive
out the objectives and requirements of the project. If it's difficult to discern
which constraint is the primary constraint, ask the project sponsor something like
this: "Ms. Sponsor, if you could have only one of these two alternatives, which
would you choose? The project is delivered on the date you've stated, or we don't
spend one penny more than the approved budget." If Ms. Sponsor replies with
the date response, you know your primary constraint is time. If push comes to
shove during the project Planning processes for this project, the budget might
have to give because time cannot.
You'll want to understand what the primary constraint is on the project. If you
assume the primary constraint is budget when in actuality the primary constraint
is time, in the immortal words of two-year-olds worldwide, "Uh-oh."
Understanding the constraints and which one carries the most importance will
help you later in the project Planning process group with details such as scope
planning, scheduling, estimating, and project management plan development.
That's assuming your project gets to the project Planning processes, which brings
That's assuming your project gets to the project Planning processes, which brings
me to the next topic: project assumptions.

Project Assumptions
You've probably heard the old saying about the word assume, something about
what it makes out of "u" and "me." In the case of project management, however,
throw this old saying out the window, because it's not true.
Assumptions, for the purposes of project management, are things you believe to
be true. For example, if you're working on a large construction project, you
might make assumptions about the availability of materials. You might assume
that concrete, lumber, drywall, and so on are widely available and reasonably
priced. You might also assume that finding contract labor is either easy or
difficult, depending on the economic times and the availability of labor in your
locale. Each project will have its own set of assumptions, and the assumptions
should be identified, documented, and updated throughout the project.
It's essential to understand and document the assumptions you're making, and the
assumptions your stakeholders are making, about the project. It's also important
to find out as many of the assumptions as you can up front. Projects can fail,
sometimes after lots of progress has been made, because an important
assumption was forgotten or the assumption was incorrect. Defining new
assumptions and refining old ones are forms of progressive elaboration.
Let's say you make plans to meet your buddy for lunch at 11:30 on Friday at
your favorite spot. When Friday rolls around, you assume he's going to show up,
barring any catastrophes between the office and the restaurant. Project
assumptions work the same way. For planning purposes, you presume the event
or thing you've made the assumptions about is true, real, or certain. You might
assume that key resources will be available when needed on the project.
Document that assumption. If Sandy is the one and only resource who can
perform a specific task at a certain point in the project, document your
assumption that Sandy will be available and run it by her manager. If Sandy
happens to be on a plane for Helsinki at the time you thought she was going to
be working on the project, you could have a real problem on your hands.
Other assumptions could be factors such as vendor delivery times, product
availability, contractor availability, the accuracy of the project plan, the
assumption that key project members will perform adequately, contract signing
dates, project start dates, and project phase start dates. This is not an exhaustive
list, but it should get you thinking in the right direction. As you interview your
stakeholders, ask them about their assumptions and add them to your list. Use
brainstorming exercises with your team and other project participants to come up
brainstorming exercises with your team and other project participants to come up
with additional assumptions.




  Think about some of the factors you usually take for granted when you're
  trying to identify assumptions. Many times they're the elements everyone
  expects will be available or will behave in a specific way. Think about
  factors such as key team members' availability, access to information, access
  to equipment, management support, and vendor reliability.

Try to validate your assumptions whenever possible. When discussing
assumptions with vendors, make them put those assumptions in writing. In fact,
if the services or goods you're expecting to be delivered by your suppliers are
critical to the project, include a clause in the contract to assure a contingency
plan in case your suppliers fail to perform. For example, if you're expecting 200
computers to be delivered, configured, and installed by a certain date, require the
vendor to pay the cost of rental equipment in the event the vendor can't deliver
on the promised due date.
Remember, when assumptions are incorrect or not documented, it could cause
problems partway through the project and might even be a project killer.

Approving and Publishing the Project Scope Statement
Just like the project charter, the project scope statement should be approved,
agreed upon, published, and distributed to the stakeholders, key management
personnel, and project team members. This isn't an official output of this
process, nor is it noted in the PMBOK(R) Guide. You can accomplish this with a
formal sign-off procedure that's documented as part of the approval
requirements section of the scope statement. When stakeholders sign off and
agree to the scope statement, they're agreeing to the deliverables and
requirements of the project. As with the project charter, their agreement and
endorsement of the project requirements and deliverables will likely sustain their
participation and cooperation throughout the rest of the project. That doesn't
mean they'll agree to everything as the project progresses, but it does mean the
stakeholders are informed and will likely remain active project participants.
  Remember that the definition of a successful project is one that
  accomplishes the goals of the project and meets stakeholders' expectations.
  Understand and document those expectations and you're off to a good start.


Updating the Project Documents
The last output of this process is project documents updates. When you're in the
midst of defining deliverables, you'll often find that changes to the original
project objectives, requirements, or stakeholder register will occur. This may
require updates to the stakeholder register, the requirements documentation, and
requirements traceability matrix. Changes to scope may also occur later in the
project. When the changes are approved, you'll need to update the scope
statement and notify stakeholders that changes have been made.



        Real World Scenario

  Mountain Streams Services
  Maria Sanchez is the CEO of Mountain Streams Services. She recently
  accepted a prestigious industry award on behalf of the company. Maria
  knows that without the dedication and support of her employees, Mountain
  Streams Services wouldn't have achieved this great milestone.
  Maria wants to host a reception for the employees and their guests in
  recognition of all their hard work and contributions to the company. Maria
  has appointed you to arrange the reception.
  The reception is scheduled for April 12, and Maria has given you a budget of
  $125 per person. The company employs 200 people. The reception should be
  semiformal.
  You've documented the deliverables as follows:
     Location selection
     Food and beverage menu
     Invitations
     Entertainment
     Insurance coverage
     Decorations
     Photographer
     Agenda
     In addition to the deliverables, you want to go over the following
     requirements with Maria to be certain you are both in agreement:
     The location should be in the downtown area.
     Employees are encouraged to bring one guest but no children.
     There will be an open bar paid for by Maria.
     The agenda will include a speech by Maria, followed by the distribution
     of bonus checks to every employee. This is to be kept secret until the
     reception.
     The decorations should include gold-trimmed fountain pens with the
     company logo at every place setting for the attendees to keep.
     Once you've documented all the particulars, you ask to speak with Maria
     to go over this project scope statement and get her approval before
     proceeding with the project.


Creating the Work Breakdown Structure
Have you ever mapped out a family tree? In the Create WBS process, you'll
construct something like it called a work breakdown structure (WBS). It maps
the deliverables of the project with subdeliverables and other components
stemming from each major deliverable in a tree or chart format. Simply put, a
WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchy that defines and organizes the entire
scope of work of the project and only the work of the project. The items defined
on the WBS come from the approved scope statement. Like the scope statement,
the WBS serves as a foundational agreement among the stakeholders and project
team members regarding project scope.
  Exam Spotlight
  Subdividing deliverables into smaller components is the purpose of the
  Create WBS process. The PMBOK(R) Guide calls this decomposition, which
  is also a tool and technique of this process.

The WBS will be used throughout many of the remaining Planning processes
and is an important part of project planning. As you probably have concluded,
everything you've done so far builds on the previous step. The project charter,
requirements documentation, and project scope statement outline the project
objectives, requirements, and deliverables. Now you'll use that comprehensive
list of requirements and deliverables to build the framework of the WBS.




  I can't stress enough the importance of the work you've done up to this point.
  Your WBS will be only as accurate as your list of requirements and
  deliverables. The deliverables will become the groupings that will form the
  higher levels of the WBS from which activities will be derived later in the
  Planning processes.

The WBS should detail the full scope of work needed to complete the project.
This breakdown will smooth the way for estimating project cost and time,
scheduling resources, and determining quality controls later in the Planning
processes. Project progress will be based on the estimates and measurements
assigned to the WBS segments. So, again, accuracy and completeness are
required when composing your WBS.
Before you begin constructing the WBS, you'll need to gather and review some
important project documents. You'll look at those next.

Gathering the WBS Inputs
The inputs to the Create WBS process aren't new. They are as follows:
   Scope management plan
   Project scope statement
   Requirements documentation
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The scope management plan outlines how you will create the WBS from the
elements listed in the scope statement, and it also describes how to obtain
approval for and maintain the WBS. The important aspect to note about the
inputs to this process is that the approved project scope statement is the
document you will use to define and organize the work of the project in the
WBS. Make certain you're using the most current version of the scope statement.
Also note that the WBS, just like the project scope statement, contains the work
of the project and only the work of the project.

Decomposing the Deliverables
The Create WBS process consists of two tools and techniques, decomposition
and expert judgment. Decomposition involves breaking down the deliverables
into smaller, more manageable components of work. The idea here is to break
down the deliverables to a point where you can easily plan, execute, monitor and
control, and close out the project deliverables. Decomposition typically pertains
to breaking deliverables down into smaller deliverables, or component
deliverables, where each level of the WBS (or each level of decomposition) is a
more detailed definition of the level above it.
This breaking-down or decomposing process will accomplish several tasks for
you, one of which is improving estimates. It's easier to estimate the costs, time,
and resources needed for individual work components than it is to estimate them
for a whole body of work or deliverable. Using smaller components also makes
it easier to assign performance measures and controls. These give you a baseline
to compare against throughout the project or phase. Finally, assigning resources
and responsibility for the components of work makes better sense because
several resources with different skills might be needed to complete one
deliverable. Breaking them down assures that an assignment, and the
responsibility for that assignment, goes to the proper parties.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, decomposition is a five-step process:
1. Identify the deliverables and work. This step involves identifying all the
   major project deliverables and related work. You can use the expert
   judgment technique to analyze the project scope statement and identify the
   major deliverables.
2. Organize the WBS. This step involves organizing the work of the project
   and determining the WBS structure. (I'll talk more about constructing the
   WBS in the next section.)
3. Decompose the WBS components into lower-level components. WBS
   components, like the deliverables and requirements, should be defined in
   tangible, verifiable terms so that performance and successful completion (or
   delivery) are easily measured and verified. Each component must clearly
   describe the product, service, or result in verifiable terms, and it must be
   assigned to a unit in the organization that will take responsibility for
   completing the work and making certain of its accuracy.
4. Assign identification codes. This step is a process where you assign
   identification codes or numbers to each of the WBS components.




     I'll talk more about the process in step 4 later in this chapter in the
     section "Understanding the Unique WBS Identifiers."

5. Verify the WBS. This step is a verification step. Examine the decomposition
   to determine whether all the components are clear and complete. Determine
   whether each component listed is absolutely necessary to fulfill the
   requirements of the deliverable, and verify that the decomposition is
   sufficient to describe the work.
Of course you won't perform this process alone. That's where the expert
judgment tool and technique comes into play. You'll work with others such as
team members, stakeholders, other experts with specific training or industry
knowledge, those who have worked on similar projects in the past, and industry
aids such as templates.
You can now plug the components you and the team have identified into the
WBS. This all sounds like a lot of work. I won't kid you--it is, but it's essential
to project success. If you don't perform the WBS process adequately and
accurately, you might end up setting yourself up for a failed project at worst or
for lots of project changes, delayed schedules, and increased costs at best--not
to mention all those team members who'll throw up their hands when you return
to them for the third or fourth time to ask that they redo work they've already
to them for the third or fourth time to ask that they redo work they've already
completed. I know you won't let this happen, so let's move on to constructing the
WBS.
The Create WBS process has several outputs, one of which is the WBS. You'll
look at the specifics of how to create the WBS next.

Constructing the WBS
There is no "right" way to construct a WBS. In practice, the chart structure is
used quite often. (This structure resembles an organization chart with different
levels of detail.) But a WBS could be composed in outline form as well. The
choice is yours. You'll look at a couple of ways shortly, along with some figures
that depict the different levels of a WBS.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, you can organize the WBS in several ways:
Major Deliverables and Subprojects The major deliverables of the project
are used as the first level of decomposition in this structure. If you're opening a
new store, for example, the deliverables might include determining location,
store build-out, furnishings, product, and so on. I'll talk about subprojects next.
Subproject That May Be Executed Outside the Project Team Another way
to organize the work is by subprojects. Perhaps you're expanding an existing
highway and several subprojects are involved. Some of your first level of
decomposition might include these subprojects: demolition, design, bridgework,
and paving. Each of the subproject managers will develop a WBS for their
subproject that details the work required for that deliverable. When subproject
work is involved, oftentimes the subproject work is contracted out. In this
example, if you contracted out the bridgework deliverable, this subproject
requires its own WBS, which the seller (the bridgework subcontractor) is
responsible for creating as part of the contract and contract work.
Project Phases Many projects are structured or organized by project phases.
For example, let's say you work in the construction industry. The project phases
used in your industry might include project initiation, planning, designing,
building, inspection, and turnover. A feasibility study might be a deliverable
under the project initiation phase, blueprints might be a deliverable under the
planning phase, and so on. Each phase listed here would be the first level of
decomposition (that is, the first level of the WBS); their deliverables would be
the next level, and so on.
We'll take a look at some example WBS structures next.
Understanding the Various WBS Levels
Although the project manager is free to determine the number of levels in the
WBS based on the complexity of the project, all WBS structures start with the
project itself. Some WBS structures show the project as level one. Others show
the level under the project, or the first level of decomposition, as level one. The
PMBOK(R) Guide notes that level one is the project level, so I'll follow that
example here.
The first level of decomposition might be the deliverables, phases, or
subprojects, as I talked about earlier. (Remember that the first level of
decomposition is actually the second level of the WBS because the project level
is the first level.) The levels that follow show more and more detail and might
include more deliverables followed by requirements. Each of these breakouts is
called a level in the WBS. The lowest level of any WBS is called the work
package level. The goal is to construct the WBS to the work package level where
you can easily and reliably estimate cost and schedule dates. Keep in mind that
not all of the deliverables may need the same amount of decomposition. Also
realize that performing too much decomposition can be as unproductive as not
decomposing enough. My rule of thumb is, when the work outlined in the work
package level is easily understood by team members and can be completed
within a reasonable length of time, you've decomposed enough. If you
decompose to the point where work packages are describing individual activities
associated with higher-level elements, you've gone too far.

  Exam Spotlight
  Remember that each descending level of the WBS is a more detailed
  description of the project deliverables than the level above it. Each
  component of the WBS should be defined clearly and completely and should
  describe how the work of the project will be performed and controlled.
  Collectively, all the levels of the WBS roll up to the top so that all the work
  of the project is captured (and no additional work is added). According to the
  PMBOK(R) Guide, this is known as the 100-percent rule.
  There is some controversy among project managers over whether activities
  should be listed on the WBS. In practice, I often include activities on my
  work breakdown structure for small projects only because it facilitates other
  Planning processes later. In this case, the activities are the work package
  level. However, you should realize that large, complex projects do not
  include activities on the WBS. For the exam, remember that you will
  decompose activities during the Define Activities process that I'll talk about
  in Chapter 4, "Creating the Project Schedule," and that activities are not part
  of the WBS.

The easiest way to describe the steps for creating a WBS is with an example.
Let's suppose you work for a software company that publishes children's games.
You're the project manager for the new Billy Bob's Bassoon game, which
teaches children about music, musical rhythm, and beginning sight reading. The
first box on the WBS is the project name; it appears at the top of the WBS, as
shown in Figure 3.1, and is defined as WBS level one.




Figure 3.1 WBS levels one and two
The next level is the first level of decomposition and should describe the major
deliverables for the project. In this example, some of the deliverables might be
requirements definition, design specifications, and programming. This isn't an
exhaustive list of deliverables; in practice, you would go on to place all of your
major deliverables into the WBS as level-two content. For illustration purposes,
just look at a slice of the WBS for this project. Refer to Figure 3.1 to see the
WBS with level-one and level-two detail added.
Level-three content might be the component deliverables that are further broken
out from the major deliverables of level two, or it might be the products or
results that contribute to the deliverable. The Billy Bob's Bassoon example
shows further deliverables as level-three content. See Figure 3.2 for an
illustration of the WBS so far.




Figure 3.2 WBS levels one, two, and three




  Large, complex projects are often composed of several subprojects that
  collectively make up the main project. The WBS for a project such as the
  Billy Bob's Bassoon game would show the subprojects as level-one detail.
  These subprojects' major deliverables would then be listed as level-two
  content, perhaps more deliverables as level three, and so on.

The goal here is to eventually break the work out to the point where the
responsibility and accountability for each work package can be assigned to an
organizational unit or a team of people. In Figure 3.3, I've decomposed this WBS
to the fourth level to show an even finer level of deliverable detail. Remember
that activities are not usually included in the WBS. An easy way to differentiate
between deliverables and activities is to use nouns as the deliverable descriptors
and verbs as activity descriptors (we'll talk about activities in Chapter 4).
Reaching way back to my grade-school English, I recall that a noun is a person,
place, or thing. In this example, the deliverables are described using nouns.
When we get to the activity list, you might use verbs like define, design, and
determine to describe them.




Figure 3.3 WBS levels one, two, three, and four
You can see from these illustrations how a poorly defined scope or inadequate
list of deliverables will lead to a poorly constructed WBS. Not only will this
make the WBS look sickly, but the project itself will suffer and might even
succumb to the dreaded premature project demise. The final cost of the project
will be higher than estimated, and lots of rework (translation: late nights and
weekends) will be needed to account for the missing work not listed on the
WBS. You can construct a good WBS and maintain a healthy project by taking
the time to document all the deliverables during the Define Scope process.

  WBS Templates
  WBS Templates
  Work breakdown structures can be constructed using WBS templates or the
  WBS from a similar, completed project. Although every project is unique,
  many companies and industries perform the same kind of projects
  repeatedly. The deliverables are similar from project to project, and they
  generally follow a consistent path. WBS templates can be used in a case like
  this as a tool to simplify the WBS process, saving the project manager time.

Don't get too carried away when creating a WBS. The object is to define the
work of the project so you can easily plan, manage, monitor, and control the
work. But you don't want to take this too far. If you decompose the work to the
point that you're showing every minute detail, you've ventured into inefficiency
and will find it more difficult to plan and manage. In addition, you're potentially
stifling the creativity of the people working on the project because everything is
so narrowly defined.
Sometimes, particularly when working on large projects that consist of several
subprojects, some of the subprojects might not be scheduled until a future date.
Obviously, it makes sense to develop the WBS in detail at that future date when
the deliverables and subprojects are better known and more details are available.
This technique is called rolling wave planning. The idea behind this technique is
that you elaborate the work of the project to the level of detail you know about at
the time. If a subproject or deliverable is scheduled sometime in the future, the
only component that might appear on the WBS today is the subproject itself. As
you get closer to the subproject, you'll elaborate the details of the subproject and
record them on the WBS.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand that rolling wave planning is a process of elaborating
  deliverables, project phases, or subprojects in the WBS to differing levels of
  decomposition depending on the expected date of the work. Work in the near
  term is described in more detail than work to be performed in the future.


Understanding the Unique WBS Identifiers
Each element at each level of the WBS is generally assigned a unique identifier
according to the PMBOK(R) Guide. This unique identifier is typically a number,
and it's used to sum and track the costs, schedule, and resources associated with
the WBS elements. The numbers are usually associated with the corporation's
chart of accounts, which is used to track costs by category. These codes are
known as control accounts, and collectively, the control accounts are known as
the code of accounts. The unique identifiers for the requirements definition
branch of the WBS might look something like this:
   10-1 Billy Bob's Bassoon
   10-2 Requirements Definition
   10-3 Game Requirements
       10-3-1 Character Definition
       10-3-2 Instruments Design
   10-4 Software Requirements
       10-4-1 Platform
       10-4-2 System Description

Defining Work Packages
Work packages are the components that can be assigned to one person, or a team
of people, with clear accountability and responsibility for completing the
assignment, and they can be monitored and controlled throughout the project.
Assignments are easily made at the work package level but can be made at any
level in the WBS. The work package level is where time estimates, cost
estimates, and resource estimates are determined.




  As mentioned earlier, the project manager is free to determine the number of
  levels in the WBS based on the complexity of the project. You need to
  include enough levels to accurately estimate project time and costs but not so
  many levels that it's difficult to distinguish between the components.
  Regardless of the number of levels in a WBS, the lowest level in a WBS is
  called the work package level.

Work package levels on large projects can represent subprojects that are further
decomposed into their own work breakdown structures. They might also consist
decomposed into their own work breakdown structures. They might also consist
of project work that will be completed by a vendor, another organization, or
another department in your organization. If you're giving project work to another
department in your organization, you'll assign the work packages to individual
managers, who will in turn break them down into activities during the Define
Activities process later in the Planning process group.
Work packages might be assigned to vendors or others external to the
organization. For example, perhaps one of the deliverables in your project is
special packaging and a vendor is responsible for completing this work. The
vendor will likely treat this deliverable as a project within its own organization
and construct its own WBS with several levels of decomposition. However, for
your project, it's a deliverable listed at the work package level of the WBS.




  This might seem self-evident, but work packages not shown on the WBS are
  not included in the project. The same holds true for the project scope
  statement--if the deliverable isn't noted there, it isn't part of the project.




         Real World Scenario

  The Lincoln Street Office Building
  Flagship International has just purchased a new building to house its
  growing staff. The folks at Flagship consider themselves very lucky to have
  won the bid on the property located in a prime section of the downtown area.
  The building is a historic building and is in need of some repairs and
  upgrades to make it suitable for office space. Constructing the renovations
  will require special handling and care, as outlined in the Historical Society
  Building Revisions Guide.
  Alfredo Martini is the project manager assigned to the renovation project.
  Alfredo has already determined the deliverables for this project. In so doing,
  he has discovered that he will not be able to manage all the work himself. He
will need several subproject managers working on individual deliverables,
all reporting to him. Alfredo calls a meeting with the other project managers
to develop the WBS. Let's eavesdrop on the meeting.
"As you all know, we're planning to move into the Lincoln Street building
by November 1. There is quite a bit of work to do between now and then,
and I'm enlisting each of you to manage a segment of this project. Take a
look at this WBS."
Here's how a portion of the WBS that Alfredo constructed looks.
Lincoln Street Building Renovation
   2.0 Facility Safety
       2.1 Sprinkler System
       2.2 Elevators
       2.3 Emergency Evacuation Plans
   3.0 Asbestos Abatement
       3.1 Inspection and Identification
       3.2 Plans for Removal
   4.0 Office Space
       4.1 Building Floor Plans
       4.2 Plans for Office Space Allocation
       4.3 Plans for Break Room Facilities
       4.4 Plans for Employee Workout Room
Alfredo continues, "I'm going to manage the Facility Safety project. Adrian,
I'd like you to take the Asbestos Abatement project, and Orlando, you're
responsible for the Office Space project."
"Alfredo," Adrian says, "asbestos abatement is going to take contractors and
specialized equipment. We don't have staff to do these tasks."
"I understand. You'll need to take charge of securing the contractor to handle
this. Your responsibility will be to manage the contractor and keep them on
schedule," Alfredo answers.
Orlando reminds Alfredo that he has missed a deliverable on the WBS. "Part
of the Office Space project needs to include the network communications
  of the Office Space project needs to include the network communications
  and telecommunications equipment rooms. I don't see that on here."
  "Good point, Orlando," Alfredo says. "The level-two and level-three
  elements of this WBS are not complete. Each of you has been assigned to
  the subproject level, level one. Your first assignment is to meet back here in
  two weeks with a WBS for your subproject. I'd like to see some ideas about
  the staff assignments you'd make at the work package level and how long
  you think these components will take. We'll refine those after we meet next."


Creating WBS Process Outputs
The Create WBS process has two outputs: the scope baseline and project
documents updates. We'll look at both of these next.

Scope Baseline
Remember how I said that everything you've done so far has built upon itself?
This is an important concept you should know for this output. The scope
baseline for the project is the approved project scope statement, the WBS, and
the WBS dictionary. (You'll recall from Chapter 2 that the project scope
statement serves as a baseline for future project decisions because it helps the
team determine whether requested changes are inside or outside of scope.) In
other words, these documents together describe in detail all the work of the
project. From these documents, you'll develop schedules, assign resources, and
monitor and control the work of the project according to what's described here.
We've already talked about the project scope statement and the WBS, but let's
look at the WBS dictionary.

  Exam Spotlight
  The scope baseline is defined as the approved version of the detailed project
  scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. Understand this concept
  for the exam. This process does not name the WBS as an output; the WBS is
  included as part of the scope baseline output.


WBS Dictionary
The WBS dictionary, an element of the scope baseline, is where work component
descriptions listed on the WBS are documented. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, the WBS dictionary should include the following elements for each
component of the WBS:
   Code of accounts identifier
   Description of the work of the component
   Organization responsible for completing the component
   List of schedule milestones
   Schedule activities associated with the schedule milestones
   Required resources
   Cost estimates
   Quality requirements
   Criteria for acceptance
   Technical references
   Contract or agreements information
   Constraints and assumptions
Let's look at an example of what some of the elements of a WBS dictionary
entry might look like. You'll use the work package level called Inspection and
Identification defined in the sidebar "The Lincoln Street Office Building" earlier.
The WBS dictionary entry for this might look like the following:
   3.1 Inspection and Identification
       Description of work--Inspect the building for asbestos, and identify all
       areas where it's found. Update the plan for removal (WBS 2.2) with each
       location identified.
       Responsible organization--Adrian in facilities will hire and oversee a
       contractor to perform this work.
       Schedule milestones--Inspection and identification to start after
       contractor is identified and hired (no later than July 1). Work should be
       completed no later than September 15.
       Contract information--Two contractors have been identified as
       qualified and experienced in this type of work. Contract process should
       close no later than June 12.
If the WBS and the WBS dictionary are constructed well, you've given yourself
If the WBS and the WBS dictionary are constructed well, you've given yourself
a huge helping hand with the remaining Planning processes. The completion of
many of the remaining processes depends on the project scope statement and
WBS being accurate and complete. You'll use the work packages created here to
further elaborate the work into activities. From there, you can estimate costs,
develop schedules, and so on. The WBS is an essential tool for project planning,
so keep it handy.

Project Documents Updates
Project documents updates might include updates to the requirements document,
which can come about as a result of changes that occur when you're creating the
WBS. You can see from the examples you've walked through in this chapter how
new deliverables or requirements might surface as a result of working on the
WBS. These requested changes should be reviewed and either approved or
denied using your change control processes. The approved changes will likely
change the project scope statement, the project management plan, and other
project documents. These documents should be updated to reflect the approved
changes.




  I recommend reviewing Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures,
  Second Edition, published by PMI, to see examples of industry-specific
  WBS templates, or you can modify the templates for particular business
  areas that may not be represented.




  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  The project charter kickoff meeting was held and well attended. You're
  ready to start gathering requirements and writing the project scope
  statement, and you have a question or two for Dirk. You knock on his door,
  and he invites you in.
  "Shoot," he says.
  "I'm ready to define the deliverables and requirements for this project. I want
  to make sure I get the right folks involved in the meeting. Who are key
  stakeholders you recommend I speak with?"
stakeholders you recommend I speak with?"
"I can think of a few people right off that you don't want to miss. There's
Jake Peterson over in facilities. He's in charge of store furnishings, shelving,
things like that--any supplies for the stores that aren't retail products. He can
help out with store build-outs too. He supervised our last eight stores and did
a terrific job."
"Anyone else?" you ask.
"You should also talk to Jill Overstreet, the director in charge of retail
products. She can help with the initial store stocking, and once the store is
open, her group will take over the ongoing operations. All the district
managers report to Jill."
You thank Dirk and tell him you're going to contact Jake and Jill and set up
a brainstorming session to determine requirements.
A few days later.
You review your notes and reread the first draft of the project scope
statement you've prepared for the Kitchen Heaven retail store before looking
for Dirk. After your meetings with the stakeholders, you were better able to
refine the project objectives and deliverables.
"Dirk, I'm glad I caught you. I'd like to go over the project scope statement
with you before I give it to the stakeholders. Do you have a few minutes?"
"Sure," Dirk says. "Let's have it."
"The project objective is to open the 50th Kitchen Heaven store in Colorado
Springs by February 1. When I met with Jake, he confirmed it takes 120
days to do the store build-out. That includes having the shelves set up and in
place, ready to stock with inventory."
Dirk asks whether Jake told you about his store location idea.
"Yes, Jake gave me a contact name of the leasing agent, and I've left her a
voicemail. The sooner we can get that lease signed, the better. It takes Jake
120 days to do the build-out, and Jill said she needs two weeks lead time to
order the initial inventory and stock the shelves. That puts us pretty close to
our February 1 deadline, counting the time to get the lease papers signed."
"Sounds good so far," Dirk replies. "What else?"
You continue, "I've included an updated description of the products and
services the new store will offer, based on the documentation that was
services the new store will offer, based on the documentation that was
written from the last store opening. Jill reviewed the updates to the
description, so we should be in the clear there. The store will include some
new lines that we've decided to take on--cookware from famous chefs, that
kind of thing.
"Jake has already made contact with a general contractor in Colorado
Springs, and he is ready to roll once we've signed the lease.
"One more thing, Dirk. Since we're including the big bash at the grand
opening as part of the deliverables, I talked to some of your folks in
marketing to get some ideas. They are thinking we should have some great
giveaways as door prizes and that we will want the food catered. They also
thought having some live cooking demonstrations with some local chefs
would be a good attraction."
"Sounds like you're on the right track. So, what's next?" Dirk asks.
"Once you approve the scope statement, I'd like to send a copy to the
stakeholders. My next step is to break down the deliverables and
requirements I've documented here into the WBS so we can get rolling on
the work of the project."
Project Case Study Checklist
The main topics discussed in the case study are as follows:
   Stakeholder analysis for requirements gathering: Jake Peterson and
   Jill Overstreet interviewed. Needs, wants, and expectations recorded and
   requirements prioritized.
   Organizational structure: Functional organization with a separate
   projectized department.
   Constraints: February 1 date to coincide with Garden and Home show.
   Assumptions: These are the assumptions:
       A store build-out usually takes 120 days.
       Jill Overstreet will help with the initial store stocking.
       Jake Peterson will provide supplies for the stores that aren't retail
       products, such as store furnishings, shelving, and so on, and can help
       with the store build-out as well.
       The budget for the project will be between $1.5 and $2 million.
The project scope statement includes the following:
  The project scope statement includes the following:
      Project objectives: Open 50th store by February 1 in Colorado Springs.
      Project deliverables:
          Build out storefront, including shelving.
          Retail product line will be delivered two weeks prior to grand
          opening.
          Have grand-opening party with cooking demos.
      Project requirements:
          Sign lease within 14 days.
          Offer new line of gourmet food products.
          Have classroom space in back of store for cooking demos and
          classes.
      Constraints: February 1 date will coincide with Garden and Home
      Show.
      Fund limitations: Spend no more than $2 million on the project.
      Assumptions: (These are the same as listed earlier.) Decomposed
      deliverables into a WBS.
      The WBS includes the following:
          Level one is the project.
          Level two is subprojects or deliverables.
          Level three is deliverables.
          Last level of WBS is the work package level, where time and cost
          estimates can be defined in the next process.


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
In this chapter, you dealt with the realities of life on the job. The reality is, many
project managers I know are managing several projects at once as opposed to
one large project. Although every concept presented in this chapter is a sound
one, it's important to note that you have to balance the amount of effort you'll put
one, it's important to note that you have to balance the amount of effort you'll put
into project management processes against the size and complexity of the
project.
As a manager who prides herself and her team on excellent customer service, I
have once or twice gotten my team into precarious situations because I was so
focused on helping the customer that I hurt them and our department in the
process. If you're wondering how that happened, it was because we didn't take
the time to document the scope of the project and the final acceptance criteria. In
one case, in the interest of getting the project completed quickly because of our
customer's own internal deadlines, we decided the project was straightforward
enough that we didn't need to document deliverables. The customer promised to
work side by side with us as we produced the work of the project. Unfortunately,
that wasn't the case, and we didn't meet the expectations of our customer.
Further, after we did implement the project (two months behind schedule), we
went through another six weeks of "fixes" because of the miscommunication
between the customer and the project team on what constituted some of the
features of the final product. There's always a great reason for cutting corners--
but they almost always come back to haunt you. My advice is to always create a
scope statement and a requirements document and get stakeholder signatures on
both. (In practice, small projects can include both the deliverables and
requirements within the scope statement.)
Decomposing the deliverables is the first step toward determining resource
requirements and estimates. A WBS is always a good idea, no matter the size of
the project. I have to admit I have cheated a time or two on small projects and
used the project schedule as the WBS. In all fairness, that worked out fine when
the team was small and there weren't more than three or four people working on
the project. If you get many more than four people on the project team, it can be
a little cumbersome to track deliverables with a schedule only. The WBS is the
perfect tool to use to assign names to work packages, and it's the foundation for
determining estimates for the work of the project.
The five-step process outlined by the PMBOK(R) Guide works very well. Starting
with the 50,000-foot view, the team determines the major deliverables of the
project. From there, the deliverables are decomposed into ever smaller units of
work. The trick here is to break the work down into measurable units so that you
can verify the status of the work and the completion and acceptance of the work
when you're finished. If you have "fuzzy" WBS levels or work packages, you
won't be able to determine status accurately. In the information technology field,
we have a saying about the status of projects: "It's 90 percent complete." The
problem is it always seems that the last 10 percent takes twice as long to
complete as the first 90 did. If you've taken the time to document a WBS, you'll
have a much better idea of what that 90 percent constitutes. The last step is the
verification step where you determine whether everything you've identified in
the WBS is absolutely necessary to fulfill the work of the project and whether it's
decomposed enough to adequately describe the work. It has been my experience
that documenting the WBS will save you time later in the Planning processes,
particularly developing the project schedule and determining the project budget.
I believe the most important idea to take from this chapter is a simple one:
Always use a scope statement and requirements document, and always get them
signed.

Summary
This chapter started you on the road to project planning via the Develop Project
Management Plan process, the Plan Scope Management process, the Collect
Requirements process, the Define Scope process, and the Create WBS process.
We covered a lot of material in this chapter. Everything you've learned so far
becomes the foundation for further project planning.
The output of the Develop Project Management Plan process is the project
management plan, which is concerned with defining, coordinating, and
integrating all the ancillary project plans and baselines. The purpose of this plan
is to define how the project is executed, how it's monitored and controlled, and
how it's closed.
The primary output of the Plan Scope Management process is the scope
management plan. This plan is an element of the project management plan that
describes how the project team will go about defining project scope, validating
the work of the project, and managing and controlling scope.
The Collect Requirements process involves gathering and documenting the
requirements of the project. It's important that requirements be measurable,
traceable, testable, and so on. Measurement criteria for project requirements are
agreed upon by the stakeholders and project manager. Additionally,
requirements should be tracked in a traceability matrix that documents where
they originated, the results of the tests, the priority of the requirement, and more.
The project scope statement is produced during the Define Scope process. It
describes the project deliverables. The scope statement, along with the WBS and
WBS dictionary, forms the scope baseline that you'll use to weigh future project
WBS dictionary, forms the scope baseline that you'll use to weigh future project
decisions, most particularly change requests. The scope statement contains a list
of project deliverables that will be used in future Planning processes.
The project scope statement contains many elements, including product scope
description, product acceptance criteria, deliverables, exclusions from scope,
constraints, and assumptions.
Constraints restrict or dictate the actions of the project team. Constraints usually
involve time, cost, and scope but can also include schedules, technology, quality,
resources, risk, and more.
Assumptions are things believed to be true. You'll want to document project
assumptions and validate them as the project progresses.
A WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchy of project essentials. The highest
levels of the WBS are described using nouns, and the lowest levels are described
with verbs. Each element in the WBS has its own set of objectives and
deliverables that must be met in order to fulfill the deliverables of the next
highest level and ultimately the project itself. In this way, the WBS validates the
completeness of the work.
The lowest level of the WBS is known as the work package level. This
breakdown allows the project manager to determine cost estimates, time
estimates, resource assignments, and quality controls.

Exam Essentials
Be able to state the purpose of the Develop Project Management Plan
process. It defines, coordinates, and integrates all subsidiary project plans.
Understand the purpose of the project scope statement. The scope
statement serves as a common understanding of project scope among the
stakeholders. The project objectives and deliverables and their quantifiable
criteria are documented in the scope statement and are used by the project
manager and the stakeholders to determine whether the project was completed
successfully. It also serves as a basis for future project decisions.
Be able to define project constraints and assumptions. Project constraints
limit the options of the project team and restrict their actions. Sometimes
constraints dictate actions. Time, budget, and scope are the most common
constraints. Assumptions are conditions that are presumed to be true or real.
Be able to describe the purpose of the scope management plan.          The scope
management plan has a direct influence on the project's success and describes
the process for determining project scope, facilitates creating the WBS, describes
how the product or service of the project is validated and accepted, and
documents how changes to scope will be handled. The scope management plan
is a subsidiary plan of the project management plan.
Be able to define a WBS and its components. The WBS is a deliverable-
oriented hierarchy. It uses the deliverables from the project scope statement or
similar documents and decomposes them into logical, manageable units of work.
The first level of decomposition is the major deliverable level or subproject
level, the second level of decomposition is a further elaboration of the
deliverables, and so on. The lowest level of any WBS is called a work package.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the questions in Appendix A.
1. You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show.
   You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold at
   the shows. You are getting ready to write the project management plan and
   know that all the following are true regarding the PMIS except for one.
   Which of the following is not true?
   A. The PMIS is a tool and technique of this process.
   B. The configuration management system is a subsystem of the PMIS.
   C. The PMIS includes a change control system.
   D. The PMIS is an automated system.
2. Which of the following is true?
   A. You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show.
      You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold
      at the shows. You're ready to document the processes you'll use to
      perform the project as well as define how the project will be executed,
      controlled, and closed. You are working on the project scope
      management plan.
   B. You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show.
      You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold
      at the shows. You're ready to document the processes you'll use to
      perform the project as well as define how the project will be executed,
      monitored, and controlled. You are working on the product scope
      statement.
   C. You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show.
      You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold
      at the shows. You're ready to document the processes you'll use to
      perform the project as well as define how the project will be executed
      and controlled and how changes will be monitored and controlled. You
      are working on the project management plan.
   D. You are a project manager for Laredo Pioneer's Traveling Rodeo Show.
      You're heading up a project to promote a new line of souvenirs to be sold
      at the shows. You're ready to document the processes you'll use to
      perform the project as well as define how the project will be executed,
      controlled, and closed. You are working on the project scope statement.
3. You are a project manager responsible for the construction of a new office
   complex. You are taking over for a project manager who recently left the
   company. The prior project manager completed the scope statement and
   scope management plan for this project. In your interviews with some key
   team members, you conclude which of the following?
   A. The scope statement assesses the stability of the project scope and
      outlines how scope will be verified and used to control changes. The
      team members know that project scope is measured against the product
      requirements and that the scope management plan is based on the
      approved project scope.
   B. The scope management plan describes how project scope will be
      managed and controlled and how the WBS will be created and defined.
      They know that product scope is measured against the product
      requirements and that the scope management plan is based on the
      approved project scope.
   C. The scope management plan is deliverables oriented and includes cost
      estimates and stakeholder needs and expectations. They understand that
      project scope is measured against the project management plan and that
      the scope management plan is based on the approved project charter.
   D. The scope statement describes how the high-level deliverables and
      requirements will be defined and verified. They understand that product
      scope is measured against the project management plan and that the
      scope management plan is based on the approved project charter.
4. Unanimity, majority, plurality, and dictatorship are four examples of which
   of the following techniques?
   A. Group creativity techniques, which is a tool and technique of the Collect
      Requirements process
   B. Interviews, which is a tool and technique of the Define Scope process
   C. Facilitated workshops technique, which is a tool and technique of the
      Define Scope process
   D. Group decision-making techniques, which is a tool and technique of the
      Collect Requirements process
5. Which of the following is true regarding the project scope statement?
   A. The project scope statement includes a change control system that
      describes how to make changes to the project scope.
   B. The project scope statement further elaborates the details from the
      Initiating and Planning processes and serves as a basis for future project
      decisions.
   C. The project scope statement describes how the team will define and
      develop the work breakdown structure.
   D. The project scope statement assesses the reliability of the project scope
      and describes the process for verifying and accepting completed
      deliverables.
6. You are a project manager for an agricultural supply company. You have
   interviewed stakeholders and gathered requirements. Which of the following
   is true regarding the process to which this question refers?
   A. The requirements document lists the requirements and describes how
      they will be analyzed, documented, and managed throughout the project.
   B. Requirements documentation consist of formal, complex documents that
      include elements such as the business need of the project, functional
      requirements, nonfunctional requirements, impacts to others inside and
      outside the organization, and requirements assumptions and constraints.
   C. The requirements documentation details the work required to create the
      deliverables of the project, including deliverables description, product
      acceptance criteria, exclusions from requirements, and requirements
       assumptions and constraints.
   D. The requirements traceability matrix ties requirements to project
      objectives, business needs, WBS deliverables, product design, test
      strategies, and high-level requirements and traces them through to project
      completion.
7. Which of the following makes up the scope baseline?
   A. The approved project scope statement
   B. The approved scope management plan and WBS
   C. The WBS, approved project scope statement, and WBS dictionary
   D. The approved scope management plan, the WBS, and the WBS
      dictionary
8. Which of the following statements is true regarding brainstorming and lateral
   thinking?
   A. They are forms of expert judgment used to help define and develop
      requirements and develop the project scope statement.
   B. They are tools and techniques used to elaborate the product scope
      description.
   C. They are group decision-making techniques, which are a tool and
      technique of the Collect Requirements process.
   D. They are alternatives generation techniques, which are a tool and
      technique of the Define Scope process.
9. Your company, Kick That Ball Sports, has appointed you as project manager
   for its new Cricket product line introduction. This is a national effort, and all
   the retail stores across the country need to have the new products on the
   shelves before the media advertising blitz begins. The product line involves
   three new products, two of which will be introduced together and a third one
   that will follow within two years. You are ready to create the WBS. All of
   the following are true except for which one?
   A. The WBS may be structured using each product as a level-one entry.
   B. The WBS should be elaborated to a level where costs and schedule are
      easily estimated. This is known as the work package level.
   C. Rolling wave refers to how all levels of the WBS collectively roll up to
        reflect the work of the project and only the work of the project.
    D. Each level of the WBS represents verifiable products or results.
10. You are a project manager for Giraffe Enterprises. You've recently taken
    over for a project manager who lied about his PMI(R) certification and was
    subsequently fired. Unfortunately, he did a poor job of defining the scope.
    Which of the following could happen if you don't correct this?
    A. The stakeholders will require overtime from the project team to keep the
       project on schedule.
    B. The poor scope definition will adversely affect the creation of the work
       breakdown structure, and costs will increase.
    C. The project management plan's process for verification and acceptance of
       the deliverables needs to be updated as a result of the poor scope
       definition.
    D. The project costs could increase, there might be rework, and schedule
       delays might result.
11. You are the project manager for Lucky Stars nightclubs. They specialize in
    live country and western band performances. Your newest project is in the
    Planning processes group. You are working on the WBS. The finance
    manager has given you a numbering system to assign to the WBS. Which of
    the following is true?
    A. The numbering system is a unique identifier known as the WBS
       dictionary, which is used to assign quality control codes to the individual
       work elements.
    B. The numbering system is a unique identifier known as the WBS
       dictionary, which is used to track the descriptions of individual work
       elements.
    C. The numbering system is a unique identifier known as the code of
       accounts, which is used to track time and resource assignments for
       individual work elements.
    D. The numbering system is a unique identifier known as the code of
       accounts, which is used to track the costs of the WBS elements.
12. You are a project manager working on a large, complex project. You've
    constructed the WBS for this project, and all of the work package levels are
    subprojects of this project. You've requested that the subproject managers
    report to you in three weeks with their individual WBSs constructed. Which
    statement is not true regarding your WBS?
    A. The work package level is decomposed to create the activity list.
    B. The work package level is the lowest level in the WBS.
    C. The work package level facilitates resource assignments.
    D. The work package level facilitates cost and time estimates.
13. You are a project manager working on a new software product your
    company plans to market to businesses. The project sponsor told you that the
    project must be completed by September 1. The company plans to demo the
    new software product at a trade show in late September and, therefore, needs
    the project completed in time for the trade show. However, the sponsor has
    also told you that the budget is fixed at $85,000, and it would take an act of
    Congress to get it increased. You must complete the project within the given
    time frame and budget. Which of the following is the primary constraint for
    this project?
    A. Budget
    B. Scope
    C. Time
    D. Quality
14. Which of the following statements about decomposition is the least true?
    A. Decomposition involves structuring and organizing the WBS so that
       deliverables are always listed at level one.
    B. Decomposition requires a degree of expert judgment and also requires
       close analysis of the project scope statement.
    C. Decomposition is a tool and technique used to create a WBS.
    D. Decomposition subdivides the major deliverables into smaller
       components until the work package level is reached.
15. You are in the process of translating project objectives into tangible
    deliverables and requirements. All of the following are techniques used in
    the product analysis tool and technique of the Define Scope process except
    which one?
    A. Value engineering and value analysis
    B. Product configuration and specification analysis
    C. Systems analysis and systems engineering
    D. Product breakdown and functional analysis
16. You are a project manager for a documentary film company. In light of a
    recent regional tragedy, the company president wants to produce a new
    documentary on the efforts of the heroic rescue teams to air as soon as
    possible. She's looking to you to make this documentary the best that has
    ever been produced in the history of this company. She guarantees you free
    rein to use whatever resources you need to get this project done quickly.
    However, the best photographer in the company is currently working on
    another assignment. Which of the following is true?
    A. The primary constraint is time because the president wants the film done
       quickly. She told you to get it to air as soon as possible.
    B. Resources are the primary constraint. Even though the president has
       given you free rein on resource use, you assume she didn't mean those
       actively assigned to projects.
    C. The schedule is the primary constraint. Even though the president has
       given you free rein on resource use, you assume she didn't mean those
       actively assigned to projects. The photographer won't be finished for
       another three weeks on his current assignment, so schedule adjustments
       will have to be made.
    D. The primary constraint is quality because the president wants this to be
       the best film ever produced by this company. She's given you free rein to
       use whatever resources are needed to get the job done.
17. Your project depends on a key deliverable from a vendor you've used several
    times before with great success. You're counting on the delivery to arrive on
    June 1. This is an example of a/an ___________________.
    A. Constraint
    B. Objective
    C. Assumption
    D. Requirement
18. What limits the options of the project team?
    A. Technology
    B. Constraints
    C. Deliverables
    D. Assumptions
19. Your company provides answering services for several major catalog
    retailers. The number of calls coming into the service center per month has
    continued to increase over the past 18 months. The phone system is
    approaching the maximum load limits and needs to be upgraded. You've
    been assigned to head up the upgrade project. Based on the company's
    experience with the vendor who worked on the last phone upgrade project,
    you're confident they'll be able to assist you with this project as well. Which
    of the following is true?
    A. You've made an assumption about vendor availability and expertise. The
       project came about because of a business need.
    B. Vendor availability and expertise are constraints. The project came about
       because of a business need.
    C. You've made an assumption about vendor availability and expertise. The
       project came about because of a market demand.
    D. Vendor availability and expertise are constraints. The project came about
       because of a market demand.
20. Which of the following is not a major step of decomposition?
    A. Identify major deliverables.
    B. Identify resources.
    C. Identify components.
    D. Verify correctness of decomposition.
CHAPTER 4
Creating the Project Schedule
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE PLANNING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 4: Develop the project schedule based on the approved project
   deliverables and milestones, scope, and resource management plans in
   order to manage timely completion of the project.
    Knowledge and Skills:
       Time management planning, including scheduling tools and techniques
       Workflow diagramming techniques
The Planning process group has more processes than any other process group.
As a result, a lot of time and effort goes into the Planning processes of any
project. On some projects, you might spend almost as much time planning the
project as you do executing and controlling it. This isn't a bad thing. The better
planning you do up front, the more likely you'll have a successful project.
Speaking of planning, together the Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and
Controlling process groups account for almost 70 percent of the PMP(R) exam
questions, so plan on spending about the same percentage of your study time on
these areas.
This is another fun-filled, action-packed chapter. We'll start off by defining the
schedule management plan and then move on to the activities that become the
work of the project. The WBS will come in handy here, so keep it close. Then
we'll sequence the activities in their proper order, estimate the resources we'll
need to complete the work, and estimate how long each activity will take. Last
but not least, we'll develop the project schedule.
Everything you've done up to this point and the processes we'll discuss in this
chapter will help you create an accurate project schedule. You'll use these
documents (along with several other documents you've created along the way)
throughout the Executing and Monitoring and Controlling processes to help
measure the progress of the project. Let's get going.
  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Creating the Schedule Management Plan
The Plan Schedule Management process describes how the project schedule will
be developed, executed, and controlled as well as how changes will be
incorporated into the project schedule. According to A Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition, the primary
benefit of this process is that it helps guide and direct how the project schedule
will be managed. The only output of this process is the schedule management
plan. Let's first look at the inputs and the tools and techniques of this process and
spend most of our time examining the schedule management plan itself.
The inputs of this process include the project management plan, project charter,
enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets. The project
management plan includes the scope baseline, which in turn is made up of the
project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary. The project schedule will
be derived from the WBS (which includes deliverables and work package
levels), so the scope baseline is key to defining the processes you'll use to
develop the schedule management plan.
Enterprise environmental factors include the culture of the organization and
availability of resources as well as the project management software and work
authorization system the organization uses to assign and track work components.
The organizational process assets that are important to this process are templates,
change control processes, historical information, policies and guidelines for
schedule control, control tools for managing schedules, and risk control
processes and procedures.
We have seen all of the tools and techniques before. They are expert judgment,
analytical techniques, and meetings.
The key to this process, as I stated earlier, is the schedule management plan,
which is an element of the project management plan. It is the only output of this
process, and it serves to describe how the project schedule will be developed,
monitored, controlled, and changed. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, several
elements make up the schedule management plan. Be certain to review all of
them. I have highlighted the most important elements here:
Schedule Model Development This refers to the methodologies and tools
you'll use to develop the schedule (for example, Oracle Primavera or Microsoft
Project), along with the data they contain.
Accuracy Levels This element describes the rounding you'll use when
deriving activity duration estimates. For example, you might round to the nearest
week, day, or hour depending on the complexity of the project.
Units of Measure This element also concerns activity duration estimates as
well as schedule activities. This describes what measure you'll use when
developing the schedule, such as hours, days, weeks, or some other measure.
Control Thresholds Control thresholds refer to the level of variance the
schedule can experience before you take action. Again, depending on the
complexity of the project, this might be a generous amount of time or a very
limited amount of time. You can express thresholds in terms of hours or days (as
an example, a slippage of greater than three days requires action) or, most
typically, as a percentage of time.
Performance Measurement Rules This refers to where and what types of
measures you'll use to verify schedule performance. This could include
designating levels on the WBS and/or determining what type of earned value
measurement technique you'll use.

Defining Activities
Now you're off and running toward the development of your project schedule.
To develop the schedule, you first need to define the activities, sequence them in
the right order, estimate resources, and estimate the time it will take to complete
the tasks. I'll cover the Define Activities process here and the Sequence
Activities process next, and I'll pick up with the estimating processes in the next
chapter.
  Define Activities and Sequence Activities are separate processes, each with
  its own inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. In practice, especially for
  small to medium-sized projects, you can combine the Create WBS process
  we talked about in Chapter 3, "Developing the Project Scope Statement,"
  with these processes and complete them all at once.

The Define Activities process is a further breakdown of the work package
elements of the WBS. It documents the specific activities needed to fulfill the
deliverables detailed on the WBS and the project scope statement. Much as with
the work package level of the WBS, activities can be easily assigned, estimated,
scheduled, and controlled. The Define Activities process might be performed by
the project manager, or when the WBS is broken down to the subproject level,
this process (and all the activity-related processes that follow) might be assigned
to a subproject manager.

Define Activities Process Inputs
The following are inputs (including the key elements of each input) to the Define
Activities process:
   Schedule management plan
   Scope baseline (including deliverables, constraints, and assumptions)
   Enterprise environmental factors (project management information systems,
   organizational culture, published commercial databases)
   Organizational process assets (existing guidelines and policies, templates,
   lessons learned knowledge base, and historical information)

Tools and Techniques for Defining Activities
The tools and techniques of the Define Activities process are as follows:
   Decomposition
   Rolling wave planning
   Expert judgment
We covered most of these topics in the previous chapter. Decomposition in this
process involves breaking the work packages into smaller, more manageable
units of work called activities. These are not deliverables but the individual units
of work that must be completed to fulfill the work packages and the deliverables
listed in the WBS. Activities will help in later Planning processes to define
estimates and create the project schedule. Activity lists (which are one of the
outputs of this process) from prior projects can be used as templates in this
process. Rolling wave planning involves planning near-term work in more detail
than future-term work. As we discussed in Chapter 3, this is a form of
progressive elaboration. Expert judgment, in the form of project team members
with prior experience developing project scope statements and WBSs, can help
you define activities.

  Exam Spotlight
  The purpose of the Define Activities process is to decompose the work
  packages into schedule activities where the basis for estimating, scheduling,
  executing, and monitoring and controlling the work of the project is easily
  supported and accomplished.


Define Activities Outputs
Define Activities has three outputs:
   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Milestone list
We'll look at each of these outputs next.

Activity List
One primary output of the Define Activities process is an activity list. The
activity list should contain all the schedule activities that will be performed for
the project, with a scope of work description of each activity and an identifier
(such as a code or number) so that team members understand what the work is
and how it is to be completed. The schedule activities are individual elements of
the project schedule, and the activity list document is part of the project
documents. To keep your sanity, and that of your team members, make certain to
enter the activity names onto the schedule the same way they appear on the
activity list.

Activity Attributes
Activity attributes describe the characteristics of the activities and are an
extension of the activity list. Activity attributes will change over the life of the
project as more information is known. In the early stages of the project, activity
attributes might include the activity ID, the WBS identification code it's
associated with, and the activity name. As you progress through the project and
complete other Planning processes, you might add predecessor and successor
activities, logical relationships, leads and lags, resource requirements, and
constraints and assumptions associated with the activity. We'll cover these topics
throughout the remainder of this chapter.
The activity attributes are used as input to several processes, including the
Develop Schedule process that we'll talk about in the section "Developing the
Project Schedule" later in this chapter.




  In practice, I like to tie the activity list to the WBS. Remember from
  Chapter 3 that each WBS element has a unique identifier, just like the
  activities in the activity list. When recording the identifier code for the
  activity list, I'll use a system whereby the first three or four digits represent
  the WBS element the activity is tied to and the remaining digits refer to the
  activity itself.


Milestone Lists
Milestones are typically major accomplishments of the project and mark the
completion of major deliverables or some other key event in the project. For
example, approval and sign-off on project deliverables might be considered
milestones. Other examples might be the completion of a prototype, system
testing, contract approval, and so on. The milestone list records these
accomplishments and documents whether the milestone is mandatory or
optional. The milestone list is part of the project documentation and is also used
to help develop the project schedule.
Understanding the Sequence Activities Process
Now that you've identified the schedule activities, you need to sequence them in
a logical order and find out whether dependencies exist among the activities. The
interactivity of logical relationships must be sequenced correctly in order to
facilitate the development of a realistic, achievable project schedule.
Consider a classic example. Let's say you're going to paint your house, but
unfortunately, it's fallen into a little disrepair. The old paint is peeling and
chipping and will need to be scraped before a coat of primer can be sprayed on
the house. After the primer dries, the painting can commence. In this example,
the primer activity depends on the scraping. You can't--okay, you shouldn't--
prime the house before scraping off the peeling paint. The painting activity
depends on the primer activity in the same way. You really shouldn't start
painting until the primer has dried.
During Sequence Activities, you will use a host of inputs and tools and
techniques to produce the primary output and project schedule network
diagrams. You've already seen all the inputs to this process. They are the
schedule management plan, activity list, activity attributes, milestone list, project
scope statement, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process
assets. We'll look at several new tools and techniques next.

Sequence Activities Tools and Techniques
Sequence Activities has three tools and techniques, all of which are new to you:
   Precedence diagramming method (PDM)
   Dependency determination
   Leads and lags
I'll switch the order of these and cover dependency determination first. In
practice, you'll define dependencies either before or while you're using the PDM
to draw your schedule network. To make sure you're on the same page with the
PMBOK(R) Guide terminology regarding dependencies, I'll cover them first and
then move on to the other tools and techniques.

Dependency Determination
Dependencies are relationships between the activities in which one activity is
dependent on another to complete an action, or perhaps an activity is dependent
on another to start an action before it can proceed. Dependency determination is
a matter of determining where those dependencies exist. Thinking back to the
house-painting example, you couldn't paint until the scraping and priming
activities were completed. You'll want to know about four types of dependencies
for the exam:
   Mandatory dependencies
   Discretionary dependencies
   External dependencies
   Internal dependencies
As you've probably guessed, the PMBOK(R) Guide defines dependencies
differently depending on their characteristics:
Mandatory Dependencies Mandatory dependencies, also known as hard
logic or hard dependencies, are defined by the type of work being performed.
The scraping, primer, and painting sequence is an example of mandatory
dependencies. The nature of the work itself dictates the order in which the
activities should be performed. An activity with physical limitations is a telltale
sign that you have a mandatory dependency on your hands.
Discretionary Dependencies Discretionary dependencies are defined by the
project team. Discretionary dependencies are also known as preferred logic, soft
logic, or preferential logic. These are usually process-or procedure-driven or
"best-practice" techniques based on past experience. For example, both past
experience and best practices on house-painting projects have shown that all trim
work should be hand-painted whereas the bulk of the main painting work should
be done with a sprayer.

  Exam Spotlight
  Discretionary dependencies have a tendency to create arbitrary total float
  values that will limit your options when scheduling activities that have this
  type of dependency. If you are fast tracking to compress your schedule, you
  should consider changing or removing these dependencies.

External Dependencies External dependencies are, well, external to the
project. This might seem obvious, but the PMBOK(R) Guide points out that even
though the dependency is external to the project (and, therefore, a nonproject
activity), it impacts project activities. For example, perhaps your project is
researching and marketing a new drug. The FDA must approve the drug before
your company can market it. This is not a project activity, but the project cannot
move forward until approval occurs. That means FDA approval is an external
dependency.
Internal Dependencies Internal dependencies, another somewhat obvious
dependency, are internal to the project or the organization. They may, however,
still be outside of your control. For example, perhaps before implementing a new
time tracking system in your maintenance shop, the operations department has
decided to study the business rules regarding time tracking. Examining and
updating the business rules and processes needs to be completed before the time
tracking system can be installed and your project can proceed.
Once you've identified the dependencies and assembled all the other inputs for
the Sequence Activities process, you'll take this information and produce a
diagram--or schematic display--of the project activities. The project schedule
network diagram shows the dependencies--or logical relationships--that exist
among the activities. You can use one of the other tools and techniques of this
process to produce this output. You'll now examine each in detail.

Precedence Diagramming Method (PDM)
The precedence diagramming method (PDM) is what most project management
software programs use to sequence activities. Precedence diagrams use boxes or
rectangles (called nodes) to represent the activities. The nodes are connected
with arrows showing the dependencies between the activities. This method is
also called activity on node (AON).
The minimum information that should be displayed on the node is the activity
name, but you might put as much information about the activity on the node as
you'd like. Sometimes the nodes are displayed with activity name, activity
number, start and stop dates, due dates, slack time, and so on. (I'll cover slack
time in the section "Develop Schedule Tools and Techniques" later in this
chapter.)

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that the PDM uses only one time estimate to
  determine duration.
Figure 4.1 shows a PDM--or AON--of the house-painting example.




Figure 4.1 Example of a PDM or AON
The PDM is further defined by four types of logical relationships. The terms
dependencies and precedence relationships also are used to describe these
relationships. You might already be familiar with these if you've used Microsoft
Project or similar project management software. The four dependencies, or
logical relationships, are as follows:
Finish-to-Start (FS) The finish-to-start relationship is the most frequently
used relationship. This relationship says that the predecessor--or from activity--
must finish before the successor--or to activity--can start. In PDM diagrams,
this is the most often used logical relationship.
Start-to-Finish (SF) The start-to-finish relationship says that the predecessor
activity must start before the successor activity can finish. This logical
relationship is seldom used.
Finish-to-Finish (FF) The finish-to-finish relationship says that the
predecessor activity must finish before the successor activity finishes.
Start-to-Start (SS) I think you're getting the hang of this. The start-to-start
relationship says that the predecessor activity must start before the successive
activity can start.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, know that finish-to-start is the most commonly used
  dependency in the PDM method and that start-to-finish is rarely used. Also
  remember that according to the PMBOK(R) Guide, each activity and/or
  milestone on the network diagram is connected by either at least one
  predecessor and/or a successor activity except the first and last activity
  and/or milestone.

Keep these logical relationships (or dependencies) in mind when constructing
your project schedule network diagram.

Other Diagramming Methods
The arrow diagramming method (ADM) is not a listed tool and technique of the
Sequence Activities process, but there is a possibility you could see a question
on the exam regarding it. It's an old technique that's rarely used anymore, but
nonetheless you should have some familiarity with it.
The ADM is visually the opposite of the PDM. The arrow diagramming method
places activities on the arrows, which are connected to dependent activities with
nodes. This method is also called activity on arrow (AOA) and activity on line
(AOL). This technique isn't used nearly as often as the PDM, but some industries
prefer the ADM to the PDM. For the record, note that the ADM allows for more
than one time estimate to determine duration and uses only the finish-to-start
dependency. There's one more unique note about the ADM to tuck away:
Sometimes dummy activities must be plugged into the diagram to accurately
display the dependencies. Dummy activities are commonly depicted using a
dotted arrow.
Figure 4.2 shows the ADM method applied to the house-painting example.




Figure 4.2 Example of an ADM method

  Exam Spotlight
  I recommend that you memorize the following graphic to help you
  remember the tools and techniques of the Sequence Activities process and
  their characteristics for the exam.
 This might look a little strange, but I think it will work for you now that you
 understand what each of these diagramming methods is. This is information
 you need to know for the exam. If this graphic isn't useful for you, come up
 with your own mnemonic or sample that will help you remember which of
 these is which. Don't say I didn't warn you.

There is one other diagramming method you could potentially see a question
about on the exam. It's called GERT, which stands for Graphical Evaluation and
Review Technique. What you should know for the exam is that this
diagramming method allows for conditions, branches, and loops.

Applying Leads and Lags
Leads and lags should be considered when determining dependencies. Lags
occur when time elapses between two activities, which delays successor
activities (those that follow a predecessor activity) from starting, and as a result,
time is added either to the start date or to the finish date of the activity you're
scheduling. Leads, conversely, speed up the successor activities, and as a result,
time needs to be subtracted from the start date or the finish date of the activity
you're scheduling.

  Exam Spotlight
  Leads and lags speed up or delay successor activities but should not replace
  schedule logic.

Let's revisit the house-painting example to put all this in perspective. In order to
paint, you first need to scrape the peeling paint and then prime. However, you
can't begin painting until the primer has dried, so you shouldn't schedule priming
for Monday and painting for Tuesday if you need the primer to dry on Tuesday.
Therefore, the priming activity generates the need for lag time at the end of the
activity to account for the drying time needed before you can start painting.
Lead time works just the opposite. Suppose, for this example, you could start
priming before the scraping is finished. Maybe certain areas on the house don't
require scraping, so you don't need to wait until the scraping activity finishes to
begin the priming activity. In this example, lead time is subtracted from the
beginning of the priming activity so that this activity begins prior to the previous
activity finishing.




  You might also use schedule network templates in this process. These are
  not a named tool and technique of this process but may come in handy on
  your next project. Schedule network templates are like the templates I've
  talked about in previous processes. Perhaps the project you're working on is
  similar to a project that has been completed in the past. You can use a
  previous project schedule network diagram as a template for the current
  project. Or you might be working on a project with several deliverables that
  are fairly identical to projects you've performed in the past or the
  deliverables on the existing project are fairly similar; in that case, you can
  use the old schedule network diagrams, or even the same schedule network
  diagrams, as templates for the project. Templates can be used for certain
  diagrams, as templates for the project. Templates can be used for certain
  portions of the project schedule or for the entire project. If you are using
  templates for portions of the project schedule, they are known as subnetwork
  templates or fragment network templates.


Sequence Activities Outputs
There are only two outputs of the Sequence Activities process: project schedule
network diagrams and project documents updates. I've just spent a good deal of
time describing the different types of project schedule network diagrams you can
construct using the PDM or ADM techniques. You can generate project schedule
network diagrams on a computer, or you can draw them by hand. Like the WBS,
these diagrams are visual representations of the work of the project and might
contain all the project details or they might contain only summary-level details,
depending on the complexity of the project. Summary-level activities are a
collection of related activities, also known as hammocks. Think of hammocks as
a group of related activities rolled up into a summary heading that describes the
activities likely to be contained in that grouping.
Keep in mind that the construction of these project schedule network diagrams
might bring activities to light that you missed when defining your activity list, or
it might make you break an activity down into two activities in places where you
thought one activity might work. If this is the case, you will need to update the
activity list and the activity attributes. The other project document update that
may be required as a result of this process is an update to the risk register. (We'll
talk about the risk register in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning.")
After the activities are sequenced, the next steps involve estimating the resources
and estimating the durations of the activities so that they can be plugged into the
project schedule. We'll look at these topics in the next sections of this chapter.

Estimating Activity Resources
All projects, from the smallest to the largest, require resources. The term
resources, in this case, does not mean just people; it means all the physical
resources required to complete the project. The PMBOK(R) Guide defines
resources as people, equipment, materials, and supplies. In reality, this includes
people, equipment, supplies, materials, software, hardware--the list goes on
depending on the project on which you're working. The Estimate Activity
Resources process is concerned with determining the types of resources needed
(both human and materials) and in what quantities for each schedule activity
within a work package.




  Remember, the activity resource requirements output from the Estimate
  Activity Resources process is an input to the Plan Human Resource
  Management process.

The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that Estimate Activity Resources should be closely
coordinated with the Estimate Costs process (I'll talk about Estimate Costs in
Chapter 5, "Developing the Project Budget and Communicating the Plan").
That's because resources--whether people or material or both--are typically the
largest expense you'll have on any project. Identifying the resources becomes a
critical component of the project planning process so estimates--and ultimately
the project budget--can be accurately derived. You'll look at the inputs and tools
and techniques that will help you document these requirements next.

Estimate Activity Resources Inputs
The Estimate Activity Resources process has several inputs, most of which you
already know:
   Schedule management plan
   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Resource calendars
   Risk register
   Activity cost estimates
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The only inputs you haven't seen before are resource calendars, risk register, and
activity cost estimates.
  Resource calendars are an output of the Acquire Project Team and Conduct
  Procurements processes. Both of these processes are performed during the
  Executing process group, so you may find this input perplexing here.
  However, you may have some resource availability information (resource
  calendars) on a preliminary basis during the Estimate Activity Resources
  process, and you'll further define it when resources are assigned to the
  project later in the Executing processes. In practice, you may find that you
  perform the Acquire Project Team process during the later stages of the
  Planning portion of the project rather than in the Executing process.

The resource calendars input describes the time frames in which resources (both
human and material) are available. They look at a particular resource or groups
of resources and their skills, abilities, quantity, and availability. Perhaps your
project calls for a marketing resource and the person assigned to the marketing
activities is on an extended vacation in October. The resource calendar would
show this person's vacation schedule. (The overall project calendar shows the
holidays the company recognizes.)
Resource calendars also examine the quantity, capability, and availability of
equipment and material resources that have a potential to impact the project
schedule. For example, suppose your project calls for a hydraulic drill and your
organization owns only one. The resource calendar will tell you whether it's
scheduled for another job at the same time it's needed for your project.
The risk register is an output of the Identify Risks process. It is a list of
identified risks and their potential responses. We will discuss the risk register in
more depth in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning."
Activity cost estimates are an output of the Estimate Costs process. These are the
costs that are determined for each activity. We will look at activity cost estimates
in more depth in Chapter 5.

Estimate Activity Resources Tools and Techniques
Your goal with the Estimate Activity Resources process is to determine the
activity resource requirements, including quantity and availability. This process
has five tools and techniques to help accomplish this output: expert judgment,
alternative analysis, published estimating data, bottom-up estimating, and project
alternative analysis, published estimating data, bottom-up estimating, and project
management software. You already know what expert judgment entails, so take
a look at the remaining tools:
Alternative Analysis Alternative analysis is used when thinking about the
methods you might use to accomplish the activities your resources have been
assigned. Many times, you can accomplish an activity in more than one way, and
alternative analysis helps decide among the possibilities. For example, a
subcompact car drives on the same roads a six-figure sports car travels. The
sports car has a lot more features than the subcompact, it's faster, it's probably
more comfortable, and it has a visual appeal that the subcompact doesn't. The
sports car might be the valid resource choice for the project, but you should
consider all the alternatives. The same idea applies to human resources in that
you might apply senior-level resources versus junior-level resources, or you
could add resources to speed up the schedule. You may also use make-rent-or-
buy analysis when determining alternative resources.
Published Estimating Data Estimating data might include organizational
guidelines, industry rates or estimates, production rates, resource rates, and so
on. For example, your organization might have established price agreements
with vendors that outline rates by resource types, or there might be industry
estimates for production rates for your particular activity or your particular
geographical region.
Bottom-Up Estimating Bottom-up estimating is a process of estimating
individual schedule activity costs and then adding them together to come up with
a total estimate for the work package. Here you estimate every schedule activity
individually and then roll up those estimates, or add them all together, to come
up with a total. This is an accurate means of estimating, provided the estimates at
the schedule activity level are accurate. However, it takes a considerable amount
of time to perform bottom-up estimating because every activity must be assessed
and estimated accurately to be included in the bottom-up calculation. The
smaller and more detailed the activity, the greater the accuracy and cost of this
technique. If it isn't possible to estimate the activity cost, you'll need to
decompose the activity to a lower level of detail so that an estimate can be
performed. Bottom-up estimating may also be used to determine activity
durations and is a good technique to use when you aren't confident about the
type or quantity of resources you'll need for the project.
Project Management Software Project management software can help plan,
organize, and estimate resource needs and document their availability. It might
also help you to produce resource breakdown structures, resource rates, resource
calendars, and availability.

Estimate Activity Resources Outputs
The purpose of the Estimate Activity Resources process is to develop the activity
resource requirements output. This output describes the types of resources and
the quantity needed for each activity associated with a work package. You
should prepare a narrative description for this output that describes how you
determined the estimate, including the information you used to form your
estimate and the assumptions you made about the resources and their
availability.




  Work package estimates are derived by taking a cumulative total of all the
  schedule activities within the work package.

You'll use the activity resource requirements in the next process (Estimate
Activity Durations) to determine the length of time each activity will take to
complete. That, of course, depends on the quantity and skill level of the
resources assigned, which is the reason you estimate resources before you try to
determine duration.
The two other outputs of this process are resource breakdown structure and
project documents updates.
The resource breakdown structure (RBS) is much like an organizational
breakdown structure, but the RBS lists the resources by category and type. You
may have several categories of resources, including labor, hardware, equipment,
supplies, and so on. Type describes the types of resources needed, such as skill
levels or quality grades of the material and so on.
The project documents updates portion of this output refers to updating the
activity list, activity attributes, and the resource calendars with changes to any of
the elements you've recorded here.
You can see how these "Activity" processes have built on each other. First you
defined the activities, then you determined dependencies and sequenced them in
the correct order, and next you determined what types and quantities of
resources are required to complete the activities. Now you're ready to begin
resources are required to complete the activities. Now you're ready to begin
estimating the duration of these activities so you can plug them into the project
schedule.

Estimating Activity Durations
The Estimate Activity Durations process attempts to estimate the work effort,
resources, and number of work periods needed to complete each activity. The
activity duration estimates are the primary output of this process. These are
quantifiable estimates expressed as the number of work periods needed to
complete a schedule activity. Work periods are usually expressed in hours or
days. However, larger projects might express duration in weeks or months. Work
periods are the activity duration estimates, and they become inputs to the
Develop Schedule process.
When estimating activity duration, be certain to include all the time that will
elapse from the beginning of the activity until the work is completed. For
example, consider the earlier example of the house-painting project. You
estimate that it will take three days, including drying time, to prime the house.
Now, let's say priming is scheduled to begin on Saturday, but your crew doesn't
work on Sunday. The activity duration in this case is four days, which includes
the three days to prime and dry plus the Sunday the crew doesn't work. Most
project management software programs will handle this kind of situation
automatically once you've keyed in the project calendar and work periods.
Progressive elaboration comes into play during this process also. Estimates
typically start at a fairly high level, and as more details are known about the
deliverables and their associated activities, the estimates become more accurate.
You should rely on those folks who have the most knowledge of the activities
you're trying to estimate to help you with this process.

Estimate Activity Durations Inputs
The inputs to this process include the schedule management plan, activity list,
activity attributes, activity resource requirements, resource calendars, project
scope statement, risk register, resource breakdown structure, enterprise
environmental factors, and organizational process assets.
A few of the important elements regarding these inputs apply here as you've seen
in past processes: databases, productivity metrics, historical information
regarding durations on similar projects, project calendars, scheduling
methodology, and lessons learned. The project calendars (which list company
holidays, shift schedules, and so on) are considered a part of the organizational
process assets, and activity resource requirements are especially useful during
this process.

Estimate Activity Durations Tools and Techniques
The Estimate Activity Durations process has several new tools and techniques:
   Expert judgment
   Analogous estimating
   Parametric estimating
   Three-point estimating
   Group decision-making techniques
   Reserve analysis
You'll take a look at each of these tools and techniques next.

Expert Judgment
The staff members who will perform activities will most accurately estimate
them. In this case, team members use expert judgment because of their
experience with similar activities in the past. You should be careful with these
estimates, though, because they are subject to bias and aren't based on any
scientific means. Your experts should consider that resource levels, resource
productivity, resource capability, risks, and other factors can impact estimates.
It's good practice to combine expert judgment with historical information and
use as many experts as you can.

Analogous Estimating
Analogous estimating, also called top-down estimating, is a form of expert
judgment. With this technique, you will use the actual duration of a similar
activity completed on a previous project to determine the duration of the current
activity--provided the information was documented and stored with the project
information on the previous project. This technique is most useful when the
previous activities you're comparing are similar to the activity you're estimating
and don't just appear to be similar. You want the folks who are working on the
estimate to have experience with these activities so they can provide reasonable
estimates. This technique is especially helpful when detailed information about
the project is not available, such as in the early phases of the project.
Top-down estimating techniques are also used to estimate total project duration,
particularly when you have a limited amount of information about the project.
The best way to think about top-down techniques is to look at the estimate as a
whole. Think about being on a mountaintop where you can see the whole picture
as one rather than all the individual items that make up the picture.
For instance, let's return to the house-painting example. You would compare a
previous house-painting project to the current house-painting project if the
houses are of similar size and the paint you're using is the same quality. You can
use the first house-painting project to estimate the project duration for the second
house-painting project because of the similarities in the project.
Top-down techniques are useful when you're early in the project Planning
processes and are just beginning to flesh out all the details of the project.
Sometimes during the project selection process, the selection committee might
want an idea of the project's duration. You can derive a project estimate at this
stage by using top-down techniques.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide states that analogous estimating is a gross value
  estimating technique. It also notes that you can use analogous estimating to
  determine overall project duration and cost estimates for the entire project
  (or phases of the project). For the exam, remember that the analogous
  technique is typically less time-consuming and less costly than other
  estimating techniques, but it's also less accurate.


Parametric Estimating
Parametric estimating is a quantitatively based estimating method that
multiplies the quantity of work by the rate or uses an algorithm in conjunction
with historical data to determine cost, budget, or duration estimates. The best
way to describe it is with an example. Suppose you are working on a
companywide network upgrade project. This requires you to run new cable to
the switches on every floor in the building. To come up with an estimate, you
can use parametric estimates to determine activity duration estimates by taking a
known element--in this case, the amount of cable needed--and multiplying it by
the amount of time it takes to install a unit of cable. In other words, suppose you
have 10,000 meters of new cable to run. You know from past experience it takes
1 hour to install 100 meters. Using this measurement, you can determine an
estimate for this activity of 100 hours to run the new cable. Therefore, the cable
activity duration estimate is 100 hours.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide states that you can also use parametric estimating to
  determine time estimates for the entire project or portions of the project
  when you are using this technique in conjunction with other estimating
  techniques. For the exam, remember that a statistical relationship exists
  between historical data and other variables (as explained in the cable
  example earlier) when using parametric estimates and that this technique can
  be highly accurate if the data you are using is reliable.


Three-Point Estimating
Three-point estimating, as you can probably guess, uses three estimates that,
when averaged, come up with a final estimate. The three estimates you'll use in
this technique are the most likely estimate, an optimistic estimate, and a
pessimistic estimate. The most likely estimate assumes there are no disasters and
the activity can be completed as planned. The optimistic estimate is the fastest
time frame in which your resource can complete the activity. The pessimistic
estimate assumes the worst happens and it takes much longer than planned to get
the activity completed. You'll want to rely on experienced folks to give you these
estimates. Then you can choose to use one of two formulas to calculate the
expected duration estimate (E). The first formula, called the triangular
distribution, consists of summing the optimistic (O), the pessimistic (P), and the
most likely (M) estimates and then dividing that sum by 3. The formula looks
like this:
   E = (O + P + M) / 3
The second formula is called a beta distribution, which is taken from the
program evaluation and review technique (PERT) that we will review in depth in
the Develop Schedule process later in this process. The formula for beta
distribution, or PERT, looks like this:
   E = (O + P + 4M) / 6
   E = (O + P + 4M) / 6

Group Decision-Making Techniques
Group decision-making techniques include brainstorming and the Delphi or
nominal group techniques. These techniques get your team members involved
and will help improve the accuracy of your estimates. Brainstorming is an age-
old technique where all participants have an opportunity to speak up. No idea is
a bad idea with this technique, and it's essential that the facilitator not allow
participants to get into judging contests or debates on the merits of the ideas
proposed during the brainstorming session.
The Delphi technique is similar to brainstorming in that you involve subject
matter experts in determining estimates. Their experiences with the organization
and on similar past projects will help improve the accuracy of the estimates.
Because you have them involved in the process and they know that the estimates
derived from this exercise will be attached to the project schedule, they are likely
to provide more accurate estimates and work hard to meet or beat them.

Reserve Analysis
Contingency reserves--also called buffers or time reserves in the PMBOK(R)
Guide--means a portion of time (or money when you're estimating budgets) that
is added to the schedule to account for risk or uncertainty. You might choose to
add a percentage of time or a set number of work periods to the activity or the
overall schedule or both. Contingency reserves are calculated for known risks
that have documented contingency or mitigation response plans to deal with the
risk event should it occur, but you don't necessarily know how much time it will
take to implement the mitigation plan and potentially perform rework. For
example, you know it will take 100 hours to run new cable based on the
quantitative estimate you came up with earlier. You also know that sometimes
you hit problem areas when running the cable. To make sure you don't impact
the project schedule, you build in a reserve time of 10 percent of your original
estimate to account for the problems you might encounter. This brings your
activity duration estimate to 110 hours for this activity. Contingency reserves
can be and should be modified as the project progresses. As you use the time, or
find you don't need the time, you will modify the reserve amounts.
Management reserves are a type of reserve used for unknown events. Since they
are unknown, you have not identified them as risks. Management reserves are
for that funny feeling you have that something could come up that you haven't
thought about during the Planning process. Management reserves set aside
periods of time for this unknown work but are not included in the schedule
periods of time for this unknown work but are not included in the schedule
baseline. Keep in mind this is not time that is available to throw in extra
deliverables that didn't make it into the scope statement. Management reserves
must be used for project work that is within scope. If you do use management
reserves during the project, you must change the schedule baseline to reflect the
time used.

  Exam Spotlight
  Contingency reserves are included in the schedule baseline; management
  reserves are not. Contingency reserves are for potential work identified
  during the Risk Planning processes. Management reserves are for unknown
  circumstances that have not been previously identified but require work that
  is within scope of the project. Management reserves that are used on the
  project require a change to the schedule baseline.


Estimate Activity Durations Outputs
Everything I've discussed to this point has brought you to the primary output of
this process: the activity duration estimates. You use the inputs and tools and
techniques to establish these estimates. As mentioned earlier, activity duration
estimates are estimates of the required work periods needed to complete the
activity. This is a quantitative measure usually expressed in hours, weeks, days,
or months.
One factor to note about your final estimates as an output to this process is that
they should contain a range of possible results. In the cable-running example,
you would state the activity duration estimates as "100 hours  10 hours" to
show that the actual duration will take at least 90 hours and might go as long as
110 hours--or you could use percentages to express this range.
The other output of Estimate Activity Durations is project documents updates.
The information that may need to be revisited and updated as a result of this
process includes the activity attributes and the assumptions you made regarding
resource availability and skill levels.
Now that you have all the activity information in hand, along with a host of other
inputs, you're ready to develop the project schedule.

  Exam Spotlight
Exam Spotlight
Remember that you perform the Activity processes in this order: Define
Activities, Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Resources, and Estimate
Activity Durations. Develop Schedule comes after you've completed all of
these processes.




       Real World Scenario

Desert State University (DSU)
DSU has hired a contract agency to create its new registration website. The
website will allow students in good academic standing to register for classes
over the Internet. You have been appointed as the project manager for the
DSU side of this project. You'll be working with Henry Lu from Websites
International to complete this project.
Henry has given you an activity list and asked for time estimates that he can
plug into the project plan.
Your first stop is Mike Walter's desk. He's the expert on the mainframe
registration system and he'll be writing the interface programs to accept
registration data from the new website. Mike will also create the download
that the Internet program will use to verify a student's academic standing.
Mike has created other programs just like this in the past. His expertise and
judgment are very reliable.
The next stop is Kate Langdon. She's the new team leader of the testing
group. Kate has been with DSU for only one month. Since she has no
experience working with DSU data and staff members, she tells you she'll
get back to you within a week with estimates for the testing activities. She
plans to read through the project binders of some similar projects and base
her estimates against the historical information on similar projects. She'll run
the estimates by her lead tester before giving them to you.
You've asked both of your resources to provide you with three-point
estimates. Mike Walter's estimates are an example of using the tool and
technique of expert judgment to derive activity duration estimates. The
  technique of expert judgment to derive activity duration estimates. The
  estimates expected from Kate Langdon will be derived using historical
  information (implied by the research she's going to do into past similar
  projects) and expert judgment because she's involving her lead tester to
  verify the estimates.


Developing the Project Schedule
The Develop Schedule process is the heart of the Planning process group. This is
where you lay out the schedule for your project activities, determine their start
and finish dates, and finalize activity sequences and durations. Develop
Schedule, along with Estimate Activity Resources and Estimate Activity
Durations, is repeated several times before you come up with the project
schedule. Most project management software programs today can automatically
build a schedule for you once you've entered the needed information for the
activities. The project schedule, once it's approved, serves as the schedule
baseline for the project that you can track against in later processes.




  Remember that you cannot perform Develop Schedule until you have
  completed at least the following processes in the Planning group (some of
  these can be performed at the same time for smaller, less complex projects):
  Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create WBS, Define Activities,
  Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Resources, Estimate Activity
  Durations, and Plan Human Resource Management. In practice, it's also
  beneficial to perform Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, Plan Risk Responses, and Plan
  Procurement Management prior to developing the schedule.

There is a lot of material to cover in this process, so grab a cup of coffee or a
soda now. I'll start with the inputs to the Develop Schedule process and then
follow up with an in-depth discussion of the tools and techniques of the process.
These techniques will help you get to the primary output of this process: the
project schedule.

Develop Schedule Inputs
Develop Schedule has 13 inputs, 9 of which are outputs from other Planning
Develop Schedule has 13 inputs, 9 of which are outputs from other Planning
processes. The inputs are as follows:
   Schedule management plan
   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Project schedule network diagrams
   Activity resource requirements
   Resource calendars
   Activity duration estimates
   Project scope statement
   Risk register
   Project staff assignments
   Resource breakdown structure
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
You can see how important it is to perform all the Planning processes accurately
because the information you derive from almost every process in the Planning
group is used somewhere else in Planning, many of them here. Your project
schedule will reflect the information you know at this point in time. If you have
incorrectly estimated activity durations or didn't identify the right dependencies,
for example, the inputs to this process will be distorted and your project schedule
will not be correct. It's definitely worth the investment of time to correctly plan
your project and come up with accurate outputs for each of the Planning
processes.
As with several other processes, you should pay particular attention to
constraints and assumptions when performing Develop Schedule. Constraints are
with you throughout the life of the project. The most important constraints to
consider in the Develop Schedule process are time constraints, and they fall into
two categories: imposed dates and key events/major milestones.
Imposed dates restrict the start or finish date of activities. The two most common
constraints, start no earlier than and finish no later than, are used by most
computerized project management software programs. Let's look once again at
the house-painting example. The painting activity cannot start until the primer
has dried. If the primer takes 24 hours to dry and is scheduled to be completed
on Wednesday, this implies that the painting activity can start no earlier than
Thursday. This is an example of an imposed date.
Key events or milestones refer to the completion of specific deliverables by a
specific date. Stakeholders, customers, or management staff might request that
certain deliverables be completed or delivered by specific dates. Once you've
agreed to those dates (even if the agreement is only verbal), it's often cast in
stone and difficult to change. These dates, therefore, become constraints.




  Be careful of the delivery dates you commit to your stakeholders or
  customers. You might think you're simply discussing the matter or throwing
  out ideas, whereas the stakeholder might take what you've said as fact. Once
  the stakeholder believes the deliverable or activity will be completed by a
  specific date, there's almost no convincing them that the date needs
  changing.


Develop Schedule Tools and Techniques
The primary outputs of Develop Schedule are the schedule baseline and the
project schedule. The schedule baseline is the approved version of the project
schedule. You can employ several tools and techniques to produce these outputs.
The tools and techniques you choose depend on the complexity of the project.
For the exam, however, you'll need to know them all.
Develop Schedule has eight tools and techniques:
   Schedule network analysis
   Critical path method
   Critical chain method
   Resource optimization techniques
   Modeling techniques
   Leads and lags
    Schedule compression
    Scheduling tool
A lot of information is packed into some of these tools and techniques, and you
should dedicate study time to each of them for the exam. We'll look at each one
next.

Schedule Network Analysis
Schedule network analysis produces the project schedule. It involves calculating
early and late start dates and early and late finish dates for project activities (as
does the critical path method). It uses a schedule model and other analytical
techniques such as critical path and critical chain method, what-if analysis, and
resource leveling (all of which are other tools and techniques in this process) to
help calculate these dates and create the schedule. These calculations are
performed without taking resource limitations into consideration, so the dates
you end up with are theoretical. At this point, you're attempting to establish the
time periods within which the activities can be scheduled. Resource limitations
and other constraints will be taken into consideration when you get to the
outputs of this process.

Critical Path Method
The critical path method (CPM) is a schedule network analysis technique that
estimates the minimum project duration. It determines the amount of float, or
schedule flexibility, for each of the network paths by calculating the earliest start
date, earliest finish date, latest start date, and latest finish date for each activity
(without taking resource availability into account). This is a schedule network
analysis technique that relies on sequential networks (one activity occurs before
the next, a series of activities occurring concurrently is completed before the
next series of activities begins, and so on) and on a single duration estimate for
each activity. The precedence diagramming method (PDM) can be used to
perform CPM. Keep in mind that CPM is a method to determine schedule
durations without regard to resource availability.
The critical path (CP) is generally the longest full path on the project. Any
project activity with a float time that equals 0 or with negative float is considered
a critical path task. The critical path can change under a few conditions. When
activities with float time use up all their float, they can become critical path
tasks. Or you might have a milestone midway through the project with a finish
no later than constraint that can change the critical path if it isn't met.
Float time is also called slack time, and you'll see these terms used
interchangeably. There are two types of float: total float and free float. Total
float (TF) is the amount of time you can delay the earliest start of a task without
delaying the ending of the project. Free float (FF) is the amount of time you can
delay the start of a task without delaying the earliest start of a successor task.
In the following section, you'll calculate the CP for a sample project, and I'll
illustrate how you derive all the dates, the CP, and the float times.

Gathering Activity and Dependency Information
Let's say you are the project manager for a new software project. Your team will
be developing a custom application that manages, tracks, and analyzes charitable
contributions to a variety of organizations managed by your parent company.
You need to devise a software system that tracks all the information related to
the contributions, the donors, and the receivers and also supplies the
management team with reports that will help them make good business
decisions. For purposes of illustration, I'm showing only a limited portion of the
tasks that you would have on a project like this.
You'll start this example by plugging information from the processes you've
already completed into a table (a complete example is shown later in Table 4.1
in the section "Calculating the Critical Path"). The list of activities comes from
the Define Activities process. The durations for each activity are listed in the
Duration column and were derived during the Estimate Activity Durations
process. The duration times are listed in days.
The Dependency column lists the activities that require a previous activity to
finish before the current activity can start. You're using only finish-to-start
relationships. For example, you'll see that activity 2 and activity 4 each depend
on activity 1 to finish before they can begin. The dependency information came
from the Sequence Activities process. Now, you'll proceed to calculating the
dates.

Calculating the Forward and Backward Pass
Project Deliverables is the first activity and, obviously, where the project starts.
This activity begins on April 1. Project Deliverables has a 12-day duration. So,
take April 1 and add 12 days to this to come up with an early finish date of April
12. Watch out, because you need to count day 1, or April 1, as a full workday.
The simplest way to do this calculation is to take the early start date, add the
duration, and subtract 1. Therefore, the early finish date for the first activity is
April 12. By the way, we are ignoring weekends and holidays for this example.
Activity 2 depends on activity 1, so it cannot start until activity 1 has finished.
Its earliest start date is April 13 because activity 1 finished at the end of the
previous day. Add the duration to this date minus 1 to come up with the finish
date.
You'll notice that since activity 4 depends on activity 1 finishing, its earliest start
date is also April 13. Continue to calculate the remaining early start and early
finish dates in the same manner. This calculation is called a forward pass.
To calculate the latest start and latest finish dates, you begin with the last
activity. The latest finish for activity 9 is July 10. Since the duration is only one
day, July 10 is also the latest start date. You know that activity 8 must finish
before activity 9 can begin, so activity 8's latest finish date, July 9, is one day
prior to activity 9's latest start date, July 10. Subtract the duration of activity 8
(three days) from July 9 and add one day to get the latest start date of July 7.
You're performing the opposite calculation that you did for the forward pass.
This calculation is called a backward pass, as you might have guessed. Continue
calculating the latest start and latest finish through activity 4.
Activity 3 adds a new twist. Here's how it works: Activity 7 cannot begin until
activity 3 and activity 6 are completed. No other activity depends on the
completion of activity 3. If activity 7's latest start date is June 29, activity 3's
latest finish date must be June 28. June 28 minus eight days plus one gives you a
latest start date of June 21. Activity 3 depends on activity 2, so activity 2 must be
completed prior to beginning activity 3. Calculate these dates just as you did for
activities 9 through 4.
Activity 1 still remains. Activity 4 cannot start until activity 1 is completed. If
activity 4's latest start date is April 13, the latest finish date for activity 1 must
be April 12. Subtract the duration of activity 1, and add 1 to come up with a
latest start date of April 1. Alternatively, you can calculate the forward pass and
backward pass by saying the first task starts on day 0 and then adding the
duration to this. For example, activity number 1's earliest start date is April 1,
which is day 0. Add 12 days to day 0, and you come up with an earliest finish
date of April 12.
You determine the calculation for float/slack time by subtracting the earliest start
date from the latest start date. If the float time equals 0, the activity is on the
critical path.

Calculating the Critical Path
To determine the CP duration of the project, add the duration of every activity
with zero float. You should come up with 101 days because you're adding the
duration for all activities except for activity 2 and activity 3. A critical path task
is any task that cannot be changed without impacting the project end date. By
definition, these are all tasks with zero float.
Another way to determine the critical path is by looking at the network diagram.
If the duration is included with the information on the node or if start and end
dates are given, you simply calculate the duration and then add the duration of
the longest path in the diagram to determine the CP. However, this method is not
as accurate as what's shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 CPM calculation
Activity Activity        Dependency Duration Early Early Late Late Float/Slack
Number Description                           Start Finish Start Finish
1        Project         --         12       4/1 4/12 4/1 4/12 0
         Deliverables
2        Procure         1              2           4/13 4/14      6/19 6/20      67
         Hardware
3        Test            2              8           4/15 4/22      6/21 6/28      67
         Hardware
4        Procure         1              10          4/13 4/22      4/13 4/22      0
         Software
         Tools
5        Write Code      4              45          4/23 6/6       4/23 6/6       0
6        Test and        5              22          6/7 6/28       6/7 6/28       0
         Debug
7        Install         3, 6           8           6/29 7/6       6/29 7/6       0
8        Training        7              3           7/7 7/9        7/7 7/9        0
9        Acceptance      8              1           7/10 7/10      7/10 7/10      0
Figure 4.3 shows the same project in diagram form. The duration is printed in
the top-right corner of each node. Add the duration of each path to determine
which one is the critical path.
Remember that CP is usually the path with the longest duration. In Figure 4.1,
path 1-2-3-7-8-9 equals 34 days. Path 1-4-5-6-7-8-9 equals 101 days; therefore,
this path is the critical path.




Figure 4.3 Critical path diagram

Calculating Expected Value Using PERT
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) is a method that the United
States Navy developed in the 1950s. The Navy was working on one of the most
complex engineering projects in history at the time--the Polaris Missile Program
--and needed a way to manage the project and forecast the project schedule with
a high degree of reliability. PERT was developed to do just that.
PERT and CPM are similar techniques. The difference is that CPM uses the
most likely duration to determine project duration, whereas PERT uses what's
called expected value (or the weighted average). Expected value is calculated
using the three-point estimates for activity duration (I talked about three-point
estimates earlier in this chapter) and then finding the weighted average of those
estimates (I'll talk about weighted average in the next section, "Calculating
Expected Value"). If you take this one step further and determine the standard
deviation of each activity, you can assign a confidence factor to your project
estimates. Without getting too heavily involved in the mathematics of
probability, understand that for data that fits a bell curve--which is what you're
about to calculate with the PERT technique--the following is true:
   Work will finish within plus or minus three standard deviations 99.73
   percent of the time.
   Work will finish within plus or minus two standard deviations 95.45 percent
   of the time.
   Work will finish within plus or minus one standard deviation 68.27 percent
   of the time.

Calculating Expected Value
The three-point estimates used to calculate expected value are the optimistic
estimate, the pessimistic estimate, and the most likely estimate. Going back to
the software example, let's find out what these three time estimates might look
like for the activity called Write Code. You get these estimates by asking the
lead programmer, or key team member, to estimate the optimistic, pessimistic,
and most likely duration for the activity based on past experience. Other
historical information could be used to determine these estimates as well. Say in
this case that you're given 38 days for the optimistic time, 57 days for the
pessimistic, and 45 days for the most likely. (Forty-five days was derived from
the Estimate Activity Durations process and is the estimate you used to
calculate CPM.)
The formula to calculate expected value is as follows:
   (optimistic + pessimistic + (4 x mostlikely)) / 6
The expected value for the Write Code activity is as follows:
   (38 + 57 + (4 x 45)) / 6 = 45.83
The formula for standard deviation, which helps you determine confidence level,
is as follows:
   (pessimistic - optimistic) / 6
The standard deviation for your activity is as follows:
   (57 - 38) / 6 = 3.17
You could say the following, given the information you now have:
   There is a 68.27 percent chance that the Write Code activity will be
   completed in 42.66 days to 49 days.
   There is a 95.45 percent chance that the Write Code activity will be
   completed in 39.49 days to 52.17 days.
You calculated the range of dates for the 68.27 percent chance by adding and
subtracting one standard deviation, 3.17, from the expected value, 45.83. You
calculated the 95.45 percent chance by multiplying the standard deviation times
2, which equals 6.34, and adding and subtracting that result from the expected
value to come up with the least number of days and the most number of days it
will take to finish the activity. Generally speaking, two standard deviations, or
95.45 percent, is a close enough estimate for most purposes.

Determining Date Ranges for Project Duration
Let's bring your table of activities back and plug in the expected values and the
standard deviation for each (see Table 4.2).
Table 4.2 PERT calculation
Activity Activity     Optimistic Pessimistic Most Expected Standard            SD
Number Description                           Likely Value  Deviation           Squared
                                                           (SD)
1        Project      10         14          12     12.00  0.67                0.45
         Deliverables
2        Procure      --         --          --     --     --                  --
         Hardware
3        Test         --         --          --     --     --                  --
         Hardware
4        Procure      8          14          10     10.33  1.00                1.0
         Software
         Tools
5        Write Code 38           57          45     45.83  3.17                10.05
6        Test and     20         30          22     23.00  1.67                2.79
         Debug
7        Install      5          10          8      7.83   0.83                0.69
8        Training     3          3           3      3.00   0                   0
9        Acceptance 1            1           1      1.00   0                   0
Totals                                              102.99                     14.98
Totals                                                     102.99                 14.98
for CP
Tasks




  The higher the standard deviation is for an activity, the higher the risk.
  Because standard deviation measures the difference between the pessimistic
  and the optimistic times, a greater spread between the two, which results in a
  higher number, indicates a greater risk. Conversely, a low standard deviation
  means less risk.

Now let's look at the total project duration using PERT and the standard
deviation to determine a range of dates for project duration. You should add only
the tasks that are on the critical path. Remember from the CPM example that
activities 2 and 3 are not on the critical path, so their expected value and
standard deviation calculations have been left blank in this table. When you add
all the remaining tasks, the total expected value duration is 102.99 days, or 103
days rounded to the nearest day.
Your next logical conclusion might be to add the Standard Deviation column to
get the standard deviation for the project. Unfortunately, you cannot add the
standard deviations because you will come out with a number that is much too
high. Totaling the standard deviations assumes that all the tasks will run over
schedule, and that's not likely. It is likely that a few tasks will run over but not
every one of them. So now you're probably wondering how to calculate the
magic number.
You might have noticed an extra column at the right called SD Squared (or
variance). This is the standard deviation squared--or for those of you with math
phobias out there, the standard deviation multiplied by itself.
Once you have calculated the standard deviation squared for each activity, add
the squares, for a total of 14.98. There's one more step, and you're done. Take
the square root of 14.98 (you'll need a calculator) to come up with 3.87. This is
the standard deviation you will use to determine your range of projected
completion dates. Here's a recap of these last few calculations:
   Total expected value = 103.00
   Sum of SD Squared = 14.98
   Sum of SD Squared = 14.98
   Square root of SD Squared = 3.87
You can now make the following predictions regarding your project:
   There is a 68.27 percent chance that the project will be completed in 99.13
   days to 106.87 days.
   There is a 95.45 percent chance that the project will be completed in 95.26
   days to 110.74 days.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, I recommend that you know that one standard deviation gives
  you a 68 percent (rounded) probability and two standard deviations give you
  a 95 percent (rounded) probability. Also, know how to calculate the range of
  project duration dates based on the expected value and standard deviation
  calculation. You probably don't need to memorize how to calculate the
  standard deviation because most of the questions give you this information.
  You should, however, memorize the PERT formula and know how it works.
  It wouldn't hurt to memorize the standard deviation formula as well--you
  never know what might show up on the exam.

PERT is not used often today. When it is, it's used for very large, highly complex
projects. However, PERT is a useful technique to determine project duration
when your activity durations are uncertain. It's also useful for calculating the
duration for individual tasks in your schedule that might be complex or risky.
You might decide to use PERT for a handful of the activities (those with the
highest amount of risk, for example) and use other techniques to determine
duration for the remaining activities.

Critical Chain Method
Critical chain method is a schedule network analysis technique that will modify
the project schedule by accounting for limited or restricted resources, or for
unforeseen project issues, by adding buffers to any schedule path. First construct
the project schedule network diagram using the critical path method. You will
apply the duration estimates, dependencies, and constraints and then enter
resource availability. Buffers, called feeding buffers, are added at this time as
well. The idea behind feeding buffers is similar to that of contingencies. Adding
buffer activities (which are essentially nonwork activities) to the schedule gives
you a cushion of time that protects the critical path and thus the overall project
schedule from slipping. Feeding buffers are added to noncritical chain-dependent
tasks that feed into the critical chain. Project buffers are a type of buffer that is
added at the end of the critical chain. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, after
adding these buffer activities you should schedule your critical path tasks at their
latest start and finish dates.
Once this modified schedule is calculated, you'll often find that it changes the
critical path. The new critical path showing the resource restrictions and feeding
buffers is called the critical chain.
Critical chain uses both deterministic (step-by-step) and probabilistic
approaches. A few steps are involved in the critical chain process:
   Construct the schedule network diagram using activity duration estimates
   (you'll use nonconservative estimates in this method).
   Define dependencies.
   Define constraints.
   Calculate critical path.
   Enter resource availability into the schedule.
   Recalculate for the critical chain.
The critical chain method typically schedules high-risk tasks early in the project
so that problems can be identified and addressed right away. It allows for
combining several tasks into one task when one resource is assigned to all the
tasks.

  Exam Spotlight
  CPM manages the total float of schedule network paths, whereas critical
  chain manages buffer activity durations. Critical chain is built on CPM and
  protects the schedule from slipping.


Resource Optimization Techniques
Earlier, I said that CPM and PERT do not consider resource availability. Now
that you have a schedule of activities and have determined the critical path, it's
time to plug in resources for those activities and adjust the schedule or resources
according to any resource constraints you discover. Remember that you
identified resource estimates during the Estimate Activity Resources process.
Now during Develop Schedule, resources are assigned to specific activities.
Usually, you'll find that your initial schedule has periods of time with more
activities than you have resources to work on them. You will also find that it isn't
always possible to assign 100 percent of your team members' time to tasks.
Sometimes your schedule will show a team member who is overallocated,
meaning they're assigned to more work than they can physically perform in the
given time period. Other times, they might not be assigned enough work to keep
them busy during the time period. This problem is easy to fix. You can assign
underallocated resources to multiple tasks to keep them busy. Adjusting the
schedule for overallocated resources is a harder problem to fix. We will look at
three techniques that optimize resources to prevent overallocation where
possible: resource leveling, resource smoothing, and reverse resource allocation
scheduling. You should use these techniques with CPM-based schedules.

Resource Leveling
Resource leveling--also called the resource-based method--is used when
resources are overallocated, when they are only available at certain times, or
when they are assigned to more than one activity at a time. In a nutshell,
resource leveling attempts to balance out the resource assignments to get tasks
completed without overloading the individual. You accomplish this by adjusting
the start and finish dates of schedule activities based on the availability of
resources. This typically means allocating resources to critical path tasks first,
which often changes the critical path and, in turn, the overall project end date.
The project manager can accomplish resource leveling in a couple of other ways
as well. You might delay the start of a task to match the availability of a key
team member, or you might adjust the resource assignments so that more tasks
are given to team members who are underallocated. Generally speaking,
resource leveling of overallocated team members extends the project end date. If
you're under a date constraint, you'll have to rework the schedule after assigning
resources to keep the project on track with the committed completion date. You
can accomplish this with resource smoothing, which we'll look at next.

Resource Smoothing
Resource smoothing accommodates resource availability by modifying activities
within their float times without changing the critical path or project end date.
That means you'll also use this technique when you need to meet specific
schedule dates and are concerned about resource availability.
There are several ways you can accomplish this. You can adjust the resource
assignments so that more tasks are given to team members who are
underallocated. You could also require the resources to work mandatory
overtime--that one always goes over well! Perhaps you can split some tasks so
that the team member with the pertinent knowledge or skill performs the critical
part of the task and the noncritical part of the task is given to a less-skilled team
member. Other methods might include moving key resources from noncritical
tasks and assigning them to critical path tasks or adjusting assignments.
Reallocating those team members with slack time to critical path tasks to keep
them on schedule is another option. Don't forget, fast tracking is another way to
keep the project on schedule.

Reverse Resource Allocation Scheduling
Reverse resource allocation scheduling is a technique used when key resources
--like a thermodynamic expert, for example--are required at a specific point in
the project and they are the only resource, or resources, available to perform
these activities. This technique requires the resources to be scheduled in reverse
order (that is, from the end date of the project rather than the beginning) in order
to assign this key resource at the correct time.

  Exam Spotlight
  Resource leveling can cause the original critical path to change and can
  delay the project's completion date. Resource smoothing modifies activities
  within their floats without changing the critical path or project end date. It's
  used when changes to the critical path cannot or should not be made.
  Reverse resource allocation scheduling is used when specific resources are
  needed at certain times.


Modeling Techniques
Modeling techniques typically include the use of what-if scenario analysis and
simulation.
What-if scenario analysis uses different sets of activity assumptions to produce
multiple project durations. For example, what would happen if a major
deliverable is delayed or the weather prevents you from completing a deliverable
on time? What-if analysis literally asks the question, "What if (fill in the blank)
happens on the project?" and attempts to determine the potential positive and/or
negative impacts to the project. What-if questions help determine the feasibility
of the project schedule under adverse conditions. They are also useful to the
project team in preparing risk responses or contingency plans to address the
what-if situations. Worst-case what-if scenarios may result in a no-go decision.
Simulation techniques use a range of probable activity durations for each activity
(often derived from the three-point estimates), and those ranges are then used to
calculate a range of probable duration results for the project itself. Monte Carlo
is a simulation technique that runs the possible activity durations and schedule
projections many, many times to come up with the schedule projections and their
probability, critical path duration estimates, and float time.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that Monte Carlo is a simulation technique that
  shows the probability of all the possible project completion dates.


Leads and Lags
I talked about leads and lags earlier in this chapter. You'll recall that lags delay
successor activities and require time added either to the start date or to the finish
date of the activity you're scheduling. Leads require time to be subtracted from
the start date or the finish date of the activity. Keep in mind that as you go about
creating your project schedule, you might need to adjust lead and lag time to
come up with a workable schedule.

Schedule Compression
Schedule compression is a form of mathematical analysis that's used to shorten
the project schedule duration without changing the project scope. Compression
is simply shortening the project schedule to accomplish all the activities sooner
than estimated.
Schedule compression might happen when the project end date has been
predetermined or if, after performing the CPM or PERT techniques, you
discover that the project is going to take longer than the original promised date.
In the CPM example, you calculated the end date to be July 10. What if the
project was undertaken and a July 2 date was promised? That's when you'll need
to employ one or both of the duration compression techniques: crashing and fast
to employ one or both of the duration compression techniques: crashing and fast
tracking.

Crashing
Crashing is a compression technique that looks at cost and schedule trade-offs.
Crashing the schedule is accomplished by adding resources--from either inside
or outside the organization--to the critical path tasks. It wouldn't help you to add
resources to noncritical path tasks; these tasks don't impact the schedule end date
anyway because they have float time. Crashing could be accomplished by
requiring mandatory overtime for critical path tasks or requiring overnight
deliveries of materials rather than relying on standard shipping times. You may
find that crashing the schedule can lead to increased risk or increased costs or
both.




  Be certain to check the critical path when you've used the crashing technique
  because crashing might have changed the critical path. Also consider that
  crashing doesn't always come up with a reasonable result. It often increases
  the costs of the project as well. The idea with crashing is to try to gain the
  greatest amount of schedule compression with the least amount of cost.


Fast Tracking
I talked about fast tracking in Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?" Fast tracking is
performing two tasks or project phases in parallel that were previously scheduled
to start sequentially. Fast tracking can occur for the entire duration of the task or
phase or for a portion of the task or phase duration. It can increase project risk
and might cause the project team to have to rework tasks. Fast tracking will
work only for activities that can be overlapped. For example, it is often
performed in object-oriented programming. The programmers might begin
writing code on several modules at once, out of sequential order and prior to the
completion of the design phase. However, if you remember our house-painting
example, you couldn't start priming and painting at the same time, so fast
tracking isn't a possibility for those activities.

Scheduling Tool
Given the examples you've worked through on Develop Schedule and resource
Given the examples you've worked through on Develop Schedule and resource
leveling, you have probably already concluded how much a scheduling tool
might help you with these processes. The scheduling tools I've used are in the
form of project management software programs. They will automate the
mathematical calculations (such as forward and backward pass) and perform
resource-leveling functions for you. Obviously, you can then print the schedule
that has been produced for final approval and ongoing updates. It's common
practice to email updated schedules with project notes so that stakeholders know
what activities are completed and which ones remain to be done.
It's beyond the scope of this book to go into all the various software programs
available to project managers. Suffice it to say that scheduling tools and project
management software range from the simple to the complex. The level of
sophistication and the types of project management techniques that you're
involved with will determine which software product you should choose. Many
project managers that I know have had great success with Microsoft Project
software and use it exclusively. It contains a robust set of features and reporting
tools that will serve most projects well.
Don't forget that you are the project manager, and your good judgment should
never be usurped by the recommendation of a software product. Your finely
tuned skills and experience will tell you whether relationship issues between
team members might cause bigger problems than what the resource-leveling
function indicates. Constraints and stakeholder expectations are difficult for a
software package to factor in. Rely on your expertise when in doubt. If you don't
have the experience yet to make knowledge-based decisions, seek out another
project manager or a senior stakeholder, manager, or team member and ask them
to confirm whether you're on the right track. Here's a word of caution: Don't
become so involved with the software that you're managing the software instead
of managing the project. Project management software is a wonderful tool, but it
is not a substitute for sound project management practices or experience.

Scheduling Process Outputs
The Develop Schedule process has six outputs:
   Schedule baseline
   Project schedule
   Schedule data
   Project calendars
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
We'll take a look at a few of the outputs of this process next, starting with the
project schedule first. Take note that the two primary outputs from this process
that will carry forward throughout the rest of the project are the project schedule
and the schedule baseline.



         Real World Scenario

  Sunny Surgeons, Inc.
  Kate Newman is a project manager for Sunny Surgeons, Inc. Sunny
  Surgeons, Inc., is a software company that produces software for handheld
  devices for the medical profession. The software allows surgeons to keep
  notes regarding patients, upcoming surgeries, and ideas about new medicines
  and techniques to research. Kate's latest project is to write an enhanced
  version of the patient-tracking program with system integration capabilities
  to a well-known desktop software product used by the medical industry.
  The programming department has had some recent turnover. Fortunately,
  Stephen, the senior programmer who led the development effort on the
  original version of the patient tracker, still works for Sunny. His expertise
  with handheld technologies, as well as his knowledge of the desktop
  software product, makes him an invaluable resource for this project.
  Kate discovered a problem during the development of the project schedule.
  Stephen is overallocated for three key activities. Kate decides to see what his
  take is on the situation before deciding what to do.
  Stephen, the eternal optimist programmer who loves his job and does all but
  sleep in his office at night, says he can easily complete all the activities and
  that Kate shouldn't give it a second thought. He also suggests to Kate that
  Karen Wong, a junior programmer on his team who worked on the last
  project with him, might be able to handle the noncritical path task on her
  own, with a little direction from Stephen.
  Kate thinks better of the idea of overallocating her key project resource,
  even if he does think he can do the entire thing single-handedly. She decides
  to try some resource leveling to see what turns up.
  to try some resource leveling to see what turns up.
  Kate discovers that rearranging the order of activities, along with assigning
  Karen to handle the noncritical path activity, might be a possible solution.
  However, this scenario lengthens the project by a total of eight days. Since
  Kate knows the primary constraint on this project is quality, she's fairly sure
  she can get a buy-off from the project sponsor and stakeholders on the later
  schedule date. She can also sell the resource-leveled schedule as a low-risk
  option as opposed to assigning Stephen to all the activities and keeping the
  project end date the same. Overallocating resources can cause burnout and
  stress-related illnesses, which will ultimately have a negative impact on the
  project schedule.


Project Schedule
The purpose of the Develop Schedule process is to analyze most of the steps
we've talked about so far, including sequencing activities, determining their
durations, considering schedule constraints, and analyzing resource
requirements. One of the primary outputs of this process is the project schedule,
which presents the start and finish dates for each of the project activities, the
duration of activities, dependencies among activities, milestones, and resources
in a project schedule model. Determining resource assignments occurs in the
Acquire Project Team process, and depending on the size and complexity of
your project or your organization's culture, this process might not be completed
yet. If that's the case, the project schedule is considered preliminary until the
resources are assigned to the activities.




  In PMBOK(R) Guide terms, the project schedule is considered preliminary
  until resources are assigned. In reality, keep in mind that once you've
  published the project schedule (even though it's in a preliminary state), some
  stakeholders might regard it as the actual schedule and expect you to keep to
  the dates shown. Use caution when publishing a schedule in its preliminary
  form.

The project schedule should be approved by stakeholders and functional
managers, who should sign off on it. This assures you that they have read the
schedule, understand the dates and resource commitments, and will likely
schedule, understand the dates and resource commitments, and will likely
cooperate. You'll also need to obtain confirmation that resources will be
available as outlined in the schedule when you're working in a functional
organization. The schedule cannot be finalized until you receive approval and
commitment for the resource assignments outlined in it.
Once the schedule is approved, it will become your baseline for the remainder of
the project. Project progress and task completion will be monitored and tracked
against the project schedule to determine whether the project is on course as
planned.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that the project schedule is based on the timeline
  (derived from the activity estimates we calculated earlier in this chapter), the
  scope document (to help keep track of major milestones and deliverables),
  and resource plans. These plans are all used as references when creating the
  schedule.

According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the schedule models are called presentations.
You can present the schedule in a variety of ways, some of which are variations
on what you've already seen. Project schedule network diagrams, like the ones
discussed earlier, will work as schedule diagrams when you add the start and
finish dates to each activity. These diagrams usually show the activity
dependencies and critical path. Figure 4.4 shows a sample portion of a project
schedule network diagram highlighting the programming activities.
Figure 4.4 Project schedule network diagram with activity dates
Gantt charts are easy to read and commonly used to display schedule activities.
Depending on the software you're using to produce the Gantt chart, it might also
show activity sequences, activity start and end dates, resource assignments,
activity dependencies, and the critical path. Figure 4.5 is a simple example that
plots various activities against time. These activities do not relate to the activities
in the tables or other figures shown so far. Gantt charts are also known as bar
charts.
Figure 4.5 Gantt chart
Milestone charts are another way to depict schedule information. Milestones
mark the completion of major deliverables or some other key events in the
project. For example, approval and sign-off on project deliverables might be
considered a milestone. Other examples might be completion of a prototype,
system testing, and contract approval.
Milestone charts might show the key events and their start or completion dates in
a bar chart form similar to a Gantt chart. Or they can be written in a simple table
format with milestones listed in the rows and expected schedule dates in one
column and actual completion dates in another, as shown in Table 4.3. As the
milestones are met, the Actual Date column is filled in. This information can be
included with the project status reports.
Table 4.3 Milestone chart
            Milestone                   Scheduled Date Actual Date
            Sign-off on deliverables    4/12           4/12
            Sign-off on hardware test   4/22           4/25
            Programming completed       6/06
            Testing completed           6/28
            Acceptance and sign-off     7/10
            Project closeout            7/10




  Milestone charts are an ideal way to present information to the executive
  team. They are high level, easy to read, and to the point. Bar charts (or Gantt
  charts) are great for presenting the schedule to the management level. They
  have a bit more detail and are a quick way to see at a glance what resources
  are required when.


Schedule Baseline
The schedule baseline is the final, approved version of the project schedule with
baseline start and baseline finish dates and resource assignments. The approved
project schedule becomes a part of the project management plan we talked about
project schedule becomes a part of the project management plan we talked about
in Chapter 3 and, once approved, must follow change control procedures if
changes are needed.




  According to the PMI(R) Project Management Professional (PMP)
  Examination Content Outline, in order to manage the timely completion of
  your project you'll need the project schedule, the approved project
  deliverables (documented in the project scope statement), milestones, scope
  management plan, and resource management plans.

As I've noted during discussions of some of the other Planning processes, project
planning and project management are iterative processes. Rarely is anything cast
in cement. You will continue to revisit processes throughout the project to refine
and adjust. Eventually, processes do get put to bed. You wouldn't want to return
to the Planning process at the conclusion of the project, for example, but keep in
mind that the Planning, Executing, and Monitoring and Controlling process
groups are iterative, and it's not unusual to have to revise processes within these
process groups as you progress on the project.
In practice, for small to medium-sized projects, you can complete Define
Activities, Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Resources, Estimate Activity
Durations, and Develop Schedule at the same time with the aid of a project
management software tool. You can produce Gantt charts; you can produce the
critical path, resource allocation, and activity dependencies; you can perform
what-if analysis; and you can produce various reports after plugging your
scheduling information into most project management software tools. Regardless
of your methods, be certain to obtain sign-off on the project schedule and
provide your stakeholders and project sponsor with regular updates. Keep your
schedule handy--there will likely be changes and modifications as you go.
While you're at it, be certain to save a schedule baseline for comparative
purposes. Once you get into the Executing and Monitoring and Controlling
processes, you'll be able to compare what you planned to do against what
actually happened.

Schedule Data
The schedule data refers to documenting the supporting data for the schedule.
The minimum amount of information in this output includes the milestones,
The minimum amount of information in this output includes the milestones,
schedule activities and activity attributes, and the assumptions and constraints
regarding the schedule. You should document any other information that doesn't
necessarily fit into the other categories. Always err on the side of too much
documentation rather than not enough.
You will have to be the judge of what other information to include here because
it will depend on the nature of the project. The PMBOK(R) Guide suggests that
you might include schedule contingencies, alternative schedules, and resource
histograms. Chapter 7, "Planning Project Resources," contains an example of a
resource histogram if you want to peek ahead. Resource histograms typically
display hours needed on one axis and period of time (days, weeks, months,
years) on the other axis. You might also include alternative schedules or
contingency schedule reserves in the schedule data section.

Project Documents Updates
As with many of the other processes you've seen in this chapter, creating the
project schedule may require updates to the activity resource requirements
document, activity attributes, calendars, and the risk register.



         Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  You worked with the stakeholders to document the activity list last week.
  After creating the first draft of the project schedule network diagram, you
  went back to each of them to ask for time estimates for each of the activities.
  Ricardo's estimates are shown here:
  1. Procure the T1 connection. This takes 30 to 45 days. This activity can be
     done concurrently with the other activities listed here. Ricardo will
     perform this activity.
  2. Run Ethernet cable throughout the building. This activity depends on the
     lease being signed and must finish before the build-out can start. The
     estimated time to complete is 16 hours, which was figured using
     parametric estimating techniques. Ricardo has one person on staff who
     can complete this specialized activity. His first available date is October
   5.
3. Purchase the router, switch, server, and rack for the equipment room and
   the four point-of-service terminals. Delivery time is two weeks. Ricardo
   will perform this activity.
4. Install the router and test the connection. Testing depends on the T1
   installation at demarcation. The time estimate to install is eight hours.
   Ricardo's staff will perform this activity.
5. Install the switch. Based on past experience, the time estimate to install
   is two hours. Ricardo's staff will do this activity.
6. Install the server and test. The testing depends on the T1 connection
   installation. Based on past experience, the time estimate to install is six
   hours. Ricardo's staff will do this activity.
7. The web team will add the new store location and phone number to the
   lookup function on the Internet site. The time estimate is two hours.
   Ricardo will assign his applications programming manager to this
   activity. This activity depends on the lease being signed.
Jake and Jill have each written similar lists with estimates and potential
resource assignments. You begin to align all the activities in sequential order
and discover a problem. Jill needs 14 days to hire personnel and stock
shelves, meaning that the build-out must be finished by January 16. Build-
out takes approximately 120 days and can't start before September 20
because of the contractor's availability. This is a problem because Ricardo's
Ethernet cable expert isn't available until October 5, and he needs 2 days to
complete the cabling. This pushes out the build-out start date by almost
2 weeks, which means the project completion date, or store-opening date, is
delayed by 2 weeks.
After gathering more information from Ricardo, you head to Dirk's office.
"So, Dirk," you conclude after filling him in on all the details, "we have two
options. Hire a contractor to perform the cable run since Ricardo's person
isn't available or push the store opening out by two weeks."
Dirk asks, "How much will the contractor charge to run the cable, and are
they available within the time frame you need?"
"Yes, they are available, and I've already requested that Ricardo book the
week of September 18 to hold this option open for us. They've quoted a price
of $10,000."
of $10,000."
"Okay, let's bring in the contractor. At this point, $10,000 isn't going to
break the budget. How is that planning coming anyway? Signed a lease
yet?"
"Yes, we've signed the lease. Jake has been meeting with Gomez
Construction on the build-out. We've used Gomez on three out of the last
five new stores and have had good luck with them."
You spend the next couple of days working on the project schedule in
Microsoft Project, clarifying tasks and activities with Jake, Ricardo, and Jill.
You decide that a Gantt chart will work excellently for reporting status for
this project. You stare intensely at the problem you see on the screen. The
Grand Opening task is scheduled to occur 13 days later than when you need
it! The grand opening must happen February 1 and 2, not February 14 and
15 as the schedule shows. You trace the problem back and see that the Grand
Opening task depends on Train Store Personnel, which itself depends on
several other tasks, including Hire Store Personnel and Install and Test
Hardware. Digging deeper, build-out can't begin until the Ethernet cable is
run throughout the building. Ricardo already set up the time with the
contractor to run the cable on September 18. This date cannot move, which
means build-out cannot start any sooner than September 20, which works
with Gomez's availability.
You pick up the phone and dial Jake's number. "Jake," you say into the
receiver, "I'm working on the project schedule, and I have some issues with
the Gomez activity."
"Shoot," Jake says.
"Gomez Construction can't start work until the Ethernet cable is run. I've
already confirmed with Ricardo that there is no negotiation on this. Ricardo
is hiring a contractor for this activity, and the earliest they can start is
September 18. It takes them two days to run the cable, which puts the start
date for build-out at September 20."
"What's the problem with the September 20 date?" Jake asks
"Jill wants to have the build-out finished prior to hiring the store personnel.
During the last store opening, those activities overlapped, and she said it was
unmanageable. She wants to hire folks and have them stock the shelves in
preparation for store opening but doesn't want contractors in there while
they're doing it. A September 20 start date for Gomez puts us at a finish date
of January 26, which is too late to give Jill time to hire and stock shelves.
of January 26, which is too late to give Jill time to hire and stock shelves.
My question is this: Is 120 days to finish a build-out a firm estimate?"
"Always--I've got this down to a science. Gomez has worked with me on
enough of these build-outs that we can come within just a couple of days of
this estimate either way," Jake says.
You pick up your schedule detail and continue, "I've scheduled Gomez's
resource calendar as you told me originally. Gomez doesn't work Sundays,
and neither do we. Their holidays are Labor Day, a couple of days at
Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year's, but this puts us too far out on the
schedule. Our February 1 opening must coincide with the Home and Garden
Show dates."
"I can't change the 120 days. Sounds like you have a problem."
"I need to crash the schedule," you say. "What would the chances be of
Gomez agreeing to split the build-out tasks? We could hire a second
contractor to come in and work alongside Gomez's crew to speed up this
task. That would shorten the duration to 100 days, which means we could
meet the February 1 date."
"Won't happen. I know Gomez. They're a big outfit and have all their own
crews. We typically work with them exclusively. If I brought another
contractor into the picture, I might have a hard time negotiating any kind of
favors with them later if we get into a bind."
"All right," you say. "How about this? I'm making some changes to the
resource calendar while we're talking. What if we authorize Gomez's crew to
work six 10-hour days, which still leaves them with Sundays off, and we ask
them to work on Labor Day and take only one day at Thanksgiving instead
of two?"
"I think Gomez would go for that. You realize it's going to cost you?"
"Project management is all about trade-offs. We can't move the start date, so
chances are the budget might take a hit to accommodate schedule changes or
risk. Fortunately, I'm just now wrapping up the final funding requirements,
so if you can get me the increased cost from Gomez soon, I'd appreciate it.
This change will keep us on track and resolve Jill's issues too."
"I don't think Gomez's crew will mind the overtime during the holiday
season. Everyone can use a little extra cash at that time of year, it seems. I'll
have the figures for you in a day or two."
  Project Case Study Checklist
  The main topics discussed in the case study are as follows:
     Estimate Activity Durations
     Estimate Activity Resources
     Developing project schedule
         Calendars
         Lead and lag time
         Critical path
     Duration compression
         Crashing
         Fast tracking
     Utilizing project management software
     Producing project schedule
         Milestones
         Gantt chart
         Resource leveling


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
The schedule management plan documents how you will define, monitor,
control, and change the project schedule. It is the only output of the Plan
Schedule Management process. Define Activities and Sequence Activities are
the first two processes in the "Activity" sequence you'll complete on the road to
Develop Schedule. You perform Estimate Activity Resources to determine the
resource requirements and quantity of resources needed for each schedule
activity. For small to medium-sized projects, I've found that you can perform this
process at the same time as the Estimate Activity Durations process. If you work
in an organization where the same resource pool is used for project after project,
you already know the people's skills sets and availability, so you can perform
this process at the same time you're creating the project schedule. The same logic
holds for projects where the material resources are similar for every project you
conduct. If you don't have the need to perform this process, I do recommend that
you create a resource calendar at a minimum so that you can note whether team
members have extended vacations or family issues that could impact the project
schedule. Needless to say, if you're working on a large project or your project
teams are new for every project, you should perform the Estimate Activity
Resources process rather than combining it with Develop Schedule. It will come
in handy later when you're ready to plug names into the activities listed on the
project schedule.
Estimate Activity Durations is a process you'll perform for most projects on
which you'll work. For larger projects, I'm a big fan of PERT estimates. PERT
gives you estimates with a high degree of reliability, which are needed for
projects that are critical to the organization, projects that haven't been undertaken
before, or projects that involve complex processes or scope. It's easy to create a
spreadsheet template to automatically calculate these estimates for you. List your
schedule activities in each row, and in the individual columns to the right, record
the most likely, pessimistic, and optimistic estimates. The final column can hold
the calculation to perform the weighted average of these three estimates, and you
can transfer the estimates to your schedule. You can easily add columns to
calculate standard deviation as well.
In theory, if you've performed all the "Activity" processes, the schedule should
almost be a no-brainer. You can plug the activity list, resources, estimates, and
successor and predecessor tasks into the schedule. From there, you will want to
take the next step and determine the critical path. The critical path is, well,
critical to your project's success. If you don't know which activities are on the
critical path, you won't know what impacts delays or risk events will have on the
project. No matter how big or small the project, be sure you know and
understand the critical path activities.

Summary
Great job! You've made it through the Planning activities associated with the
Project Time Management Knowledge Area. I covered several processes in this
chapter, including Plan Schedule Management, Define Activities, Sequence
Activities, Estimate Activity Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, and
Develop Schedule.
Define Activities uses the scope baseline (which includes the project scope
statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary) to help derive activities. Activities are
statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary) to help derive activities. Activities are
used to help derive a basis for estimating and scheduling project work during the
Planning processes and for executing and monitoring and controlling the work of
the project in later processes.
The Sequence Activities process takes the activities and puts them in a logical,
sequential order based on dependencies. Dependencies exist when the current
activity relies on some action from a predecessor activity or it impacts a
successor activity. Four types of dependencies exist: mandatory, discretionary,
external, and internal. PDM (also known as AON) and ADM (also known as
AOA) are two methods for displaying project schedule network diagrams. PDM
has four logical relationships, or dependencies: finish-to-start, start-to-finish,
finish-to-finish, and start-to-start.
The Estimate Activity Resources process considers all the resources needed and
the quantity of resources needed to perform project activities. This information is
determined for each activity and is documented in the activity resource
requirements output.
Duration estimates are produced as a result of the Estimate Activity Durations
process. Activity duration estimates document the number of work periods
needed for each activity, including their elapsed time. Analogous estimating--
also called top-down estimating or gross value estimating--is one way to
determine activity duration estimates. You can also use top-down techniques to
estimate project durations and total project costs. Parametric estimating
techniques multiply a known element--such as the quantity of materials needed
--by the time it takes to install or complete one unit of materials. The result is a
total estimate for the activity. Three-point estimates use two formulas to
calculate estimates, including triangular distributions (an average estimate based
on the most likely estimate, a pessimistic estimate, and an optimistic estimate)
and beta distributions (the PERT formula). Reserve analysis takes schedule risk
into consideration by adding a percentage of time or another work period to the
estimate just in case you run into trouble.
PERT calculates a weighted average estimate for each activity by using the
optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely times. It then determines variances, or
standard deviations, to come up with a total project duration within a given
confidence range. Work will finish within plus or minus one standard deviation
68.27 percent of the time. Work will finish within plus or minus two standard
deviations 95.45 percent of the time.
Develop Schedule is the process in which you assign beginning and ending dates
to activities and determine their duration. You might use CPM to accomplish
to activities and determine their duration. You might use CPM to accomplish
this. CPM calculates early start, early finish, late start, and late finish dates. It
also determines float time. All tasks with zero float are critical path tasks. The
critical path is the longest path of tasks in the project.
Schedules sometimes need to be compressed to meet promised dates or to
shorten the schedule times. Crashing looks at cost and schedule trade-offs.
Adding resources to critical path tasks or approving over time are two ways to
crash the schedule. Fast tracking involves performing tasks (or phases) in
parallel that were originally scheduled to start one after the other. Crashing may
change the critical path; fast tracking does not. Fast tracking usually increases
project risk. You can use Monte Carlo analysis in the Develop Schedule process
to determine multiple, probable project durations.
Resource leveling is used when resources are overallocated and may create
changes to the critical path and project end date. Resource smoothing modifies
activities within their floats without changing the critical path or project end
date.
The project schedule presents the activities in graphical form through the use of
project schedule network diagrams with dates, Gantt charts, milestone charts,
and project schedule network diagrams.


Exam Essentials
Be able to name the purpose of the Estimate Activity Resources process.
The purpose of Estimate Activity Resources is to determine the types of
resources needed (human, equipment, and materials) and in what quantities for
each schedule activity within a work package.
Be familiar with the tools and techniques of Estimate Activity Durations.
The tools and techniques of Estimate Activity Durations are expert judgment,
analogous estimating, parametric estimating, three-point estimating, group
decision-making techniques, and reserve analysis.
Know the difference between analogous estimating and bottom-up
estimating. Analogous estimating is a top-down technique that uses expert
judgment and historical information. Bottom-up estimating performs estimates
for each work item and rolls them up to a total.
Be able to calculate the critical path. The critical path includes the activities
with durations that add up to the longest path of the project schedule network
diagram. Critical path is calculated using the forward pass, backward pass, and
float calculations.
Be able to define a critical path task.   A critical path task is a project activity
with zero or negative float.
Be able to describe and calculate PERT duration estimates. This is a
weighted average technique that uses three estimates: optimistic, pessimistic,
and most likely. The formula is as follows: (optimistic + pessimistic + (4 x most
likely)) / 6.
Be able to describe the difference between resource leveling and resource
smoothing. Resource leveling can change the critical path and project end
date. Resource smoothing does not change the critical path or project end date.
Be familiar with the duration compression techniques. The duration
compression techniques are crashing and fast tracking.
Be able to describe a critical chain. The critical chain is the new critical path
in a modified schedule that accounts for limited resources and feeding buffers.
Know the key outputs of the Develop Schedule process.          The key outputs are
the project schedule and schedule baseline.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. You have
   gathered the inputs for the Estimate Activity Durations process. Which of the
   following tools and techniques will you employ to produce the outputs for
   this process?
   A. Activity list, expert judgment, alternatives analysis, analogous
      estimating, parametric estimating, three-point estimating, and reserve
      analysis
   B. Activity list, expert judgment, analogous estimating, parametric
      estimating, group decision-making techniques, and three-point estimating
   C. Expert judgment, analogous estimating, parametric estimating, three-
      point estimating, group decision-making techniques, and reserve analysis
   D. Expert judgment, alternatives analysis, analogous estimating, parametric
       estimating, three-point estimating, and group decision-making techniques
2. You are the project manager for Changing Tides video games. You have
   produced a project schedule network diagram and have updated the activity
   list. Which process have you just finished?
   A. The Define Activities process, which identifies all the specific activities
      of the project
   B. The Sequence Activities process, which identifies all the activity
      dependencies
   C. The Develop Schedule process, which diagrams project network time
      estimates
   D. The Estimate Activity Durations process, which estimates activity
      durations
3. Your project's primary constraint is quality. To make certain the project team
   members don't feel too pressed for time and to avoid schedule risk, you
   decide to use which of the following activity estimating tools?
   A. Three-point estimates
   B. Analogous estimating
   C. Reserve analysis
   D. Parametric estimating
4. You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards.
   Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers. One
   of the activities for this project is the installation and testing of several new
   servers. You know from past experience it takes about 16 hours per server to
   accomplish this task. Since you're installing 10 new servers, you estimate
   this activity to take 160 hours. Which of the estimating techniques have you
   used?
   A. Parametric estimating
   B. Analogous estimating
   C. Bottom-up estimating
   D. Reserve analysis
5. All of the following statements describe the activity list except which one?
   A. The activity list is an output of the Define Activities process.
   B. The activity list includes all activities of the project.
   C. The activity list is an extension of and a component of the WBS.
   D. The activity list includes an identifier and description of the activity.
6. You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards.
   Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers.
   Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet
   so that legal age can be established. You know that the module to verify
   registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing
   database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing
   system is loaded. This is an example of which of the following?
   A. Preferential logic
   B. Soft logic
   C. Discretionary dependency
   D. Hard logic
7. You are the project manager for Design Your Web Site, Inc. Your company
   is designing the website for a national grocery store chain. You have your
   activity list in hand and are ready to diagram the activity dependencies using
   the PDM technique. Which of the following statements is true?
   A. PDM is also the AON diagramming method and it uses one time
      estimate.
   B. PDM is also the AOA diagramming method and uses logical
      relationships.
   C. PDM is also the ADM diagramming method and its most common
      logical relationship is finish-to-start.
   D. PDM is also the GERT method, which allows for conditions, branches,
      and loops.
8. You are working on a project that requires resources with expertise in the
   areas of hospitality management and entertainment. You are preparing your
   project schedule network diagram and know that you will use only finish-to-
   start dependencies. Which of the following diagramming methods does this
   describe?
    A. PDM
    B. ADM
    C. AON
    D. Network template
 9. Which logical relationship does the PDM use most often?
    A. Start-to-finish
    B. Start-to-start
    C. Finish-to-finish
    D. Finish-to-start
10. You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. Your company
    manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings
    for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and
    you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as
    well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this
    undertaking and have determined the critical path. Which of the following
    statements is true?
    A. You calculated the most likely start date and most likely finish dates,
       float time, and weighted average estimates.
    B. You calculated the activity dependency and the optimistic and
       pessimistic activity duration estimates.
    C. You calculated the early and late start dates, the early and late finish
       dates, and float times for all activities.
    D. You calculated the optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely duration
       times, and the float times for all activities.
11. You are a project manager for Picture Shades, Inc. Your company
    manufactures window shades that have replicas of Renaissance-era paintings
    for hotel chains. Picture Shades is taking its product to the home market, and
    you're managing the new project. It will offer its products at retail stores as
    well as on its website. You're developing the project schedule for this
    undertaking. Looking at the following graph, which path is the critical path?
    A. A-B-C-E-H
    B. A-D-E-H
    C. A-F-G-H
    D. A-F-G-E-H
12. Use the following graphic to answer this question. If the duration of activity
    B was changed to 10 days and the duration of activity G was changed to 9
    days, which path is the critical path?
    A. A-B-C-E-H
    B. A-D-E-H
    C. A-F-G-H
    D. A-F-G-E-H
13. Which of the following statements is true regarding the critical path?
    A. It should not be compressed.
    B. It allows for looping and branching.
    C. The critical path technique is the same as PERT.
    D. It's the duration of all tasks with zero or negative float.
14. You are a project manager for Move It Now trucking company. Your
    company specializes in moving household goods across the city or across the
    country. Your project involves upgrading the nationwide computer network
    for the company. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates
    for a critical path activity: 60 days most likely, 72 days pessimistic, 48 days
    optimistic. What is the weighted average or expected value?
    A. 54
    B. 66
    C. 60
    D. 30
15. You are a project manager for Move It Now trucking company. Your
    company specializes in moving household goods across the city or across the
    country. Your project involves upgrading the nationwide computer network
    for the company. Your lead engineer has given you the following estimates
    for a critical path activity: 60 days most likely, 72 days pessimistic, 48 days
    optimistic. What is the standard deviation?
    A. 22
    B. 20
    C. 2
    D. 4
16. If you know the expected value is 500 and the standard deviation is 12, you
    can say with approximately a 95 percent confidence rating which of the
    following?
    A. The activity will take from 488 to 512 days.
    B. The activity will take from 464 to 536 days.
    C. The activity will take from 494 to 506 days.
    D. The activity will take from 476 to 524 days.
17. If your expected value is 110 and the standard deviation is 12, which of the
    following is true?
    A. There is approximately a 99 percent chance of completing this activity in
       86 to 134 days.
    B. There is approximately a 68 percent chance of completing this activity in
       98 to 122 days.
    C. There is approximately a 95 percent chance of completing this activity in
       98 to 122 days.
    D. There is approximately a 75 percent chance of completing this activity in
       86 to 134 days.
18. You are the project manager working on a research project for a new drug
    treatment. Your preliminary project schedule runs past the due date for a
    federal grant application. The manager of the R&D department has agreed to
    release two resources to work on your project to meet the federal grant
    application date. This is an example of _______________________.
    A. crashing
    B. fast tracking
    C. resource leveling
    D. adjusting the resource calendar
19. You are the project manager for Rivera Gourmet Adventure Vacations.
    Rivera combines the wonderful tastes of great gourmet food with outdoor
    adventure activities. Your project involves installing a new human resources
    software system. Your stakeholders understand this is a large undertaking
    and that you might experience some schedule slippage. Jason, the database
    analyst working on this project, is overallocated. He is critical to the success
    of the project and you don't want to burn him out by overscheduling him.
    Which of the following actions should you take?
    A. You should use fast tracking to smooth out resource overallocation.
    B. You should use crashing to resource level the critical path tasks.
    C. You should use resource leveling to balance out resource assignments.
    D. You should use resource smoothing to smooth out resource assignments.
20. What is one of the problems with project management software?
    A. The project manager manages the software instead of the project.
    B. Project duration calculations are sometimes approximate.
    C. You cannot override the project management software decisions
       regarding schedules.
    D. It's expensive and difficult to use.
CHAPTER 5
Developing the Project Budget and
Communicating the Plan
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE PLANNING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 3: Develop the cost management plan based on the project
   scope, schedule, resources, approved project charter and other
   information, using estimating techniques, in order to manage project
   costs.
    Task 6: Develop the communications management plan based on the
   project organizational structure and stakeholder requirements, in order
   to define and manage the flow of project information.
    Task 13: Develop the stakeholder management plan by analyzing
   needs, interests, and potential impact in order to effectively manage
   stakeholders' expectations and engage them in project decisions.
    Knowledge and Skills:
       Cost management planning, including project budgeting tools and
       techniques
       Communications planning
       Estimation tools and techniques
       Stakeholder management planning
Two of the most important documents you'll prepare for any project are the
project schedule and the project budget. You'll use the schedule and budget
documents throughout the Executing and Monitoring and Controlling processes
to measure progress and determine if the project is on track. I believe the budget
is easier to prepare after the activities have been defined and the resource
estimates calculated. So now that we have the schedule in hand, we're going to
spend our time in this chapter developing the budget.
There are three processes we'll perform that will lead us to the cost baseline
output. The cost baseline is the authorized budget. The processes are Plan Cost
output. The cost baseline is the authorized budget. The processes are Plan Cost
Management, Estimate Costs, and Determine Budget. There are several tools
and techniques to cover in these processes that you'll want to understand for the
exam. Before we get into the details of the Estimate Costs and Determine Budget
processes, we'll talk about the cost management plan and its importance in
guiding the development of the budget.
Next, we'll talk about the stakeholder management plan, which documents
stakeholder interests and needs and their potential impacts to the project. We'll
wrap up the chapter discussing how project information is documented and
communicated. I've talked a lot about documentation so far, and I will discuss it
more in this chapter. Documentation is something you will do throughout the
remainder of the project, and the Plan Communications Management process
details how to collect information, how to store it, and when and how to
distribute it to stakeholders.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs and the
  descriptions of the project management process groups and related materials
  and figures in this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project
  Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI,
  2013).


Creating the Project Cost Management Plan
You now have an exhaustive breakdown of project activities, and you have some
pretty good duration estimates. Now here's the question that's forever on the
mind of the executive management staff: How much is it going to cost? The
purpose of the Estimate Costs process is to answer that question.
Every project has a budget, and part of completing a project successfully is
completing it within the approved budget. Sometimes project managers are not
responsible for the budget portion of the project. Instead, this function is
assigned to a functional manager who is responsible for tracking and reporting
all the project costs. I believe project managers will have more and more
responsibility in this area as the project management discipline evolves. Keep in
mind that if you, as the project manager, don't have responsibility for the project
budget, your performance evaluation for the project should not include budget or
cost measurements.
Before diving into the Estimate Costs and Determine Budget process particulars,
you should know that these processes are governed by a cost management plan
that is created when you perform the Plan Cost Management process. You
should know a couple of facts about this process and the plan for the exam.

Performing Plan Cost Management
The purpose of the Plan Cost Management process is to produce the cost
management plan, and we will look at that in detail in the next section.
Stakeholders are almost always concerned about costs. And remember that each
of them, or the departments they represent, may have a different perspective on
the costs of the project, including accounting for costs at different times in the
project and in differing ways.
Let's take a quick look at the inputs and tools and techniques of this process.
This process has four inputs: project management plan, project charter,
enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets. The two
components of the project management plan that can impact project costs are the
scope baseline and the schedule baseline, so be certain they are accurate and kept
up-to-date.
The tools and techniques of the Plan Cost Management process are expert
judgment, analytical techniques, and meetings. Analytical techniques are used to
choose methods of funding (funding with debt or equity or using funds from the
project itself) and whether items should be leased or purchased. Among the
analytical techniques are the same techniques we discussed in Chapter 2,
"Creating the Project Charter," such as payback period, ROI, IRR, discounted
cash flows, and net present value.

Creating the Cost Management Plan
The only output of this process is the cost management plan. The cost
management plan establishes the policies and procedures you'll use to plan and
execute project costs. It also documents how you will estimate, manage, and
control project costs. You will use documents such as the approved project
charter, the project scope statement, the project schedule, and resource estimates
to help in developing this plan and managing project costs. Like all the other
management plans, the cost management plan is a subsidiary of the project
management plan.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this plan includes, but is not limited to, the
following elements:
Level of Accuracy This refers to the precision level you'll use to round
activity estimates--for example, hundreds, thousands, and so on. Level of
accuracy is based on the scope and complexity of the activities and the project
itself. It also describes the acceptable ranges for establishing cost estimates (for
example, plus or minus 5 percent).
Units of Measure This refers to the unit of measure you'll use to estimate
resources--for example, hours, days, weeks, or a lump sum amount.
Organizational Procedures Links In Chapter 3, "Developing the Project
Scope Statement," we talked about the WBS and the identifiers associated with
each component of the WBS. These identifiers are called the code of accounts. A
control account (CA) is a point where several factors such as actual cost,
schedule, and scope can be used to determine earned value performance
measures. (We'll talk more about earned value in Chapter 10, "Measuring and
Controlling Project Performance.") The control account is used in the Project
Cost Management Knowledge Area to monitor and control project costs. The
control account is typically associated with the work package level of the WBS,
but control accounts could be established at any level of the WBS. The control
account also has a unique identifier that's linked to the organization's accounting
system, sometimes known as a chart of accounts.

  Exam Spotlight
  The cost management plan is established using the WBS and its associated
  control accounts.

Control Thresholds Most actual project costs do not match the estimate
exactly. The control threshold refers to the amount of variance the sponsor or
stakeholders are willing to allow before action is required. Document the
threshold amount as a percentage of deviation allowed from the cost baseline.
Rules of Performance Measurement This component of the cost
management plan refers to how you will set the earned value management
measurements. It's here you'll document where the control accounts exist within
the WBS, the earned value management (EVM) techniques you'll use to measure
performance, and the equations you'll use for calculating estimate at completion
forecasts and other measurements.
Reporting Formats This refers to the types of cost reports you'll produce for
this project and how often they'll be created.
Process Descriptions This describes the Estimate Costs, Determine Budget,
and Control Costs processes and how you'll use these processes to manage
project cost.
Additional Details This refers to any other information you might want to
capture regarding cost activities, including items such as who will perform the
cost activities, how a cost is recorded, and a description of the funding
alternatives and choices used for the project.
The key to determining accurate cost estimates (and accurate time estimates as
you discovered in Chapter 4, "Creating the Project Schedule") is the WBS. Next,
we'll look at how to determine cost estimates for the WBS components.

Estimating Costs
The Estimate Costs process develops a cost estimate for the resources (human
and material) required for each schedule activity. This includes weighing
alternative options and examining risks and trade-offs. Some alternatives you
may consider are make-versus-buy, buy-versus-lease, and sharing of resources
across either projects or departments.
Let's look at an example of trade-offs. Many times software development
projects take on a life of their own. The requested project completion dates are
unrealistic; however, the project team commits to completing the project on time
and on budget anyway. How do they do this? They do this by cutting things such
as design, analysis, and documentation. In the end, the project might get
completed on time and on budget, but was it really? The costs associated with
the extended support period because of a lack of design and documentation and
the hours needed by the software programmers to fix the reported bugs weren't
included in the original cost of the project (but they should have been).
Therefore, the costs actually exceed what was budgeted. You should examine
trade-offs such as these when determining cost estimates.
When you are determining cost estimates, be certain to include all the costs
required to complete the work of the project over its entire life cycle.
Additionally, the project team should take into consideration the costs of
ongoing support or recurring costs such as maintenance, support, and service
ongoing support or recurring costs such as maintenance, support, and service
costs after the project is complete. As in the preceding example, software
projects often have warranty periods that guarantee bug fixes or problem
resolution within a certain time frame. After the warranty period expires, you
move into the yearly maintenance and support period. These costs are typically
calculated as a percentage of the total software cost. The management team
should be made aware that these costs will continue to recur for the length of
time the customer owns the software. It's also good practice to understand these
costs prior to making go/no-go project decisions.




  Don't confuse pricing with Estimate Costs. If you are working for a company
  that performs consulting services on contract, for example, the price you will
  charge for your services is not the same as the costs to perform the project.
  The costs are centered on the resources needed to produce the product,
  service, or result of the project. The price your company might charge for
  the service includes not only these costs but a profit margin as well.


Estimate Costs Inputs
Many of the inputs of the Estimate Costs process are already familiar to you. We
talked about the cost management plan earlier in this chapter. We'll look briefly
at the other inputs next so you can see the key elements that should be
considered when creating the project budget. The inputs to this process are as
follows:
   Cost management plan
   Human resource management plan
   Scope baseline
   Project schedule
   Risk register
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets

Human Resource Management Plan
We will look more closely at the human resource management plan (an output of
the Plan Human Resource Management process) in Chapter 7, "Planning Project
Resources." For the purposes of the Estimate Costs process, understand that the
human resource management plan includes elements such as personnel rates,
project staffing attributes, and employee recognition or rewards programs. All of
these elements should be considered when determining cost estimates.

Scope Baseline
It's pop quiz time. Do you remember the elements of the scope baseline? They
are the project scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. You'll want
to consider a few key elements from the project scope statement in this process,
including key deliverables, constraints, assumptions, and acceptance criteria. I
can safely say that every project I've ever worked on had a limited budget, which
is a classic example of a project constraint. You should also understand other
constraints that have the potential to impact costs, such as required delivery
dates or availability of resources. Project assumptions regarding costs might
include whether to include indirect costs in the project estimate. We'll talk more
about this in the section "Determine Budget Inputs" later in this chapter.
The WBS, as we've discussed, serves as the basis for estimating costs. It contains
all the project deliverables and the control accounts that are typically established
at the work package level (but can be assigned to any level of the WBS). The
WBS dictionary describes the deliverables, work components, and other
elements of the WBS.
When you're considering deliverables, think about those that may have
contractual obligations that should be considered when determining cost
estimates. Perhaps you have deliverables that have legal or governmental
regulations that will require additional expenses to fulfill. Health, safety,
security, licenses, performance, intellectual property rights, and environmental
factors are some of the other elements of the scope baseline you should consider
when estimating costs, according to the PMBOK(R) Guide.

  Exam Spotlight
  Scope definition is a key component of determining the estimated costs and
  should be completed as early in the project as possible because it's easier to
  influence costs in the beginning phases of the project. But you can't
  influence costs if you don't understand the project scope.
Project Schedule
We determined the types and quantities of resources we needed in Chapter 4
using the Estimate Activity Resources (this process is closely associated with the
Estimate Costs process, according to the PMBOK(R) Guide) and Estimate Activity
Durations processes. Activity resource requirements and activity duration
estimates are the key outputs you should consider when estimating costs.
Be aware that activity duration estimates can affect costs. For example, you must
account for costs such as interest charges when you're financing the work of the
project. Also consider fluctuations in costs that can occur due to seasonal or
holiday demands or collective bargaining agreements. Watch for duration
estimates that are calculated for resources who are scheduled to work for a per-
unit period of time. These duration estimates can be incorrect (not too far off,
you hope) and can end up costing you more. For example, I recently bought a
new home requiring a move of about eight miles. The moving company told me
that the work was performed on a per-hour basis. The person providing the
estimate assured me he had been doing this for over 25 years and his estimates
were typically right on the money. Unfortunately, I swallowed that line and the
estimate I was given was wildly incorrect. It took them almost twice the amount
of time I was quoted, and you guessed it, the total ended up being almost twice
the original estimate.

Risk Register
The risk register is an output of the Identify Risks process that we'll discuss in
Chapter 6, "Risk Planning." When developing project cost estimates, you should
consider the cost of implementing risk response plans (identified in the risk
register), particularly those with negative impacts to the project. Generally,
negative risk events that occur early in the project are more costly than those that
occur later in the project.

Enterprise Environmental Factors
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the enterprise environmental factors you
should consider in this process are market conditions and published commercial
information. Market conditions help you understand the materials, goods, and
services available in the market and what terms and conditions exist to procure
those resources. Published commercial information refers to resource cost rates.
You can obtain these rates from commercial databases or published seller price
lists.

Organizational Process Assets
The organizational process assets considered in the process are similar to those
we've seen before. Historical information and lessons learned on previous
projects of similar scope and complexity can be useful in determining estimates
for the current project--particularly if the past projects occurred recently. Your
organization's business office or PMO may also have cost estimating templates
you can use to help with this process. You could use cost-estimating worksheets
from past projects as templates for the current project as well.

Tools and Techniques to Estimate Costs
The Estimate Costs process has 10 tools and techniques used to derive estimates:
   Expert judgment
   Analogous estimating
   Parametric estimating
   Bottom-up estimating
   Three-point estimating
   Reserve analysis
   Cost of quality
   Project management software
   Vendor bid analysis
   Group decision-making techniques
I covered expert judgment, analogous estimating, parametric estimating, three-
point estimating, reserve analysis, and group decision-making techniques in
Chapter 4. The majority of these are also tools and techniques of the Estimate
Activity Durations process used to help determine schedule estimates. All of the
information we discussed in Chapter 4 applies here as well, except you're using
the tools and techniques to derive cost estimates. Three-point estimates
(triangular distribution, a simple averaging or weighted averaging, and beta
distribution [PERT] formulas) are used in this process when you want to
improve your estimates and account for risk and estimation uncertainty. In the
case of reserve analysis, you're adding cost reserves (or contingencies), not
schedule reserves, during this process. Contingency reserves, like schedule
reserves, might be calculated for the whole project, one or more activities, or
both and may be calculated as a percentage of the cost or as a fixed amount.
Contingency reserves are used for known-unknown risk or issues that may
impact the project. The risk is known but the consequences are unknown. And as
with the schedule reserve, you should add contingency reserves to the cost
baseline but should not add management reserves to the cost baseline.
Management reserves are considered a part of the project budget. You could
aggregate these cost contingencies and assign them to a schedule activity or a
WBS work package level. As more information becomes known further into the
project, you may be able to reduce the contingency reserves, turn them back to
the organization, or eliminate them altogether.
The project management software tool can help you quickly determine estimates
given different variables and alternatives. Some systems are quite sophisticated
and use simulation and statistical techniques to determine estimates, whereas
others are less complex. A simple spreadsheet program can do the trick much of
the time. We'll look at the remaining tools and techniques next.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, if the Project Cost Management
  Knowledge Area includes predicting the potential financial performance of
  the product of the project, or if the project is a capital facilities project, you
  may also use additional tools and techniques in the process, such as return on
  investment, discounted cash flow, and payback period. We talked about
  these techniques in Chapter 2.


Bottom-Up Estimating
You learned about this technique in Chapter 4, but there are a few pointers to
consider for this process. This technique estimates costs associated with every
activity individually and then rolls them up to derive a total project cost estimate.
You wouldn't choose this technique to provide a cost estimate for the project
during Initiating if one were requested because you don't have enough
information at that stage to use it. Instead, use the top-down estimating technique
(analogous estimating) when a project cost estimate is needed early in the project
selection stage. Bottom-up estimating will generally provide you with the most
accurate cost estimates, but it is the most time-consuming estimating technique
accurate cost estimates, but it is the most time-consuming estimating technique
of all those mentioned here. However, the size and complexity of the project
impacts the accuracy you can achieve using this technique.

Cost of Quality
The cost of quality (COQ) is the total cost to produce the product or service of
the project according to the quality standards. Cost of quality is a topic that we
will cover when we look at the quality topics in more depth. For this process,
understand that quality is not free and you will need to include cost of quality
estimates in your final project budget.

Vendor Bid Analysis
As the name implies, this is a process of gathering information from vendors to
help you establish cost estimates. You can accomplish this by requesting bids or
quotes or working with some of your trusted vendor sources for estimates. You
should compare vendor bids when using this tool and technique and not rely
solely on one vendor to provide you with estimates.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, make sure you're familiar with all the Estimate Costs tools and
  techniques, their benefits, and under what conditions you use them.


Estimate Costs Process Outputs
The primary output of the Estimate Costs process is activity cost estimates.
These are quantitative amounts--usually stated in monetary units--that reflect
the cost of the resources needed to complete the project activities. The tools and
techniques I just described help you derive these estimates. Resources in this
case include human resources, material, equipment, services, information
technology needs, facilities, leases, rentals, exchange rates (if it applies),
financing and/or interest costs (if it applies), and so on, as well as any
contingency reserve amounts and inflation factors (if you're using them).
Estimates should be updated throughout the course of the project as more
information comes to light. Estimates are performed at a given period of time
with a limited amount of information. As more information becomes available,
your cost estimates, and therefore your overall project estimate, will become
more accurate and should be updated to reflect this new information. According
to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the accuracy of estimates during the Initiating phase of a
project have a rough order of magnitude (ROM) of -25% to +75%, and as more
information becomes available over the course of the project, the definitive
estimate moves to a range of -5% to +10%.
The remaining outputs of the Estimate Costs process are the basis of estimates
and project documents updates. The basis of estimates is the supporting detail
for the activity cost estimates and includes any information that describes how
the estimates were developed, what assumptions were made during the Estimate
Costs process, and any other details you think are needed. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, the basis of estimates should include at least the following:
   A description of how the estimate was developed or the basis for the
   estimate.
   A description of the assumptions made about the estimates or the method
   used to determine them.
   A description of the constraints.
   A range of possible results. You should state the cost estimates within ranges
   such as $5,000  10%.
   The confidence level regarding the final estimates.



         Real World Scenario

  This Older House
  Janie is an accomplished project manager. She and her husband recently
  purchased an 80-year-old home in need of several repairs and modern
  updates. She decided to put her project management skills to work on the
  house project. First, they hired a general contractor to oversee all the
  individual projects needed to bring the house up-to-date. Janie worked with
  the general contractor to construct a WBS, and she ended up with 23 work
  packages. With each work package (or multiple work packages in some
  cases) assigned to a subcontractor, it was easy to track who was responsible
  for completing the work and for determining duration estimates. Janie and
  the general contractor worked together to determine schedule dependencies
  the general contractor worked together to determine schedule dependencies
  and make certain the work was performed in the correct order and that each
  subcontractor knew when their activity was to begin and end.
  Some of the cost estimates for certain work packages were easy to determine
  using the parametric estimating method. Others required expert judgment
  and the experience of the general contractor (analogous techniques) to
  determine a cost estimate. Resource rates for laborers for some of the work
  packages were agreed to when the subcontractors bid on the work. Once
  Janie had all the cost estimates, she used the bottom-up estimating technique
  to come up with an overall cost estimate for the project. She added a
  contingency reserve in addition to the overall estimate for unforeseen risk
  events.

The last output of this process is project documents updates. Cost variances will
occur and estimates will be refined as you get further into your project. As a
result, you'll update cost estimates and ultimately the project budget to reflect
these changes. The risk register may also require an update after cost estimates
are complete.
Estimate Costs uses several techniques to make an accurate assessment of the
project costs. In practice, using a combination of techniques is your best bet to
come up with the most reliable cost estimates. The activity cost estimates will
become an input to the Determine Budget process, which allows you to establish
a baseline for project costs to track against.

Establishing the Cost Baseline
The next process involves determining the authorized cost baseline, which is the
primary output of the Determine Budget process. The Determine Budget process
aggregates the cost estimates of activities and establishes a cost baseline for the
project that is used to measure performance of the project throughout the
remaining process groups. Only the costs associated with the project become
part of the authorized project budget. For example, future period operating costs
are not project costs and therefore aren't included in the project budget.
The cost baseline is the total expected cost for the project. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, the cost baseline is a time-phased budget, and it must be
approved by the project sponsor (and key stakeholders if appropriate for your
project). As discussed earlier, the cost baseline does not include management
reserves. And if the cost baseline is not approved, it is not valid. When you're
using earned value management techniques to measure project performance, the
cost baseline is also known as the performance measurement baseline (PMB).
We'll talk about budget at completion and earned value management techniques
in detail in Chapter 11, "Controlling Work Results." Remember that costs are
tied to the financial system through the chart of accounts--or code of accounts--
and are assigned to project activities at the work package level or to control
accounts at various points in the WBS. The budget will be used as a plan for
allocating costs to project activities.




  As I've discussed with several other processes, in practice you can
  sometimes perform the Estimate Costs and Determine Budget processes at
  the same time.


Determine Budget Inputs
Outputs from other Planning processes, including the Create WBS, Develop
Schedule, and Estimate Costs processes, must be completed prior to working on
Determine Budget because some of their outputs become the inputs to this
process. The inputs for Determine Budget are as follows:
Cost Management Plan The cost management plan documents how the
project costs will be developed, managed, and controlled throughout the project.
Scope Baseline Scope baseline includes the project scope statement, the WBS,
and the WBS dictionary. The scope statement describes the constraints of the
project you should consider when developing the budget. The WBS shows how
the project deliverables are related to their components, and the work package
level typically contains control account information (although control accounts
can be assigned at any level of the WBS).
Activity Cost Estimates These are an output of the Estimate Costs process.
Activity cost estimates are determined for each activity within a work package
and then summed to determine the total estimate for a work package.
Basis of Estimates This is also an output of the Estimate Costs process and
contains all the supporting detail regarding the estimates. You should consider
assumptions regarding indirect costs and whether they will be included in the
project budget. Indirect costs cannot be directly linked to any one project. They
are allocated among several projects, usually within the department or division
in which the project is being performed. Indirect costs can include items like
building leases, management and administrative salaries (those not directly
assigned full time to a specific project), and so on.
Project Schedule The schedule contains information that is helpful in
developing the budget, such as start and end dates for activities, milestones, and
so on. Based on the information in the schedule, you can determine budget
expenditures for calendar periods.
Resource Calendars Resource calendars help you determine costs in calendar
periods and over the length of the project because they describe what resources
are needed when on the project.
Risk Register The risk register contains a list of risks that could occur on the
project. Risks with a high impact and/or high probability of occurring will likely
have response plans that could add costs to the project, so you should review
them before preparing the budget.
Agreements Agreements include cost information for purchased goods or
services that you should include in the overall project budget.
Organizational Process Assets The organizational process assets that will
assist you with the work of this process include cost budgeting tools, the policies
and procedures your organization (or PMO) may have regarding budgeting
exercises, and reporting methods.

Determine Budget Tools and Techniques
The Determine Budget process has five tools and techniques, including two you
haven't seen before:
   Cost aggregation
   Reserve analysis
   Expert judgment
   Historical relationships
   Funding limit reconciliation
I've covered expert judgment previously. Let's look at the remaining tools and
techniques.
Cost Aggregation Cost aggregation is the process of tallying the schedule
activity cost estimates at the work package level and then totaling the work
package levels to higher-level WBS component levels (such as the control
accounts). Then all of the costs can be aggregated to obtain a total project cost.
Reserve Analysis We talked about reserve analysis in the Estimate Cost
section of this chapter. Reserve analysis works the same for the Determine
Budget process. Contingency costs are considered and included in the
aggregation of control accounts for both activity cost estimates and work
package estimates. Management reserves are not included as part of the cost
baseline (an output of this process) but should be included in the project budget.
Management reserves are also not considered when calculating earned value
measurements.




  Reserve analysis should also contain appropriations for risk responses. I'll
  talk about several categories and tools of Plan Risk Responses in Chapter 6.
  Additionally, you'll want to set aside money for management reserves for
  unknown risks. This is for the unforeseen, unplanned risks that might occur.
  Even with all the time and effort you spend on planning, unexpected issues
  do crop up. It's better to have the money set aside and not need it than to
  need it and not have it.

Historical Relationships Analogous estimates and parametric estimates can
be used to help determine total project costs. Remember from Chapter 4 that
analogous estimates are a form of expert judgment. Actual costs from previous
projects of similar size, scope, and complexity are used to estimate the costs for
the current project. This is helpful when detailed information about the project is
not available or it's early in the project phases and not much information is
known.
Parametric estimates are quantitatively based and, for example, multiply the
amount of time needed to perform an activity by the resource rate to determine
total cost. Quantifiable measures used with the parametric method are easily
defined and are easily scalable from large to small projects. Analogous and
parametric estimating techniques are more accurate when the historical data
you're using is accurate.
Funding Limit Reconciliation Funding limit reconciliation involves
reconciling the amount of funds to be spent with the amount of funds budgeted
for the project. The organization or the customer sets these limits. Reconciling
the project expenses will require adjusting the schedule so that the expenses can
be smoothed. You do this by placing imposed date constraints (I talked about
these in the Develop Schedule process in Chapter 4) on work packages or other
WBS components in the project schedule.

Determine Budget Process Outputs
The goal of Determine Budget is to develop a cost baseline (an output of this
process) for the project that you can use in the Executing and Monitoring and
Controlling processes to measure performance. You now have all the
information you need to create the cost baseline. In addition, you'll establish the
project funding requirements.
The following are the outputs of the Determine Budget process:
   Cost baseline
   Project funding requirements
   Project documents updates
We've covered the project documents updates in other processes. For Determine
Budget, you may need to update the risk register, cost estimates, and/or the
project schedule. Let's look at the other two outputs next.

Documenting the Cost Baseline
You develop the cost baseline, the first output of Determine Budget, by
aggregating the costs of the WBS work packages, including contingency
reserves, into control accounts. All the control accounts are then aggregated, and
together they make up the cost baseline. Most projects span some length of time,
and most organizations time the release of funding with the project. In other
words, you won't get all the funds for the project at the beginning of the project;
they'll likely be disbursed over time. The cost baseline provides the basis for
measurement, over time, of the expected cash flows (or funding disbursements)
against the requirements, including contingency reserves. This is also known as
the project's time-phased budget.
The project budget consists of several components: the activity costs plus
contingency reserves (these are aggregated to the work package level), the work
package costs plus contingency reserves (these are aggregated to the control
accounts), and the management reserves for the cost baseline. Figure 5.1 depicts
all of the elements contained in the project budget.




Figure 5.1 Project budget
Cost baselines can be displayed graphically, with time increments on one axis
and dollars expended on the other axis, as shown in Figure 5.2. The costs shown
on this graph are cumulative costs, meaning that what you spent this period is
added to what was spent last period and then charted. Many variations of this
graph exist showing dollars budgeted against dollars expended to date and so on.
Cost budgets can be displayed using this type of graph as well, by plotting the
sum of the estimated costs excepted per period.
Figure 5.2 Cost baseline
The cost baseline should contain the costs for all of the expected work on the
project. You would have identified these costs in the Estimate Costs process.
You'll find most projects' largest expense is resource costs (as in labor costs). In
the case of projects where you're purchasing the final product, the purchase price
is the largest cost.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that cost baselines are displayed as an S curve. The
  reason for this is that project spending starts out slowly, gradually increases
  over the project's life until it reaches a peak, and then tapers off again as the
  project wraps up. Large projects are difficult to graph in this manner because
  the timescale isn't wide enough to accurately show fluctuations in spending.
  Also remember that the cost baseline does not include management reserves
  but the project budget does include them.




  Large projects might have more than one cost baseline. For example, you
  might be required to track human resources costs, material costs, and
  contractor costs separately.
  contractor costs separately.

You'll revisit the cost baseline when you learn about the Control Costs process
and examine different ways to measure costs in Chapter 10.

Gathering the Project Funding Requirements
Project funding requirements describe the need for funding over the course of
the project, and they are derived from the cost baseline. Funding for a project is
not usually released all at once. Some organizations may release funds monthly,
quarterly, or in annual increments or other increments that are appropriate for
your project.
As I said earlier, spending usually starts out slowly on the project and picks up
speed as you progress. Sometimes, the expected cash flows don't match the pace
of spending. Project funding requirements account for this by releasing funds in
increments based on the cost baseline plus management reserves that may be
needed for unanticipated events. Figure 5.3 shows the cost baseline, the funding
requirements, and the actual expenses plotted on the S curve. You can see in this
figure that actual costs have exceeded the authorized cost baseline. The
difference between the funding requirements and the cost baseline at the end of
the project is the management reserve.




Figure 5.3 Cost baseline, funding requirements, and cash flow
We've now completed two critical components of the project management plan:
the project schedule and the project budget. Several times throughout the book
I've mentioned the need for documenting, publishing, and communicating
project information. As you can imagine, the PMBOK(R) Guide has a process for
communications. We'll discuss it next.

Understanding Stakeholders
The Plan Stakeholder Management process (a part of the Project Stakeholder
Management Knowledge Area) focuses on effectively engaging stakeholders,
understanding their needs and interests, understanding the good and bad things
they might bring to the project, and recognizing how the project will impact
them. The primary output of this process is the stakeholder management plan,
which documents all of the items I just mentioned.
Stakeholder management is almost a full-time job. Stakeholders are a diverse
group with their own personalities, interests, expectations, and more. It is critical
to the success of the project that you, as the project manager, understand all of
the key stakeholders' needs and devise a plan to engage them in the project and
manage their expectations. In my experience, the most successful projects are
those where the key stakeholders and I have established a strong, professional
relationship. That means we trust each other, are able to ask questions, and can
discuss constructive alternative ideas without feeling threatened. It also means
that I often need to put myself in their shoes and understand how the project
impacts them and their departments and devise ways to work together to meet
their day-to-day needs while also completing the work of the project.
Stakeholder involvement will vary as the project progresses. I make it a point to
meet with the key stakeholders as early in the project as possible. Their
involvement early on is important because you'll need them to make decisions
about scope, budgets, and timelines and, more important, to help smooth the way
and remove obstacles that are impeding progress. As the work gets under way
and the project progresses, their involvement may lessen, but it's important to
note that their continued engagement, even on a limited level, is critical to the
success of the project.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that stakeholder involvement must occur
  throughout the life of the project and is a critical success factor for overall
  project success.
  project success.

We have seen all of the inputs to this process before. They are project
management plan, stakeholder register, enterprise environmental factors, and
organizational process assets.
Next we'll take a look at the tools and techniques of this process.

Analyzing Stakeholders
There are three tools and techniques of this process: expert judgment, meetings,
and analytical techniques.
Expert judgment, as you recall, means meeting with others who know something
about the project. In this case, that likely includes senior managers, key
stakeholders, other project managers who have worked with your key
stakeholders in the past, consultants, industry experts, and more.
Analytical techniques allow you to classify the engagement levels of your
stakeholders and monitor and modify them throughout the project. According to
the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are five levels of classifications of stakeholder
engagement:
Unaware Stakeholders are not engaged in the project.
Resistant Stakeholders are not supportive of the project and may actively
resist engaging.
Neutral Stakeholders are neither supporting nor resisting the project and may
be minimally engaged.
Supportive Stakeholders have positive expectations of the project and are
supportive and engaged.
Leading Stakeholders are actively engaged in the project and helping to assure
its success.
The purpose behind the classification is to document what levels of engagement
your stakeholders are at during each phase of the project. It helps you to plan
what levels are needed for coming phases and to create action plans for those
stakeholders who are not at the desired level of engagement for the given phase
of the project. You might construct a simple spreadsheet like the one shown in
Table 5.1 to indicate the level of engagement of each stakeholder.
Table 5.1 Stakeholder engagement
               Unaware Resistant       Neutral       Supportive    Leading
Stakeholder              Existing                    Preferred
A                        level                       level
Stakeholder                            Existing                    Preferred
B                                      level                       level
Stakeholder                                                        Existing
C                                                                  level

Stakeholder Management Plan
The primary output of this process is the stakeholder management plan. This
plan documents the engagement levels of stakeholders (the stakeholder
engagement table we talked about in the last section gets documented here).
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the following elements are among those that
might be a part of this plan include but are not limited to the following:
   Relationships between and among stakeholders
   Communication requirements for stakeholders engaged in the current phase
   of the project
   Details regarding the distribution of information, such as the language of the
   various stakeholders, the format of the information, and the level of detail
   needed
   Reasons for distributing the information, including how the stakeholders may
   react and/or the potential for changing their level of engagement
   Timing of the information distributions and their frequency
   The process for updating and modifying the stakeholder management plan
   due to the changing needs of the stakeholders and changes as the project
   progresses
The stakeholder management plan is a subsidiary of the project management
plan.

 Exam Spotlight
 For the exam, remember that the stakeholder management plan documents
 the engagement level of the stakeholders and is also used to manage
 stakeholders' expectations and engage them in project decisions. To create
  stakeholders' expectations and engage them in project decisions. To create
  this plan, you will work with them to analyze their needs and interests and to
  understand the potential impacts each one of them could have on the project.


Communicating the Plan
I've talked a good deal about documentation so far, and this topic will continue
to come up throughout the remainder of the book. "Is that documented?" should
be an ever-present question on the mind of the project manager. Documentation
can save your bacon, so to speak, later in the project. Documentation is only one
side of the equation, though--communication is the other. You and your
stakeholders need to know who gets what information and when.
The Plan Communications Management process involves determining the
communication needs of the stakeholders by defining the types of information
needed, the format for communicating the information, how often it's distributed,
and who prepares it. All of this is documented in the communications
management plan, which is an output of this process.




  Pop quiz: Do you remember where else the communications management
  plan belongs? I'll give you the answer later in the section "Plan
  Communications Management Outputs."


Plan Communications Management Inputs
The inputs to the Plan Communications Management process will look familiar
to you. They are as follows:
   Project management plan
   Stakeholder register
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
You'll recall that the project management plan defines how the subsidiary plans
will be defined and integrated into the overall project management plan. As
such, it's rich with constraints and assumptions that you should review as they
such, it's rich with constraints and assumptions that you should review as they
pertain to stakeholder communication needs.
The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that all the elements described in the enterprise
environmental factors and in the organizational process assets are inputs to this
process. However, special note is made of the lessons learned and historical
information elements of the organizational process assets input. Information you
learn as you're progressing through the project is documented as lessons learned.
This information is helpful for future projects of similar scope and complexity.
Historical information is also useful to review when starting the Plan
Communications Management process. Either of these documents might contain
information about communication decisions on past projects and their results.
Why reinvent the wheel? If something didn't work well on a past project, you'd
want to know that before implementing that procedure on this project, so review
past project documentation.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that there is a difference between effective and
  efficient communication. Effective communication refers to providing the
  information in the right format for the intended audience at the right time.
  Efficient communication refers to providing the appropriate information at
  the right time--that is, only the information that's needed at the time.


Tools and Techniques for Plan Communications
Management
The Plan Communications Management process concerns defining and
documenting the types of information you're going to deliver, the format it will
take, to whom it will be delivered, and when. The process consists of five tools
and techniques to help determine these elements: communications requirements
analysis, communication technology, communication models, communication
methods, and meetings. Meetings, the last tool and technique of this process, are
used to help gather information to determine the communication needs of the
stakeholders and other information for the communications management plan.
You'll look at the remainder of the tools and techniques for this process next.

Communications Requirements Analysis
Communications requirements analysis involves analyzing and determining the
communication needs of the project stakeholders. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, you can examine several sources of information to help determine these
needs, including the following:
   Company and departmental organizational charts.
   Stakeholder responsibility relationships.
   Other departments and business units involved on the project.
   The number of resources involved on the project and where they're located in
   relation to project activities.
   Internal needs that the organization may need to know about the project.
   External needs that organizations such as the media, government, or industry
   groups might have that require communication updates.
   Stakeholder information. (This was documented in the stakeholder register,
   an output of Identify Stakeholders.)
This tool and technique requires an analysis of the items in the preceding list to
make certain you're communicating information that's valuable to the
stakeholders. Communicating valuable information doesn't mean you always
paint a rosy picture. Communications to stakeholders might consist of either
good or bad news--the point is that you don't want to bury stakeholders in too
much information but you want to give them enough so that they're informed
and can make appropriate decisions.
Project communication will always involve more than one person, even on the
tiniest of projects. As such, communication network models have been devised
to explain the relationships between people and the number or type of
interactions needed between project participants. What you need to remember
for the exam is that network models consist of nodes with lines connecting the
nodes that indicate the number of communication channels, also known as lines
of communication. Figure 5.4 shows an example of a network communication
model with six participants and 15 channels of communication.
Figure 5.4 Network communication model
The nodes are the participants, and the lines show the connections between them
all. You'll need to know how to calculate the number of communication channels
when you take the exam. You could draw them out as in this example and count
up the lines, but there's an easier way. The formula for calculating the lines of
communication is as follows:
   (number of participants x (number of participants less 1)) divided by 2
Here's the calculation in mathematical terms:
   n(n - 1) / 2
Figure 5.4 shows six participants, so let's plug that into the formula to determine
the lines of communication:
   6(6 - 1)/2 = 15

  Exam Spotlight
  I recommend you memorize the communications channel formula before
  taking the exam.




         Real World Scenario

  Stakeholder Relationships
  Bill is an information technology manager working on an enterprise resource
  planning project. He's one of the key stakeholders on this project. Bill
  reports to the CIO, who in turn reports to the executive vice president, who
  also happens to be the project sponsor. Bill is close friends with the human
  resources director but doesn't get along so well with the accounting
  department director. This project requires heavy involvement from the
  accounting department and medium-level involvement from the human
  resources department.
  You are the project manager for this project and are new to the organization.
  You know Bill's relationship with both the accounting and human resources
  directors. What you don't know is the relationship the two directors have
  with each other. Because all three stakeholders are key to the success of this
  project, it's important that all three communicate with you as well as with
  each other. You set up an interview with each of these stakeholders to
  determine several pieces of information: other departments that might need
  to be involved on the project, stakeholder communication needs and timing,
  external needs, timing of status updates for the company newsletter, and
  other department members aside from the stakeholders who need to be
  involved in the project. You also plant a few surreptitious questions that will
  give you insight into the relationships the stakeholders have with each other
  and with the project sponsor.
  and with the project sponsor.
  You discover that the human resources and accounting directors have known
  each other for several years and worked together at another organization
  prior to coming to work here. This tells you that if you can get one of them
  to buy in on project decisions, the other will likely follow suit. They both
  have the utmost respect for Bill and his technicalcapabilities, even though
  the accounting director doesn't care for his abrupt, direct communication
  style. You also learn that although they both have respect for the position of
  the executive vice president, they don't believe the person filling that role is
  competent to do the job. They question his decision-making ability--or lack
  thereof--and warn you that you need to write down his answers and
  direction so that he doesn't change his story halfway through the project.
  Although you won't formally document this valuable piece of information,
  you'll definitely put it into action right away.


Communication Technology
The second tool and technique of this process is communication technology.
This examines the methods (or technology) used to communicate the
information to, from, and among the stakeholders. Methods of communicating
can take many forms, such as written, spoken, email, formal status reports,
meetings, online databases, online schedules, and so on. This tool and technique
examines the technology elements that might affect project communications.
You should consider several factors before deciding what methods you'll choose
to transfer information. The timing of the information exchange or need for
updates is the first factor. The availability of the technology you're planning on
using to communicate project information is important as well. Do you need to
procure new technology or systems, or are there systems already in place that
will work? Staff experience with the technology is another factor. Are the
project team members and stakeholders experienced at using this technology, or
will you need to train them? Consider the duration of the project and the project
environment. Will the technology you're choosing work throughout the life of
the project, or will it have to be upgraded or updated at some point? How does
the project team function? Are the members located together or spread out across
several campuses or locations? Is the information you're distributing confidential
or sensitive in nature? If so, consider what security measures should be put in
place to protect the information and assure that it is delivered only to the
intended recipients.
The answers to these questions should be documented in the communications
management plan output.

Communication Models
Communication models depict how information is transmitted from the sender
and how it's received by the receiver. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, a
communication model includes the following key components:
   Encode
   Transmit
   Decode
   Acknowledge
   Feedback and/or response
Encoding the message simply means putting the information or your thoughts or
ideas into a language that the receiver will understand. The message is the result,
or output, of the encoding.
The sender transmits the message using any number of methods, including
written, oral, email, and so on. Barriers can exist that compromise this
information, such as cultural differences, distance the message must travel,
technology used to transmit and receive, and more. Any barrier, including those
just mentioned, that keeps the message from being either transmitted or
understood is called noise.
Decode is performed by the receiver and it refers to translating the information
that was sent.
Acknowledge is when the receiver lets the sender know they have received the
message. This is not an indication of agreement.
Last but not least, feedback and/or response is provided after the receiver has
decoded the original message. Then, the receiver encodes their response and
sends it back to the sender, starting the cycle all over again.
The sender is responsible for encoding the message, transmitting the message,
and decoding the feedback message. The receiver is responsible for decoding the
original message from the sender and encoding and sending the feedback
message.
Communication Methods
Communication methods refer to how the project information is shared among
the stakeholders. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are three
classifications of communication methods. We'll briefly look at each of them:
Interactive Communication Interactive communication involves
multidirectional communication where two or more parties must exchange
thoughts or ideas. This method includes videoconferencing, phone or conference
calls, meetings, and so on.
Push Communications Push communications is one way and refers to
sending information to intended receivers. It includes methods such as letters,
memos, reports, emails, voicemails, and so on. This method assures that the
communication was sent but is not concerned with whether it was actually
received or understood by the intended receivers.
Pull Communications This is the opposite of push communications. The
likely recipients of the information access the information themselves using
methods such as websites, e-learning sites, knowledge repositories, shared
network drives, and so on.




  We'll discuss communication models and communication methods in more
  detail in Chapter 9, "Conducting Procurements and Sharing Information."


Plan Communications Management Outputs
There are two outputs to the Plan Communications Management process. They
are the communications management plan and project documents updates. The
updates that may be required as a result of performing this process are the
project schedule, the stakeholder register, and the stakeholder management
strategy. Let's take a closer look at the details of the communications
management plan.
All projects require sound communication plans, but not all projects will have
the same types of communication or the same methods for distributing the
information. The communications management plan documents the types of
information needs the stakeholders have, when the information should be
distributed, how the information will be delivered, and how communications will
be monitored and controlled throughout the project. This plan is developed by
taking the organizational structure (we talked about this in Chapter 1) and
stakeholder requirements into consideration. The answer to the pop quiz posed
earlier in this chapter is that the communications management plan is a
subsidiary plan of the project management plan I talked about in Chapter 3.




  According to the PMI(R) Project Management Professional (PMP)(R)
  Examination Content Outline, the communications management plan defines
  and manages the flow of project information.

The type of information you will typically communicate includes project status,
project scope statements and scope statement updates, project baseline
information, risks, action items, performance measures, deliverables acceptance,
and so on. What's important to know for this process is that the information
needs of the stakeholders should be determined as early in the Planning process
group as possible so that as you and your team develop project planning
documents, you already know who should receive copies of them and how they
should be delivered.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the communications management plan
typically describes the following elements:
   The communication requirements of each stakeholder or stakeholder group
   Purpose for communication
   Frequency of communications, including time frames for distribution
   Name of the person responsible for communicating information
   Format of the communication and method of transmission
   Method for updating the communications management plan
   Flowcharts
   Glossary of common terms
  I've included only some of the most important elements of the
  communications management plan in the list of elements for it. I recommend
  you review the entire list in the PMBOK(R) Guide.

The information that will be shared with stakeholders and the distribution
methods are based on the needs of the stakeholders, the project complexity, and
the organizational policies. Some communications might be informal--a chat by
the coffeemaker, for instance--while other communications are more formal and
are kept with the project files for later reference. The communications
management plan may also include guidelines for conducting status meetings,
team meetings, and so on.
You might consider setting up an intranet site for your project and posting the
appropriate project documentation there for the stakeholders to access anytime
they want. If you use this method, be sure to document it in the communications
management plan and notify your stakeholders when updates or new
communication is posted.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, know that the communications management plan documents
  how the communication needs of the stakeholders will be met, including the
  types of information that will be communicated, who will communicate it,
  who receives the communication, the methods used to communicate, the
  timing and frequency, the method for updating this plan as the project
  progresses, the escalation process, and a glossary of common terms.




        Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
After creating the first draft of the project schedule network diagram, you
went back to each stakeholder to ask for cost estimates for each of the
activities. Ricardo's estimates are shown here with the activities he gave you
last time:
1. Procure the T1 connection. This takes 30 to 45 days and will have
   ongoing costs of $3,000 per month. Procurement costs are covered in the
   monthly expense.
2. Run Ethernet cable throughout the building. The estimated time to
   complete is 16 hours at $100 per hour, which was figured using
   parametric estimating techniques.
3. Purchase the router, switch, server, and rack for the equipment room and
   four point-of-service terminals. The estimated costs are $17,000.
4. Install the router and test the connection. Testing depends on the T1
   installation at demarcation. The time estimate to install is eight hours.
   Ricardo's staff will perform this activity at an average estimated cost of
   $78 per hour.
5. Install the switch. Based on past experience, the time estimate to install
   is two hours. Ricardo's staff will perform this activity at an average
   estimated cost of $78 per hour.
6. Install the server and test. Based on past experience, the estimate to
   install is six hours at $84 per hour.
7. The web team will add the new store location and phone number to the
   lookup function on the Internet site. The time estimate is two hours at
   $96 per hour.
Jake and Jill have each written similar lists with time and cost estimates.
Using this information, you create the activity cost estimates and are careful
to document the basis of estimates. The following list includes some of the
information you document in the basis of estimates:
   Ricardo's use of parametric estimates for his cost estimates.
   Jake's use of both analogous and parametric estimating techniques.
   Jill's use of reserve analysis to include contingencies for unplanned
   changes involving vendor deliveries.
   Assumptions made about vendor deliveries and availability of the T1 and
   assumptions made regarding when lease payments begin.
   The range of possible estimates is stated as plus or minus 10 percent.
You also document the cost management plan and the cost baseline along
with the project funding requirements. Since this project will occur fairly
quickly, only two funding requirement periods are needed.
The stakeholder management plan is written and describes the relationships
between the stakeholders, their communication requirements, and the
format, reasons, and timing of the distribution of information.
The communications management plan is also complete, and you've asked
the key stakeholder to review it before posting it to the intranet site for the
project. You want to make certain you've identified stakeholder
communication needs, the method of communication, and the frequency
with which communications will occur.
Project Case Study Checklist
The main topics discussed in the case study are as follows:
   Estimate Costs
   Determine Budget
       Cost aggregation
       Reserve analysis
       Expert judgment
       Parametric estimates
       Cost baseline
       Project funding requirements
   Plan Communications Management
       Determine effective and efficient communications
       Review stakeholder register and stakeholder management strategy
       Communications requirements analysis
       Communication technology
       Communication models
       Communication methods
         Communication methods
     Communications Management Plan
         Stakeholder needs
         Format and language for information
         Time frame and frequency of communication
         Person responsible for communication
         Methods for communicating
         Glossary of terms


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
The Plan Cost Management and Estimate Costs processes are something I have
to do rather early in the project because of our long procurement cycle. Our cost
management plan (the policies and procedures used to plan and execute project
costs) is set in legislation and government rulings, so there isn't a lot of
flexibility around this process in my situation. The way our funding request
process works is that I must have an estimated cost for the project before I can
request funding. If funding is approved, the project is approved. If I'm not
awarded funding, the project dies and we move on to the next one.
I rely on expert judgment and parametric estimating techniques to determine
activity and total project costs. I often engage vendors and my own project team
to help determine the costs. When I have a large project that must go out for bid,
I have a well-defined scope and some idea of schedule dates and overall costs,
but I won't complete the schedule until after the contract is awarded. In an ideal
world, I would prefer to create the schedule prior to determining cost estimates
and budgets ... but we don't live in an ideal world and sometimes Planning
processes have to be performed out of order.
The authorized project budget becomes one of the key measurements of project
success. In a later chapter, we'll talk about monitoring the budget to determine
whether we're tracking with our estimates.
I generally create a stakeholder management plan and a communications
management plan together as one document (I call it a communications plan).
The reason for this is that the stakeholder management plan contains a lot of
information about communication needs, timing, distribution methods,
distribution formats, and so on. I find it easier to keep this information together
in one plan. This plan is a must-have for every project. I can't stress enough how
often I've seen the root cause of project issues end up being communication
problems. Never assume keeping the stakeholders informed or engaged is an
easy job. Even if you know the stakeholders well, always create a
communication plan. Document how you'll communicate status, baseline
information, risks, and deliverables acceptance. That way, there's no question as
to how information will be relayed, who's going to receive it, or when it will be
delivered.

Summary
The cost management plan is the only output of the Plan Cost Management
process. This documents the policies and procedures you'll use to plan and
execute project costs as well as how you will estimate, manage, and control
project costs. The Estimate Costs process determines how much the project
resources will cost, and these costs are usually stated in monetary amounts.
Some of the techniques used specifically for estimating costs are analogous
estimating, parametric estimating, bottom-up estimating, three-point estimates,
and reserve analysis. You can also use bottom-up estimating for total project
cost estimates. This involves estimating the cost of each activity and then rolling
these up to come up with a total work package cost. The output of this process is
the activity cost estimates and the basis of estimates that details all the support
information related to the estimates.
The tools and techniques of the Determine Budget process include cost
aggregation, reserve analysis, expert judgment, historical relationships, and
funding limit reconciliation. These tools together help you produce the final,
authorized project budget known as the cost baseline, which is an output of this
process. You will use the cost baseline throughout the remainder of the project to
measure project expenditures, variances, and project performance. The cost
baseline is graphically displayed as an S curve.
The cost baseline is also known as a performance measurement baseline (PMB)
when you're calculating earned value management formulas. PMBs are
management controls that should change only infrequently. Examples of the
performance measurement baselines you've looked at so far are the scope,
schedule, and cost baselines. The completed project plan itself also becomes a
baseline. If changes in scope or schedule do occur after Planning is complete,
you should go through a formalized process to implement the changes.
you should go through a formalized process to implement the changes.
The Plan Stakeholder Management process focuses on effectively engaging
stakeholders, understanding their needs and interests, understanding the good
and bad things they might bring to the project, and understanding how the
project will impact them. The primary output of this process is the stakeholder
management plan.
The purpose of the communications management plan is to determine and
document the communication needs of the stakeholders by defining the types of
information needed, the format for communicating the information, how often
it's distributed, and who prepares it. This plan is a subsidiary plan of the project
management plan and is created in the Plan Communications Management
process.


Exam Essentials
Be able to state the purpose of the cost management plan. The cost
management plan is the only output of the Plan Cost Management process. It
establishes policies and procedures for planning and executing project costs and
documents the processes for estimating, managing, and controlling project costs.
Be able to identify and describe the primary output of the Estimate Costs
process. Activity cost estimates are the primary output of Estimate Costs.
These estimates are quantitative amounts--usually stated in monetary units--
that reflect the cost of the resources needed to complete the project activities.
Be familiar with the tools and techniques of the Estimate Costs process.
The tools and techniques of Estimate Costs are expert judgment, analogous
estimating, parametric estimating, bottom-up estimating, three-point estimating,
reserve analysis, cost of quality, project management software, vendor bid
analysis, and group decision-making techniques.
Be able to identify additional general management techniques that can be
used in the Project Cost Management Knowledge Area. Some of the
general management techniques that can be used in this Knowledge Area are
return on investment, discounted cash flow, and payback analysis.
Know the tools and techniques of the Determine Budget process. The tools
and techniques of Determine Budget are cost aggregation, reserve analysis,
expert judgment, historical relationships, and funding limit reconciliation.
Be able to describe the cost baseline. The cost baseline is the authorized,
time-phased cost of the project when using budget-at-completion calculations.
The cost baseline is displayed as an S curve.
Be able to describe project funding requirements. Project funding
requirements are the output of the Determine Budget process. They detail the
funding requirements needed on the project by time period (monthly, quarterly,
annually).
Be able to describe the purpose of the Plan Stakeholder Management
process. The Plan Stakeholder Management process concerns effectively
engaging stakeholders, understanding their needs and interests, understanding
how they may help or hurt the project, and understanding how the project will
impact them. The primary output of this process is the stakeholder management
plan.
Be able to describe the primary purpose of the stakeholder management
plan. The stakeholder management plan documents engagement levels of the
stakeholders.
Be able to describe the purpose of the communications management plan.
The communications management plan determines the communication needs of
the stakeholders. It documents what information will be distributed, how it will
be distributed, to whom, and the timing of the distribution.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. All of the following are true regarding the stakeholder management plan
   except for which one?
   A. The stakeholder management plan helps to define and manage the flow
      of information to the stakeholders.
   B. The stakeholder management plan is developed by analyzing needs,
      interests, and potential impacts of the stakeholders.
   C. The stakeholder management plan includes details regarding the
      distribution of information, reasons for distributing information, and
      timing of the information.
   D. The stakeholder management plan is created using tools and techniques
       such as expert judgment, meetings, and analytical techniques.
2. This document is used to establish the criteria for planning, estimating,
   budgeting, and controlling costs.
   A. Cost baseline, an output of the Determine Budget process. The cost
      baseline is based on the approved project charter, project scope,
      schedule, resources, and human resource management plan in order to
      manage project costs.
   B. Performance management baseline, an output of the Plan Cost
      Management process. The performance management baseline is based on
      the project scope, schedule, resources, and human resource management
      plan to manage project costs.
   C. Project funding requirements, an output of the Determine Budget
      process. Project funding is based on the project scope, schedule,
      resources, and other information in order to manage project costs.
   D. Cost management plan, an output of the Plan Cost Management process.
      The cost management plan is based on the approved project charter,
      project scope, schedule, resources, and other information in order to
      manage project costs.
3. You are a project manager working for iTrim Central and you're preparing
   your cost management plan. You know that all of the following are true
   regarding this plan except for which one?
   A. The WBS provides the framework for this plan.
   B. Units of measure should be described in the plan usually as hours, days,
      weeks, or lump sum.
   C. This plan is a subsidiary of the project management plan.
   D. Control thresholds should be described in the plan as to how estimates
      will adhere to rounding ($100 or $1,000, and so on).
4. You are a project manager working for iTrim Central. Your organization has
   developed a new dieting technique that is sure to be the next craze. One of
   the deliverables of your feasibility study was an analysis of the potential
   financial performance of this new product, and your executives are very
   pleased with the numbers. You will be working with several vendors to
   produce products, marketing campaigns, and software that will track
   customers' progress with the new techniques. For purposes of performing
   earned value measurements for project costs, you are going to place which of
   the following in the WBS?
   A. Chart of accounts
   B. Code of accounts
   C. Control account
   D. Reserve account
5. All of the following are inputs of the Estimate Costs process except for
   which one?
   A. Resource calendars
   B. Scope baseline
   C. Project schedule
   D. Human resource management plan
6. You want to improve your activity cost estimates by taking into account
   estimation uncertainty and risk. Which of the following tools and techniques
   will you use?
   A. Analogous estimates
   B. Three-point estimating
   C. Parametric estimates
   D. Bottom-up estimates
7. You have received estimates for activity costs associated with one work
   package of the WBS. Additional contingencies have been added to the
   estimates to account for cost uncertainty. Which of the following tools and
   techniques of Estimate Costs does this describe?
   A. Reserve analysis
   B. Three-point estimates
   C. Vendor bid analysis
   D. Analogous estimates
8. You have received the following estimates for a complex activity that is
   critical to the success of your project. The three-point estimates are as
   follows: the most likely estimate is $42, the optimistic estimate is $35, and
    the pessimistic estimate is $54. What is the expected activity cost of this
    activity using the beta distribution formula (rounded to the nearest dollar)?
    A. 49
    B. 39
    C. 43
    D. 44
 9. You are the project manager for a custom home-building construction
    company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming
    Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every
    room, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on
    the cost baseline for this project. All of the following statements are true
    except which one?
    A. This process aggregates the estimated costs of project activities.
    B. The cost baseline will be used to measure variances and future project
       performance.
    C. This process assigns cost estimates for expected future period operating
       costs.
    D. The cost baseline is the time-phased budget at completion for the project.
10. Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project. She would
    like the cost estimate to be as accurate as possible because this might be her
    one and only chance to secure the budget for this project because of recent
    cuts in special projects. You decide to use _______________.
    A. analogous estimating techniques
    B. bottom-up estimating techniques
    C. top-down estimating techniques
    D. expert judgment techniques
11. You are the project manager for a custom-home-building construction
    company. You are working on the model home project for the upcoming
    Show Homes Tour. The model home includes Internet connections in every
    room, talking appliances, and wiring for home theaters. You are working on
    the Determine Budget process. All of the following statements are true
    except which one?
    A. You document the funding limit reconciliation to include a contingency
       for unplanned risks.
    B. You discover that updates to the risk register are needed as a result of
       performing this process.
    C. You document that funding requirements are derived from the cost
       baseline.
    D. The performance measurement baseline will be used to perform earned
       value management calculations.
12. Which of the following is displayed as an S curve?
    A. Funding requirements
    B. Cost baseline
    C. Cost estimates
    D. Expenditures to date
13. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Determine Budget
    process except for which one?
    A. Reserve analysis
    B. Expert judgment
    C. Historical relationships
    D. Cost of quality
14. Your project sponsor has requested a cost estimate for the project on which
    you're working. This project is similar in scope to a project you worked on
    last year. She would like to get the cost estimates as soon as possible.
    Accuracy is not her primary concern right now. She needs a ballpark figure
    by tomorrow. You decide to use __________________.
    A. analogous estimating techniques
    B. bottom-up estimating techniques
    C. parametric estimating techniques
    D. three-point estimating techniques
15. You have eight key stakeholders (plus yourself) to communicate with on
    your project. Which of the following is true?
    A. There are 36 channels of communication, and this should be a
       consideration when using the communications technology tool and
       technique.
    B. There are 28 channels of communication, and this should be a
       consideration when using the communications requirements analysis tool
       and technique.
    C. There are 28 channels of communication, and this should be a
       consideration when using the communications technology tool and
       technique.
    D. There are 36 channels of communication, and this should be a
       consideration when using the communications requirements analysis tool
       and technique.
16. All of the following are true regarding Plan Communications Management
    except for which one?
    A. The communications management plan is a subsidiary plan of the project
       management plan.
    B. This process should be completed as early in the project as possible. It is
       used to define and manage the flow of project information.
    C. It's tightly linked with enterprise environmental factors and all
       organizational process assets are used as inputs for this process.
    D. Communications requirements analysis, communication technology,
       communication methods, and expert judgment are tools and techniques
       of this process.
17. You are preparing your communications management plan and know that all
    of the following are true except for which one?
    A. Decode means to translate thoughts or ideas so they can be understood by
       others.
    B. Transmit concerns the method used to convey the message.
    C. Acknowledgment means the receiver has received and agrees with the
       message.
    D. Encoding and decoding are the responsibility of both the sender and
       receiver.
18. Which of the following ensures that information is distributed but does not
    acknowledge or certify that it was understood by the intended receiver(s)?
    A. Push communication
    B. Interactive communication
    C. Transmit
    D. Message and feedback message
19. You need to communicate information in a multidirectional fashion with
    several stakeholders. Which of the following is true?
    A. This describes push communication, which is a communication model.
    B. This describes interactive communication, which is a communication
       method.
    C. This describes communication requirements analysis, which is a
       communication model.
    D. This describes pull communication, which is a communication method.
20. Communication technology takes into account all of the following factors
    that can affect the project except for which one?
    A. Urgency of the need for information
    B. Project environment
    C. Reasons for the distribution of information
    D. Duration of the project
CHAPTER 6
Risk Planning
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE PLANNING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 10: Plan for risk management by developing a risk management
   plan; identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing project risks; creating the
   risk register; and defining risk response strategies in order to manage
   uncertainty and opportunity throughout the project life cycle.
    Knowledge and Skills:
       Requirements gathering techniques (e.g., planning sessions,
       brainstorming, and focus groups)
       Regulatory and environmental impacts assessment planning
       Risk management planning
Risk is evident in everything we do. When it comes to project management,
understanding risk and knowing how to minimize its impacts (or take full
advantage of its opportunities) on your project are essential for success. This
entire chapter is dedicated to project risk. Five of the six risk processes, all
contained in the Risk Management Knowledge Area, fall in the Planning process
group. I'll cover Plan Risk Management, Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative
Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, and Plan Risk Responses in
this chapter. I'll follow up with the last risk process, Control Risks, in Chapter
11, "Controlling Work Results."
Hold on to your hats! I'm going to cover a lot of material in this chapter, but it
will go fast. I promise.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Planning for Risks
Every one of us takes risks on a daily basis. Just getting out of bed in the
morning is a risk. You might stub your toe in the dark on the way to the light
switch or trip over the dog and break a leg. These events don't usually happen,
but the possibility exists. The same is true for your project. Risk exists on all
projects, and the potential that a particular risk event will occur depends on the
nature of the risk.
Risk, like most of the elements of the other Planning processes, changes as the
project progresses and should be monitored throughout the project. As you get
close to a risk event, that's the time to reassess your original assumptions about it
and your plans to deal with it and make any adjustments as required.
Not all risks are bad. Risks can present future opportunities as well as future
threats to a project. Risk events may occur due to one reason or several reasons,
and they may have multiple impacts. All risks have causes, and if the risk event
occurs during a project, there are consequences. Those consequences will likely
impact one or more of the project objectives, and you'll need to know whether
the consequences have positive or negative impacts.
Risk is, after all, uncertainty. The more you know about risks and their impacts
beforehand, the better equipped you will be to handle a risk event when it
occurs. The processes that involve risk, probably more than any other project
Planning process, concern balance. You want to find that point where you and
the stakeholders are comfortable with the risk based on the benefits you can
potentially gain. In a nutshell, you're balancing the action of taking a risk against
avoiding the consequences or impacts of a risk event or enjoying the benefits it
may bring. The rest of this chapter will deal with finding out what risk events
might occur (and how to deal with risks that are unknown), determining an
organization's tolerance for risk taking, and developing action plans for risks
you've determined have hefty impacts. The first step is performing the Plan Risk
Management process. Here, you determine the approach you'll use for risk
management activities and document your plans for them in a risk management
plan. You'll look at that process now.

  Exam Spotlight
  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, once a negative risk event occurs, it's
  considered an issue and is no longer a risk.


Planning Your Risk Management
Risks come about for many reasons. Some are internal to the project, and some
are external. The project environment, the planning process, the project
management process, inadequate resources, and so on can all contribute to risk.
Some risks you'll know about in advance and plan for during this process; others
risk events will occur unannounced during the project. The Plan Risk
Management process determines how you'll prepare for and perform risk
management activities on your project.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide contends that the Plan Risk Management process
  should begin as soon as the project begins and it should be concluded early
  in the Planning processes. The risk management plan, the only output of this
  process, assures that the appropriate amount of resources and the appropriate
  time are dedicated to risk management. "Appropriate" is determined based
  on the levels, the importance, and the types of risks. The most important
  function the risk management plan serves is that it's an agreed-upon baseline
  for evaluating project risk.

To document the risk management plan, you need to gather some inputs that will
help you determine your organization's risk policies and tolerance for risk. You'll
look at those inputs next.

Plan Risk Management Inputs
Risks associated with a project are generally concerned with any number and
combination of four project objectives--time, cost, scope, and quality. As you
might have guessed, the project management plan is an input to this process and
it includes the scope statement, which describes your project deliverables. The
inputs of this process are as follows:
   Project management plan
   Project charter
   Stakeholder register
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The risk attitude of the organization and the stakeholders is a key element of the
enterprise environmental factors input. Risk attitude consists of three elements:
Risk Appetite Risk appetite is the level of uncertainty the stakeholders are
willing to accept in exchange for the potential positive impacts of the risk. For
example, let's say your organization is a multinational manufacturing firm that is
implementing a new inventory system. The end users are grumbling and have
expressed their concerns for the new system. The old system does everything
they want it to do, and they are not interested in this new technology. There is a
potential for the represented employees to protest this new system, and such a
reaction could impact production. Your stakeholders are willing to accept this
risk even though they don't know if, or to what extent, production may be
impacted because the benefits of the new system far outweigh the potential
unknown impacts of employees protesting.
Risk Tolerance Risk tolerance is that balance I talked about earlier where
stakeholders are comfortable taking a risk because the known benefits to be
gained outweigh what could be lost--or just the opposite. They will avoid taking
a risk because the cost or impact is too great given the amount of benefit that can
be derived. Here's an example to describe risk tolerance: Suppose you're a 275-
pound brute who's surrounded by three bodyguards of equal proportion
everywhere you go. Chances are, walking down a dark alley in the middle of the
night doesn't faze you in the least. That means your risk tolerance for this
activity is high. However, if you're a petite 90-pounder without the benefit of
bodyguards or karate lessons, performing this same activity might give you
cause for concern. Your risk tolerance is low, meaning you wouldn't likely do
this activity. The higher your tolerance for risk, the more you're willing to take
on risk and its consequences.
Risk tolerance is different than risk appetite because risk appetite concerns the
amount of uncertainty you are willing to take on to gain a benefit whereas risk
tolerance concerns the amount of risk, and hence the potential consequences or
benefits you might gain or lose if the risk event occurs.
  Organizations and stakeholders, as well as individuals, all have different
  tolerances for risk. One organization might believe that the risk of a potential
  7 percent cost overrun is high, whereas another might think it's low.
  However, either one of these organizations might decide to accept the risk if
  it believes the risk is in balance with the potential rewards. It's important for
  the project manager to understand the tolerance level that the organization
  and the stakeholders have for risk before evaluating and ranking risk.

Risk Threshold Risk thresholds are measures or levels of uncertainty or
impact the organization is willing to operate within. For example, a monetary
risk threshold might state if the risk poses a threat that could cost more than 5
percent of the total project budget, the risk should not be accepted. If it's below 5
percent, it may be accepted.
Remember that organizational process assets include policies and guidelines that
might already exist in the organization. Your organization's risk categories, risk
statement formats, and risk templates should be considered when planning for
risks. Also, when developing the risk management plan, consider the defined
roles and responsibilities and the authority levels the stakeholders and project
manager have for making decisions regarding risk planning.
The project management plan includes all of the subsidiary plans and baselines
for the project. This is the first place you'll start looking when identifying risks,
and it should be considered when determining the process you'll use to evaluate
risks. The risk management plan (the only output of this process) will also
become part of the project management plan.

Tools and Techniques for Plan Risk Management
The Plan Risk Management process has three tools and techniques: analytical
techniques, expert judgment, and meetings.
Analytical techniques in this case are understanding stakeholder risk appetites
and tolerances, developing a method for scoring risks, and determining the risk
exposure of the project. We will cover these topics in more depth throughout the
remainder of this chapter.
The purpose of meetings--which are held with project team members,
The purpose of meetings--which are held with project team members,
stakeholders, functional managers, and others who might have involvement in
the risk management process--is to contribute to the risk management plan.
During these meetings, the fundamental plans for performing risk management
activities will be discussed and determined and then documented in the risk
management plan.
The key outcomes of performing these planning meetings are as follows:
   Risk cost elements are developed for inclusion in the project budget.
   Schedule activities associated with risk are developed for inclusion in the
   project schedule.
   Risk responsibilities are assigned.
   The risk contingency reserve process is established or reviewed.
   Templates for risk categories are defined or modified for this project.
   Definitions of terms (probability, impact, risk types, risk levels, and so on)
   are developed and documented.
   The probability and impact matrix is defined or modified for this project.




 I'll discuss risk responsibilities, define the terms associated with risk
 management, and help you construct your own probability and impact
 matrix in the remaining sections of this chapter.




        Real World Scenario

 Do We Need a Risk Management Plan?
 Julia is the project manager for a small project her department is
 undertaking. The project objective is to give customers the ability to
 download videos of the properties her organization has listed for lease. Two
 programmers from the information technology department will be working
  programmers from the information technology department will be working
  on the updates to the website, programming the links, and so on. The project
  sponsor wants to fast-track this project. She'd like to skip most of the
  Planning processes, and she sees no need for a risk management plan. Julia
  explains to the sponsor that the risk management plan for a project this size
  might be only a paragraph or two long. She emphasizes the importance of
  documenting how they'll identify risks, how they'll quantify them, and how
  they'll monitor the risks as the project progresses. Julia has project
  management experience on projects of all sizes and knows firsthand that
  ignoring this step could bring some unexpected surprises to the sponsor later
  in the project. She explains a bad past experience where this step was
  ignored and then assures the sponsor that they can probably agree to the
  plan, identify and quantify the risks, and determine response plans in an hour
  and a half or less. The sponsor now understands the issues and agrees to the
  meeting.

Ultimately, your goal for this process is documenting the risk management plan.
This document is the basis for understanding the remaining risk processes.
Because the risk management plan encompasses a wealth of information, I've
given this topic its own section. Let's get to it.

Creating the Risk Management Plan
The purpose of the Plan Risk Management process is to create a risk
management plan, which describes how you will define, monitor, and control
risks throughout the project. This involves identifying risks, analyzing and
prioritizing them, and developing risk response strategies so that you can
manage both uncertainty and opportunity throughout the life of the project. The
risk management plan is a subsidiary of the project management plan, and it's the
only output of this process.
The risk management plan details how risk management processes (including
Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis, Plan Risk Responses, and Control Risks) will be implemented,
monitored, and controlled throughout the life of the project. It details how you
will manage risks but does not attempt to define responses to individual risks.




  I'll talk about how to develop the risk response plans in the section
  I'll talk about how to develop the risk response plans in the section
  "Developing a Risk Response Plan" later in this chapter.

According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the risk management plan should include the
following elements:
   Methodology
   Roles and responsibilities
   Budgeting
   Timing
   Risk categories
   Definitions of risk probability and impact
   Probability and impact matrix
   Revised stakeholder tolerances
   Reporting formats
   Tracking

  Exam Spotlight
  It's important to spend time developing the risk management plan because
  it's an input to every other risk-planning process and it enhances the
  probability of risk management success.

You'll take a look at most of these elements next. However, risk categories,
probability and impact, and probability and impact matrix are pretty meaty
topics, so I'll cover those in their own sections following this one:
Methodology Methodology is a description of how you'll perform risk
management, including elements such as methods, tools, and where you might
find risk data that you can use in the later processes.
Roles and Responsibilities Roles and responsibilities describe the people who
are responsible for managing the identified risks and their responses for each
type of activity identified in the risk management plan. These risk teams might
not be the same as the project team. Risk analysis should be unbiased, which
might not be possible when project team members are involved.
Budgeting The budget for risk management is included in the plan as well.
With this category, you'll assign resources and estimate the costs of risk
management and its methods, including contingency reserves. These costs are
then included in the project's cost baseline.
Timing Timing documents the timing of the risk management processes
(including when and how often they'll be performed on the project) and includes
the activities associated with risk management in the project schedule.
Revised Stakeholder Tolerances This is just as it implies. As you proceed
through the risk management processes, you might find that risk tolerances will
change. Document those new tolerance levels in the risk management plan.
Reporting Formats Reporting formats describe the content of the risk register
and the format of this document. (I'll talk more about the risk register later in this
chapter.) Reporting formats also detail how risk management information will be
maintained, updated, analyzed, and reported to project participants.
Tracking This includes a description of how you'll document the history of the
risk activities for the current project and how the risk processes will be audited.
You can reference this information when you're performing risk-planning
processes later in the current project or on future projects. This information is
also helpful for lessons learned, which I'll cover in Chapter 9, "Conducting
Procurements and Sharing Information."

Risk Categories
Risk categories are a way to systematically identify risks and provide a
foundation for understanding. When determining and identifying risks, the use of
risk categories helps improve the process by giving everyone involved a
common language or basis for describing risk.
Risk categories should be identified during this process and documented in the
risk management plan. These categories will assist you in making sure the next
process, Identify Risks, is performed effectively and produces a quality output.
The following list includes some examples of the categories you might consider
during this process (or modify based on previous project information):
   Technical, quality, and performance risks
   Project management risks
   Organizational risks
   External risks
You can go about describing categories of risk in a couple of ways. One way is
simply listing them. You could, and should, review prior projects for risk
categories and then tailor them for this project.
You could also construct a risk breakdown structure (RBS), which lists the
categories and subcategories. Figure 6.1 shows a sample of an RBS.




Figure 6.1 Risk breakdown structure




  The organizational process assets input might include an RBS that you can
  reference for this project. Don't forget your PMO. The project management
  reference for this project. Don't forget your PMO. The project management
  office might have templates or an RBS already developed.

Risk categories might reflect the type of industry or application area in which the
project exists. For example, information technology projects will likely have
many risks that fall into the technical category, whereas construction projects
might be more subject to risks that fall into the external risks category. The
categories do not have to be industry specific, however. Keep in mind that
project management, for example, is a risk for every project in every industry.
You can find a description of each of the categories next:
Technical/Quality/Performance Risks Technical, quality, and performance
risks include risks associated with unproven technology, complex technology, or
changes to technology anticipated during the course of the project. Performance
risks might include unrealistic performance goals. Perhaps one of the project
deliverables concerns a component manufactured to specific performance
standards that have never been achieved. That's a performance risk.
Project Management Risks The project management risk category includes
improper schedule and resource planning, poor project planning, and improper
or poor project management disciplines or methodologies.
Organizational Risks The organizational risk category can include resource
conflicts because of multiple projects occurring at the same time in the
organization; scope, time, and cost objectives that are unrealistic given the
organization's resources or structure; and lack of funding for the project or
diverting funds from this project to other projects.
External Risks The external risk category includes those aspects that are
external to the project, such as new laws or regulations, labor issues, weather,
changes in ownership, and foreign policy for projects performed in other
countries. Catastrophic risks--known as force majeure--are usually outside the
scope of Plan Risk Management and instead require disaster recovery
techniques. Force majeure includes events such as earthquakes, meteorites,
volcanoes, floods, civil unrest, terrorism, and so on.

Defining Probability and Impact
When you're writing the risk management plan, you'll want to document the
definitions for probability and impact as they relate to potential negative risk
events and their impacts on the four project objectives. Probability describes the
potential for the risk event occurring, whereas impact describes the effects or
consequences the project will experience if the risk event occurs. This definition
consequences the project will experience if the risk event occurs. This definition
can be sophisticated or simple. For example, you might use numeric values to
define probability and impact or simply assign a high-medium-low rating to each
risk. What's important to note now is that you don't use these probability and
impact definitions here. You use these definitions later in the Perform
Qualitative Risk Analysis process. (I'll talk in depth about probability and impact
in the section "Analyzing Risks Using Qualitative Techniques" later in this
chapter.) But you should define and document them here in the risk management
plan.

Probability and Impact Matrix
A probability and impact matrix prioritizes the combination of probability and
impact scores and helps you determine which risks need detailed risk response
plans. For example, a risk event with a high probability of occurring and a high
impact will likely need a response plan. This matrix is typically defined by the
organization, but if you don't have one, you'll need to develop this now--during
your planning meetings (a tool and technique of this process). You'll use this
matrix in the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process, and I'll talk more in
depth about it in the section "Analyzing Risks Using Qualitative Techniques"
later in this chapter. Again, you want to define (or modify) and document the
probability and impact matrix in the risk management plan.




  The key point about this process is that you'll define what the probability and
  impact tools look like now during Plan Risk Management so that the team
  has an agreed-upon basis for evaluating the identified risks later during the
  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process.

To recap, the steps associated with these last few elements of the risk
management plan are as follows:
1. Define the risk categories (these will assist the risk team in the Identify Risks
   process).
2. Determine how probability and impact will be defined (to be used in the
   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process).
3. Develop or modify the probability and impact matrix (to be used in the
   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process).
Doing all these steps, together with the other elements of the risk management
plan, gives you and the risk management team a common understanding for
evaluating risks throughout the remainder of the project.

Identifying Potential Risk
The Identify Risks process involves identifying all the risks that might impact the
project, documenting them, and documenting their characteristics. Identify Risks
is an iterative process that continually builds on itself. As you progress through
the project, more risks might present themselves. Once you've identified or
discovered a potential new risk, you should analyze it to determine whether a
response plan is needed. You can see that the risk management cycle starts again
with Identify Risks and progresses through the remaining risk processes to
determine what to do about them.
You can include several groups of folks to help identify risks, including project
team members, risk team members, stakeholders, subject matter experts, users of
the final product or service, and anyone else who you think might help in the
process. Perhaps in the first round of Identify Risks you could include just the
project team and subject matter experts and then bring in the stakeholders or risk
management team to further flesh out risks during the second round of
identification. Risk events can occur at any time during the project, and all
project participants should be encouraged to continually watch for and report
potential risk events.




  I'll talk more about the techniques you can use to identify risks in the section
  "Tools and Techniques for Identify Risks."

Risks might or might not adversely affect the project. Some risks have positive
consequences, whereas others have negative consequences. However, you
should identify all risk events and their consequences. Here's a partial list to get
you thinking about where risk might be found:
   Budgets/funding
   Schedules
   Scope or requirements changes
   Project plan
   Project management processes
   Technical issues
   Personnel issues
   Hardware
   Contracts
   Political concerns
   Business processes
   Legal processes and activities
   Environmental concerns
   Management policies, processes, and attitudes
This is by no means an exhaustive list. Remember that risk is uncertainty, and
realize that risk (uncertainty) is lurking almost anywhere on your project. It's
your job to discover as many of the potential risks as possible using the tools and
techniques of this process and to document these risks.

Identify Risks Inputs
The inputs to the Identify Risks process are as follows:
   Risk management plan
   Cost management plan
   Schedule management plan
   Quality management plan
   Human resource management plan
   Scope baseline
   Activity cost estimates
   Activity duration estimates
   Stakeholder register
   Project documents
   Procurement documents
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
We have covered each of these inputs previously, with the exception of the
quality management plan and the human resource management plan. We'll talk
about both of these inputs in Chapter 7, "Planning Project Resources," where we
will discuss quality planning and human resource planning in depth. For
purposes of the Identify Risks process, understand that the quality management
process, identified in the quality management plan, has the potential to produce
or prevent risks itself. We'll touch on a few of the key elements of some of these
other inputs also.
You should pay particular attention to the roles and responsibilities section of the
risk management plan and the budget and schedule for risk activities. Don't
forget to examine the categories of risks as well. This is a great place to start
when you get the team together and begin brainstorming your list of risks.
The project scope statement, part of the scope baseline, contains a list of project
assumptions. You'll recall that assumptions are things believed to be true. During
the risk-planning stages of your project and throughout the work of the project,
it's imperative to revisit and revalidate your project assumptions. At the time you
recorded an assumption about vendor deliveries, for example, the vendor had a
great track record and never missed a date. Months later on the project, that
vendor merges with one of its competitors. Now you'll need to reexamine your
assumptions about delivery times and determine whether the assumption is still
valid or whether you have a risk on your hands.
The cost, schedule, and human resource management plans can be helpful
sources when identifying risks. You should also consider network diagrams,
baselines, work performance reports, and other project information during this
process.
The enterprise environmental-factors input concerns aspects from outside the
project that might help you determine or influence project outcomes. Be certain
to check for industry information (commercial databases, checklists,
benchmarking studies, and so on) or academic research that might exist for your
application areas regarding risk information.
As always, don't forget about historical information such as previous project
experiences via the project files. You might find risk templates and lessons
experiences via the project files. You might find risk templates and lessons
learned in these files that will help with the current project. Project team
knowledge is another form of historical information.




  Although the PMBOK(R) Guide doesn't mention it, I've found that other
  elements of your project are helpful when identifying risk, such as the work
  breakdown structure (WBS), the staffing management plan, project staff
  assignments, and resource availability. In practice, you should examine the
  outputs of most of the Planning processes when attempting to identify risks.


Tools and Techniques for Identify Risks
The Identify Risks process is undertaken using seven tools and techniques:
   Documentation reviews
   Information gathering
   Checklist analysis
   Assumptions analysis
   Diagramming techniques
   SWOT analysis
   Expert judgment
You'll learn more about each of these in the following sections.

Documentation Reviews
Documentation reviews involve reviewing project plans, assumptions,
procurement documents, and historical information from previous projects from
both a total project perspective and an individual deliverables and activities
level. This review helps the project team identify risks associated with the
project objectives. Pay attention to the quality of the plans (is the content
complete, or does it seem to lack detail?) and the consistency between plans. An
exceptionally documented schedule is great, but if the budget isn't as well
documented, you might have some potential risks.
Information Gathering
Information gathering encompasses several techniques, including brainstorming,
the Delphi technique, interviewing, and root cause analysis. The goal of these
techniques is to end up with a comprehensive list of risks at the end of the
meeting. Let's take a quick look at each of these techniques.

Brainstorming
Brainstorming is probably the most often used technique of the Identify Risks
process. You've probably used this technique many times for many purposes.
Brainstorming involves getting subject matter experts, team members, risk
management team members, and anyone else who might benefit the process in a
room and asking them to start identifying possible risk events. The trick here is
that one person's idea might spawn another idea, and so on, so that by the end of
the session you've identified all the possible risks. The facilitator could start the
group off by going through the categories of risks to get everyone thinking in the
right direction. Edward de Bono devised a method of brainstorming called Six
Thinking Hats (based on his book by the same name) that you might want to
investigate. You may recall that Edward de Bono is also noted for lateral
thinking techniques, which we discussed in Chapter 3, "Developing the Project
Scope Statement."

  Nominal Group Technique
  The Nominal Group technique is not included as part of the information
  gathering techniques in the PMBOK(R) Guide. However, it's possible you may
  see a question about it on the exam. The Nominal Group technique is a
  brainstorming technique, or it can be conducted as a mass interview
  technique.
  This technique requires the participants to be together in the same room.
  Each participant has paper and pencil in front of them, and they are asked to
  write down what risks they think the project faces. Using sticky-backed
  notes is a good way to do this. Each piece of paper should contain only one
  risk. The papers are given to the facilitator, who sticks them up to the wall or
  a whiteboard. The panel is then asked to review all the risks posted on the
  board, rank them and prioritize them (in writing), and submit the ranking to
  the facilitator. Once this is done, you should have a complete list of risks.
Delphi Technique
The Delphi technique is a lot like brainstorming, except that the people
participating in the meeting don't know one another. In fact, the people
participating in this technique don't all have to be located in the same place and
usually participate anonymously. You can use email to facilitate the Delphi
technique easily.
What you do is assemble your experts, from both inside and outside the
company, and provide them with a questionnaire to identify potential risks. The
questionnaire is often designed with forced choices that require the experts to
select between various options. The questionnaire asks participants about risks
associated with the project, the business process, and the product of the project,
and it asks the readers to rank their answers in regard to the potential impacts of
the risks. They in turn send their responses back to you (or to the facilitator of
this process). All the responses are organized by content and sent back to the
Delphi members for further input, additions, or comments. The participants then
send their comments back one more time, and the facilitator compiles a final list
of risks.
The Delphi technique is a great tool that allows consensus to be reached quickly.
It also helps prevent one person from unduly influencing the others in the group
and, therefore, prevents bias in the outcome because the participants are usually
anonymous and don't necessarily know how others in the group responded.

Interviewing
Interviews are question-and-answer sessions held with others, including other
project managers, subject matter experts, stakeholders, customers, the
management team, project team members, and users. These folks provide you
with possible risks based on their past experiences with similar projects.
This technique involves interviewing those folks with previous experience on
projects similar to yours or those with specialized knowledge or industry
expertise. Ask them to tell you about any risks that they've experienced or that
they think might happen on your project. Show them the WBS and your list of
assumptions to help get them started thinking in the right direction.

Root Cause Analysis
Did you ever hear someone say you're looking at the symptoms and not at the
problem? That's the idea here. Root cause analysis involves digging deeper than
the risk itself and looking at the cause of the risk. This helps define the risk more
clearly, and it also helps you later when it's time to develop the response plan for
the risk.

  Exam Spotlight
  Be aware that there might be questions about any of the techniques I've
  shown here. Understand the difference between the various information-
  gathering techniques for the exam.


Checklist Analysis
Checklists used during the Identify Risks process are usually developed based on
historical information and previous project team experience. If you typically
work on projects that are similar in nature, begin to compile a list of risks. You
can then convert this to a checklist that will allow you to identify risks on future
projects quickly and easily. You can also use the lowest level of the RBS as a
checklist. However, don't rely solely on checklists for Identify Risks because
you might miss important risks. It isn't possible for a single checklist to be an
exhaustive source for all projects. You can improve your checklists at the end of
the project by adding the new risks that were identified.

Assumptions Analysis
Assumptions analysis is a matter of validating the assumptions you identified
and documented during the course of the project-planning processes.
Assumptions should be accurate, complete, and consistent. Examine all your
assumptions for these qualities. Assumptions are also used as jumping-off points
to further identify risks.
The important point to note about the project assumptions is that all assumptions
are tested against two factors:
   The strength of the assumption or the validity of the assumption
   The consequences that might impact the project if the assumption turns out
   to be false
All assumptions that turn out to be false should be evaluated and scored just as
risks.
Diagramming Techniques
Three types of diagramming techniques are used in Identify Risks: cause-and-
effect, system or process flowcharts, and influence diagrams. Cause-and-effect
diagrams show the relationship between the effects of problems and their causes.
This diagram depicts every potential cause and subcause of a problem and the
effect that each proposed solution will have on the problem. This diagram is also
called a fishbone diagram, and it's also called an Ishikawa diagram after its
developer, Kaoru Ishikawa. Figure 6.2 shows an example cause-and-effect
diagram.




Figure 6.2 Cause-and-effect diagram
The system or process flowchart shows the logical steps needed to accomplish
an objective, how the elements of a system relate to each other, and what actions
cause what responses. This flowchart is probably the one with which you're most
familiar. It's usually constructed with rectangles and parallelograms that step
through a logical sequence and allow for "Yes" and "No" branches (or some
similar type of decision). Figure 6.3 shows a flowchart to help determine
whether risk response plans should be developed for the risk (I'll talk about
response plans in the section "Developing a Risk Response Plan" later in this
chapter).
Figure 6.3 Flowchart diagram




  Cause-and-effect diagrams and system or process flowcharts are used in the
  Identify Risks process as well as in the Control Quality process.

A third diagramming technique used during Identify Risks is called influence
diagramming. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, influence diagrams typically
show the causal influences among project variables, the timing or time ordering
of events, and the relationships among other project variables and their
outcomes. Simply put, they visually depict risks (or decisions), uncertainties, or
impacts and how they influence each other. Figure 6.4 shows an influence
diagram for a product introduction decision. The weather is a variable that could
impact delivery time, and delivery time is a variable that can impact when
revenues will occur.




Figure 6.4 Influence diagram
Each of these techniques provides a way for you to help identify project risks.
It's important that you identify all the risks early in the process. The better job
you do of identifying the project's risks at the Planning stage, the more
comprehensive the risk response plan will be. Identify Risks is not an area of
project planning that you should skip.

Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT)
Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (also known as SWOT
analysis) is a technique that examines the project from each of these viewpoints.
It also requires examining the project from the viewpoint of the project itself and
from project management processes, resources, the organization, and so on to
identify risks, including those that are generated internally to the project.
Strengths and weaknesses are generally related to issues that are internal to the
organization. Strengths are what your organization does well according to your
customers, or the marketplace. Weaknesses are areas the organization could
improve upon. Typically, negative risks are associated with the organization's
weaknesses and positive risks are associated with its strengths. Opportunities
and threats are usually external to the organization. SWOT analysis is sometimes
known as internal-external analysis and can be used in combination with
brainstorming techniques to help discover and document potential risks.

Expert Judgment
Experts for risk identification purposes can include anyone who has experience
working on similar projects, experience working in the business area for which
the project was undertaken, or specific industry experience. When using this
technique, you should consider any bias your experts may have regarding the
project or potential risk events.

Identify Risks Outputs
The output of the Identify Risks process is the risk register. Everything you've
done in this process up to this point will get documented here. The risk register
contains the following elements:
    List of identified risks
    List of potential responses
The risk register also often contains warning signs, or triggers, although they
aren't listed as an official part of the register. You'll take a look at all of these
elements next. Understand that all risks should be documented, tracked,
reviewed, and managed throughout the project.

List of Identified Risks
Risks are all the potential events and their subsequent consequences that could
occur as identified by you and others during this process. You might want to
consider logging your risks in a risk database or tracking system to organize
them and keep a close eye on their status. This can easily be done in spreadsheet
format or whatever method you choose. List the risks, assign each risk a tracking
number, and note the potential cause or event and the potential impact. This list
gives you a means to track the risks, their occurrence, and the responses
implemented.

List of Potential Responses
You might identify potential responses to risks at the same time you're
identifying the risks. Sometimes just identifying a risk will tell you the
appropriate response. Document those responses here. You'll refer to them again
appropriate response. Document those responses here. You'll refer to them again
in the Plan Risk Responses process a little later in this chapter.
A sample risk register is shown in Table 6.1. As you progress through the risk
planning processes, and through the project itself, more risks may be identified
and more information will become known about the risks. You should update the
risk register with new information as it becomes known.
Table 6.1 Risk register
ID Risk            Trigger      Event       CauseImpact Owner Response
                                                                Plan
1 Infrastructure Predecessor Operating Equipment Schedule Brown Compress
  team is not tasks not      system    was not   delay          the
  available      completed upgrade delivered                    schedule
  when needed on time        delayed on time                    by
                                                                beginning
                                                                tasks in
                                                                the next
                                                                milestone
                                                                while
                                                                working
                                                                on
                                                                operating
                                                                system
                                                                upgrade

Triggers
Triggers are warning signs or symptoms that a risk event is about to occur. For
example, if you've ever suffered from a hay fever attack, you can't mistake the
itchy, runny nose and scratchy throat that can come on suddenly and send you
into a sneezing frenzy. Signals like this are known as triggers, and they work the
same way when you're determining whether a risk event is about to occur. For
example, if you're planning an outdoor gathering and rain clouds start rolling in
from the north on the morning of the activity, you probably have a risk event
waiting to happen. A key team member hinting about job hunting is a warning
sign that the person might be thinking of leaving, which in turn can cause
schedule delays, increased costs, and so on. This is another example of a trigger.
Triggers are not listed as one of the risk register elements until the Plan Risk
Responses process is carried out, but in practice this is an appropriate time to list
them. You will likely encounter questions on the exam about triggers, so don't
say I didn't warn you. Also, throughout the remainder of the project, be on the
alert for triggers that might signal that a risk event is about to occur.

Analyzing Risks Using Qualitative Techniques
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process involves determining what
impact the identified risks will have on the project objectives and the probability
they'll occur. It also ranks the risks in priority order according to their effect on
the project objectives so that you can spend your time efficiently by focusing on
the high-priority risks. This helps the team determine whether Perform
Quantitative Risk Analysis should be performed or whether you can skip right to
developing response plans. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process also
considers risk tolerance levels, especially as they relate to the project constraints
(scope, time, cost, and quality) and the time frames of the potential risk events.
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process should be performed throughout
the project. This process is the one you'll find you'll use most often when
prioritizing project risks because it's fast, relatively easy to perform, and cost
effective. The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that you should identify and manage the
risk attitudes of those assisting with this process, and if bias is introduced, you
should evaluate it and correct it if necessary. It also notes that simply conducting
the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process and evaluating the impact and
probability of risks can help to keep bias at a minimal level.

Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Inputs
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process has five inputs:
   Risk management plan
   Scope baseline
   Risk register
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The critical element in this process, as with most of the processes where the risk
register is an input, is the list of risks contained in the risk register. The risk
management plan documented the roles and responsibilities of risk team
members, budget and schedule factors for risk activities, the stakeholder risk
members, budget and schedule factors for risk activities, the stakeholder risk
tolerances, the definitions for probability and impact, and the probability and
impact matrix, all of which should be utilized when prioritizing risks. You'll
examine probability and impact more closely in the next section, "Tools and
Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis."
The scope baseline describes the deliverables of the project, and from there you
should be able to determine whether you're dealing with a high level of
uncertainty or a project that's similar in size and scope to one you've performed
before. Projects with high levels of uncertainty or that are more complex than
what the team has undertaken before require more diligence during the Perform
Qualitative Risk Analysis process.
As with the Identify Risks process, you should examine historical information
and lessons learned from past projects as a guide for prioritizing the risks for this
project. Risk databases from your industry or application area can be used here
as well. These are part of the organizational process assets input.
The real key to this process lies in the tools and techniques you'll use to
prioritize risks. Hold on tight because you're going in the deep end.

Tools and Techniques for Perform Qualitative
Risk Analysis
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process's tools and techniques are
primarily concerned with discovering the probability of a risk event and
determining the impact (or consequences) the risk will have if it does occur. The
output of this process is project documents updates (that will include risk register
updates) where you'll document the prioritized risks you've scored using these
tools and techniques. All the information you gather regarding risks and
probability needs to be as accurate as possible. It's also important that you gather
unbiased information so that you don't unintentionally overlook risks with great
potential or consequences.
The purpose of this process is to determine risk event probability and risk impact
and to prioritize the risks and their responses. You'll use the tools and techniques
of this process to establish risk scores, which is a way of categorizing the
probability and risk impact. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process
includes the following tools and techniques:
   Risk probability and impact assessment
   Probability and impact matrix
   Risk data quality assessment
   Risk categorization
   Risk urgency assessment
   Expert judgment
We'll look at each of these tools and techniques next.

Risk Probability and Impact Assessment
This tool and technique assesses the probability that the risk events you've
identified will occur, and it determines the effect their impacts have on the
project objectives, including time, scope, quality, and cost. Analyzing risks in
this way allows you to determine which risks require the most aggressive
management. When determining probabilities and impacts, you'll refer to the risk
management plan element called "definitions of risk probability and impact."

Probability
Probability is the likelihood that an event will occur. The classic example is
flipping a coin. There is a 0.50 probability of getting heads and a 0.50
probability of getting tails on the flip. Note that the probability that an event will
occur plus the probability that the event will not occur always equals 1.0. In this
coin-flipping example, you have a 0.50 chance that you'll get heads on the flip.
Therefore, you have a 0.50 chance you will not get heads on the flip. The two
responses added together equal 1.0. Probability is expressed as a number from
0.0--which means there is no probability of the event occurring--to 1.0--which
means there is 100 percent certainty the event will occur.
Determining risk probability can be difficult because it's most commonly
accomplished using expert judgment. In nonproject management terms, this
means you're guessing (or asking other experts to guess) at the probability a risk
event will occur. Granted, you're basing your guess on past experiences with
similar projects or risk events, but no two risk events (or projects) are ever the
same. It's best to fully develop the criteria for determining probability and get as
many experts involved as you can. Carefully weigh their responses to come up
with the best probability values possible.

Impact
Impact is the amount of pain (or the amount of gain) the risk event poses to the
project. The risk impact scale can be a relative scale (also known as an ordinal
scale) that assigns values such as high, medium, or low (or some combination of
these) or a numeric scale known as a cardinal scale. Cardinal scale values are
actual numeric values assigned to the risk impact. Cardinal scales are expressed
as values from 0.0 to 1.0 and can be stated in equal (linear) or unequal
(nonlinear) increments.
Table 6.2 shows a typical risk impact scale for cost, time, and quality objectives
based on a high-high to low-low scale. You'll notice that each of the high-
medium-low value combinations on this impact scale has been assigned a
cardinal value. I'll use these in the section coming up on the probability and
impact matrix.
Table 6.2 Risk impact scale
Objectives Low-Low Low               Medium                High    High-
                                                                   High
            0.05        0.20       0.40                0.60        0.80
Cost        No          Less than 7-12% increase       13-18%      More
            significant 6%                             increase    than
            impact      increase                                   18%
                                                                   increase
Time        No          Less than 7-12% increase       13-18%      More
            significant 6%                             increase    than
            impact      increase                                   18%
                                                                   increase
Quality     No          Few        Significant impact Unacceptable Product
            significant components requiring customer quality      not
            impact      impacted   approval to proceed             usable
When you're using a high-medium-low scale, it's important that your risk team
understands what criteria were used to determine a high score versus a medium
or low score and how they should be applied to the project objectives.

Assessing Probability and Impact
The idea behind both probability and impact values is to develop predefined
measurements that describe what value to place on a risk event.

  Exam Spotlight
  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, don't forget that you define probability and impact values
  during the Plan Risk Management process and document them in the risk
  management plan.

If the risk impact scale has not been previously defined, develop one for the
project as early in the Planning processes as possible. You can use any of the
techniques I talked about earlier in the section "Tools and Techniques for
Identify Risks," such as brainstorming or the Delphi technique, to come up with
the values for probability and impact.
During the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process, you'll determine and
assess probability and impact for every risk identified during the Identify Risks
process. You could interview or hold meetings with project team members,
subject matter experts, stakeholders, or others to help assess these factors.
During this process, you should document not only the probability and impact
but also the assumptions your team members used to arrive at these
determinations. The next technique--probability and impact matrix--takes the
probability and impact values one step further by assigning an overall risk score.

Probability and Impact Matrix
The outcome of a probability and impact matrix is an overall risk rating for each
of the project's identified risks. The combination of probability and impact
results in a classification usually expressed as high, medium, or low. Typically,
high risks are considered a red condition, medium risks are considered a yellow
condition, and low risks are considered a green condition. This type of ranking is
known as an ordinal scale because the values are ordered by rank from high to
low. (In practice, ordinal values might also include ranking by position. In other
words, the risks are listed in order by rank as the first, the second, the third, and
so on.)

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that risk rating rules and the probability and
  impact matrix values and steps are usually set by the organization and are
  part of the organizational process assets.

Now let's look at an example. You have identified a risk event that could impact
project costs, and your experts believe costs could increase by as much as 9
percent. According to the risk impact rating matrix in Table 6.2, this risk carries
a medium impact, with a value of 0.40. Hold on to that number because you're
going to plug it into the probability impact matrix--along with the probability
value--to determine an overall risk value next.
You'll remember from the discussion previously that probability values should
be assigned numbers from 0.0 to 1.0. In this example, the team has determined
that there is a 0.2 probability of this risk event occurring. The risk impact scale
shows a medium, or 0.40, impact should the event occur.
Now, to determine whether the combination of the probability and impact of this
risk is high, medium, or low, you'll need to check the probability impact matrix.
Table 6.3 shows a sample probability and impact matrix.
Table 6.3 Sample probability and impact matrix
Probability Impact Values* Low-                    Low       Medium        High       High-High
            Low .05                                .20       .40           .60        .80
0.8         .04                                    .16       .32           .48        .64
0.6         .03                                    .12       .24           .36        .48
0.4         .02                                    .08       .16           .24        .32
0.2         .01                                    .04       .08           .12        .16
*No formatting = low assignment or green condition; bold = medium assignment or yellow condition; bold
italic = high assignment or red condition.

First, look at the probability column. Your risk event has a probability of .2.
Now, follow that row across until you find the column that shows the impact
score of .40 (it's the Medium column). According to your probability and impact
matrix values, this risk carries an overall score of .08 and falls in the low
threshold, so this risk is assigned a low (or green condition) value.
The values assigned to the risks determine how Plan Risk Responses is carried
out for the risks later during the risk-planning processes. Obviously, risks with
high probability and high impact are going to need further analysis and formal
responses. Remember that the values for this matrix (and the probability and
impact scales discussed earlier) are determined prior to the start of this process
and documented in the risk management plan. Also keep in mind that probability
and impact do not have to be assigned the same values I've assigned here. You
might use 0.8, 0.6, 0.4, and 0.2 for probability, for example, and assign .05, 0.1,
.3, 0.5, and 0.7 for impact scales.
.3, 0.5, and 0.7 for impact scales.



         Real World Scenario
  Screen Scrapers, Inc.
  Screen Scrapers is a software-manufacturing company that produces a
  software product that looks at your mainframe screens, commonly called
  green screens, and converts them to browser-based screens. The browser-
  based screens look like any other Windows-compatible screens with buttons,
  scroll bars, and drop-down lists.
  Screen Scrapers devised this product for companies that use mainframe
  programs to update and store data because many of the entry-level workers
  beginning their careers today are not familiar with green screens. They're
  cumbersome and difficult to learn, and no consistency exists from screen to
  screen or from program to program. Pressing the F5 key in one program
  might mean go back one page, whereas pressing F5 in another program
  might mean clear the screen. New users are easily confused, make a lot of
  mistakes, and have to write tablets full of notes on how to navigate all the
  screens.
  Your company has purchased the Screen Scraper product and has appointed
  you as the project manager over the installation. This project consists of a lot
  of issues to address, and you've made great headway. You're now at the
  Identify Risks and Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis stage. You decide to
  use the Delphi technique to assist you in identifying risk and assigning
  probability and impact rankings. Some experts are available in your
  company to serve on the Delphi panel, as well as some folks in industry
  organizations you belong to outside the company.
  You assemble the group, set up a summary of the project, and send it out via
  email, requesting responses to your questions about risk. After the first pass,
  you compile the list of risks as follows (this list is an example and isn't
  exhaustive because your list will be project specific):
      Vendor viability (will the software company stay in business?)
      Vendor responsiveness with problems after implementation
      Software compatibility risks with existing systems
   Hardware compatibility risk
   Connection to the mainframe risk
   Training IT staff members to maintain the product
You send this list back to the Delphi members and ask them to assign a
probability of 0.0 to 1.0 and an impact of high-high, high, medium, low, or
low-low to each risk. The Delphi members assign probability and impact
based on a probability scale and an impact scale designed by the risk
management team. The values of the impact scale are as follows:
   High-high = 0.8
   High = 0.6
   Medium = 0.4
   Low = 0.2
   Low-low = 0.05
The results are compiled to determine the following probability and impact
values:
   Vendor viability = 0.6 probability, high impact
   Vendor responsiveness = 0.4 probability, medium impact
   Software compatibility = 0.4 probability, medium impact
   Hardware compatibility = 0.6 probability, high-high impact
   Mainframe connection = 0.2 probability, high-high impact
   Training = 0.2 probability, low-low impact
The probability and impact matrix you used to assign the overall risk scores
was derived from the probability and impact matrix shown in the following
table.
Based on the probability and impact matrix thresholds, the project risks are
assigned the following overall probabilities:
   Vendor viability = high
   Vendor responsiveness = medium
   Software compatibility = medium
   Hardware compatibility = high
      Mainframe connection = medium
      Training = low
  PI Matrix for Screen Scrapers, Inc.


                    Probability Impact Scores*.05 .20 .40 .60 .80
                    .8              .04                       .16   .32   .48   .64
                    .6              .03                       .12   .24   .36   .48
                    .4              .02                       .08   .16   .24   .32
                    .2              .01                       .04   .08   .12   .16
  *No formatting = low assignment or green condition; bold = medium assignment or yellow condition;
  bold italic = high assignment or red condition.



Risk Data Quality Assessment
The risk data quality assessment involves determining the usefulness of the data
gathered to evaluate risk. Most important, the data must be unbiased and
accurate. You will want to examine elements such as the following when using
this tool and technique:
    The quality of the data used
    The availability of data regarding the risks
    How well the risk is understood
    The reliability and integrity of the data
    The accuracy of the data
Low-quality data will render the results from the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis process almost useless. Spend the time to validate and verify the
information you've collected about risks so that your prioritization and analysis
is as accurate as it can be. If you find that the quality of the data is questionable,
you guessed it--go back and get better data.

Risk Categorizations
This tool and technique is used to determine the effects risk has on the project.
You can examine not only the categories of risk determined during the Plan Risk
Management process (and described in the RBS) but also the project phase and
Management process (and described in the RBS) but also the project phase and
the WBS to determine the elements of the project that are affected by risk.

Risk Urgency Assessment
Using this tool you'll determine how soon the potential risk events might occur
and quickly determine responses for those risk events that could occur soon. You
should consider the risk triggers, the time to develop and implement a response,
and the overall risk rating when deciding how quickly responses are needed.

Expert Judgment
Because this process determines qualitative values, by its very nature you must
rely on expert judgment to determine the probability, impact, and other
information we've derived so far. The more knowledge and similar experience
your experts have, the better your assessments will be. Interviews and facilitated
workshops are two techniques you can use in conjunction with expert judgment
to perform this process. As with the Identify Risks process, make certain to take
into account any bias your experts have and to correct it when necessary.

Ranking Risks in the Risk Register
The goal of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process is to rank the risks
and determine which ones need further analysis and, eventually, risk response
plans. The output of this process is project documents updates. This almost
always involves updating the risk register. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide,
you'll update the risk register with the following information:
   Risk ranking (or priority) for the identified risks
   Risk scores
   Updated probability and impact analysis
   Risk urgency information
   Causes of risk
   List of risks requiring near-term responses
   List of risks that need additional analysis and response
   Watch list of low-priority risks
   Trends in qualitative risk analysis results
Each element becomes a new entry in the risk register. For example, risk ranking
Each element becomes a new entry in the risk register. For example, risk ranking
assigns the risk score or priority you determined using the probability and impact
matrix to the list of identified risks previously recorded in the risk register. I
discussed the categories and the list of risks requiring near-term responses
earlier. Note these in the risk register.
You should also note those risks that require further analysis (including using the
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process), you'll create a list of risks that
have low risk scores to review periodically, and you should note any trends in
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis that become evident as you perform this
process.
The assumptions log is another project document that should be updated as new
information is discovered throughout this process. Assumptions are generally
documented in the project scope statement or can be kept in a separate document
so that they are easier to update. Assumptions can and do change throughout the
course of the project, and the process of identifying and prioritizing risks may
require updates to the assumptions.

Quantifying Risk
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process evaluates the impacts of risk
prioritized during the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. It is typically
performed for risks identified in Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis that could
have a significant impact on the project. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
quantifies the aggregate risk exposure for the project by assigning numeric
probabilities to risks and their impacts on project objectives. This quantitative
approach is accomplished using techniques such as Monte Carlo simulation and
decision tree analysis. To paraphrase the PMBOK(R) Guide, the purpose of this
process is to perform the following:
   Quantify the project's possible outcomes and probabilities.
   Determine the probability of achieving the project objectives.
   Identify risks that need the most attention by quantifying their contribution to
   overall project risk.
   Identify realistic and achievable schedule, cost, or scope targets.
   Determine the best project management decisions possible when outcomes
   are uncertain.
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis--like Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis--
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis--like Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis--
examines risk and its potential impact on the project objectives. You might
choose to use both of these processes to assess all risks or only one of them,
depending on the complexity of the project and the organizational policy
regarding risk planning. The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process follows
the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. If you use this process, be sure to
repeat it every time the Plan Risk Responses process is performed and as part of
the Control Risks process so that you can determine whether overall project risk
has decreased.
I've already covered many of the inputs to the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis process in previous sections of this chapter. They are as follows:
   Risk management plan
   Cost management plan
   Schedule management plan
   Risk register
   Environmental enterprise factors
   Organizational process assets
The elements of the enterprise environmental factors you'll want to pay close
attention to as an input to this process are risk databases and risk specialists'
studies performed on similar projects. The elements of the organizational
process assets input include historical information from previous projects of a
similar nature.

Tools and Techniques for Perform Quantitative
Risk Analysis
The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process includes three tools and
techniques: data-gathering and representation techniques, quantitative risk
analysis and modeling techniques, and expert judgment.

Data-Gathering and Representation Techniques
The data-gathering and representation techniques include interviewing
techniques and probability distributions.

Interviewing
This technique is like the interviewing technique discussed earlier when I talked
about the Identify Risks process. Project team members, stakeholders, and
about the Identify Risks process. Project team members, stakeholders, and
subject-matter experts are prime candidates for risk interviews. Ask them about
their experiences on past projects and about working with the types of
technology or processes you'll use during this project.




  For the exam, remember that interviewing is a tool and technique of the
  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. Although you can use this
  technique in the Identify Risks process, keep in mind that it's part of the
  data-gathering and representation techniques and not a named tool and
  technique itself.

When using this technique, you should first determine what methods of
probability distribution (described next) you'll use to analyze your information.
The technique you choose will dictate the type of information you need to
gather. For example, you might use a three-point scale that assesses the low,
high, and most likely risk scenarios or take it a step further and use standard
deviations calculations.
Make certain you document how the interviewees decided on the risk ranges, the
criteria they used to place risks in certain categories, and the results of the
interview. This information will help you later in developing risk responses.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, you should know that several types of probability distributions
  exist that are useful in determining and displaying risk information. The type
  of distribution you use determines the type of information you should gather
  during the interviewing process.


Probability Distributions
It's beyond the scope of this book to delve into probability distributions and
calculations, so I'll point out a few aspects of them that you should remember for
the exam.
Continuous probability distributions (particularly beta and triangular
distributions) are commonly used in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, continuous probability distributions include
normal, lognormal, triangular, beta, and uniform distributions. Distributions are
graphically displayed and represent both the probability and time or cost
elements.
Triangular distributions use estimates based on the three-point estimate (the
pessimistic, most likely, and optimistic values). This means that during your
interviews, you'll gather these pieces of information from your experts. Then
you'll use them to quantify risk for each WBS element.
Normal and lognormal distributions use mean and standard deviations to
quantify risk, which also require gathering the optimistic, most likely, and
pessimistic estimates.
Discrete distributions represent possible scenarios in a decision tree (we'll
discuss this in a bit), outcomes of a test, results of a prototype, and other
uncertain events.

Quantitative Risk Analysis and Modeling Techniques
For the exam, you should know the four analysis and modeling techniques
within the Quantitative Risk Analysis tool and technique: sensitivity analysis,
expected monetary value analysis, decision tree analysis, and modeling and
simulation. Let's take a brief look at each of them.

Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity analysis is a quantitative method of analyzing the potential impact of
risk events on the project and determining which risk event (or events) has the
greatest potential for impact by examining all the uncertain elements at their
baseline values. One of the ways sensitivity analysis data is displayed is a
tornado diagram. Figure 6.5 shows a sample tornado diagram.
Figure 6.5 Tornado diagram
You can see by the arrangement of horizontal bars (each representing a
sensitivity variable) how the diagram gets its name. The idea is that each
sensitivity bar displays the low and high value possible for the element the bar
represents. It's beyond the scope of this book to explain how these values are
determined. The questions you might encounter on the exam are focused on the
context of this type of analysis. The variables with the greatest effect on the
project appear at the top of the graph and decrease in impact as you progress
down through the graph. This gives you a quick overview of how much the
project can be affected by uncertainty in the various elements. It also allows you
to see at a glance which risks might have the biggest impacts on the project and
will require carefully crafted, detailed response plans. You can use tornado
diagrams to determine sensitivity in cost, time, and quality objectives or for risks
you've identified during this process. Sensitivity analysis can also be used to
determine stakeholder risk tolerance levels.

Expected Monetary Value (EMV) Analysis
Expected monetary value (EMV) analysis is a statistical technique that calculates
the average, anticipated future impact of the decision. EMV is calculated by
multiplying the probability of the risk by its impact for two or more potential
outcomes (for example, a good outcome and a poor outcome) and then adding
the results of the potential outcomes together. EMV is used in conjunction with
the decision tree analysis technique, which is covered next. I'll give you an
example of the EMV formula in the next section. Positive results generally mean
the risks you're assessing pose opportunities to the project, whereas negative
results generally indicate a threat to the project.

Decision Tree Analysis
Unfortunately, this isn't a tree outside your office door that produces "yes" and
"no" leaves that you can pick to help you make a decision. Decision trees are
diagrams that show the sequence of interrelated decisions and the expected
results of choosing one alternative over the other. Typically, more than one
choice or option is available when you're faced with a decision or, in this case,
potential outcomes from a risk event. The available choices are depicted in tree
form starting at the left with the risk decision branching out to the right with
possible outcomes. Decision trees are usually used for risk events associated
with time or cost.
Figure 6.6 shows a sample decision tree using expected monetary value (EMV)
as one of its inputs.




Figure 6.6 Decision tree
The expected monetary value of the decision is a result of the probability of the
risk event multiplied by the impact for two or more potential outcomes and then
summing their results. The squares in this figure represent decisions to be made,
and the circles represent the points where risk events might occur.
The decision with an expected value of $7,000 is the correct decision to make
because the resulting outcome has the greatest value.

Modeling and Simulation
Modeling and simulation techniques are often used for schedule risk analysis
and cost analysis. For example, modeling allows you to translate the potential
risks at specific points in the project into their impacts so you can determine how
the project objectives are affected. Simulation techniques compute the project
model using various inputs, such as cost estimates or activity durations, to
determine a probability distribution for the variable chosen. (Cost risks typically
use either a work breakdown structure or a cost breakdown structure as the input
variable. Schedule risks always use the schedule network diagram and duration
estimates as the input variable.) If you used simulation techniques to determine
project cost and use the cost of the project elements as the input variable, a
probability distribution for the total cost of the project would be produced after
running the simulation numerous times. Modeling and simulation techniques
examine the identified risks and their potential impacts on the project objectives
from the perspective of the whole project.
Monte Carlo analysis is an example of a simulation technique. Monte Carlo
analysis is replicated many times, typically using cost or schedule variables.
Every time the analysis is performed, the values for the variable are changed
using a probability distribution for each variable. Monte Carlo analysis can also
be used during the Develop Schedule process.

  Exam Spotlight
  Simulation techniques are recommended for predicting schedule or cost risks
  because they're more powerful than EMV and less likely to be misused. For
  the exam, remember that simulation techniques are used to predict schedule
  or cost risks.


Expert Judgment
I've talked about this tool and technique before. Experts can come from inside or
I've talked about this tool and technique before. Experts can come from inside or
outside the organization and should have experience that's applicable to your
project. For example, if your project involves manufacturing a new product or
part, you might want to consider experts such as engineers or statisticians. If
you're dealing with sensitive data in an information technology project, consider
bringing in a security expert. When evaluating risk, use experts who understand
the tools associated with analyzing risk, including the benefits and drawbacks of
the tools or methods you'll use.

Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Outputs
The output of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is--I'll bet you
can guess--project documents updates. As with the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis process, you'll record the following new elements in the risk register:
Probabilistic Analysis of the Project Probabilistic analysis of the project is
the forecasted results of the project schedule and costs as determined by the
outcomes of risk analysis. These results include projected completion dates and
costs, along with a confidence level associated with each. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, this output is often expressed as a cumulative frequency
distribution, and you'll use these results along with stakeholder risk tolerances to
quantify the time and cost contingency reserves. (I'll talk about contingency
reserves in the next section, "Developing a Risk Response Plan.")
Confidence levels can also be used to describe the level of confidence placed on
the outcome of the forecasted results. For example, suppose the projected
schedule completion date is July 12 and the confidence level is .85. This says
you believe the project will finish on or before July 12 and that you have an 85
percent level of confidence that this date is accurate.
Probability of Achieving the Cost and Time Objectives Using the tools and
techniques of Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis allows you to assign a
probability of achieving the cost and time objectives of the project. This output
documents those probabilities and as such requires a thorough understanding of
the current project objectives and knowledge of the risks.
Prioritized List of Quantified Risks The prioritized list in this process is
similar to the list produced during the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
process. The list of risks includes those that present the greatest risk or threat to
the project and their impacts. It also lists those risks that present the greatest
opportunities to the project. This list should also indicate which risks are most
likely to impact the critical path and those that have the largest cost contingency.
Trends in Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Results Trends in Perform
Quantitative Risk Analysis will likely appear as you repeat the risk analysis
processes. This information is useful as you progress, making those risks with
the greatest threat to the project more evident, which gives you the opportunity
to perform further analysis or go on to develop risk response plans.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand the differences between the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
  and Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis processes for the exam.


Developing a Risk Response Plan
The Plan Risk Responses process is the last process covered in this chapter. (I
hear you cheering out there!) Plan Risk Responses is a process of deciding what
actions to take to reduce threats and take advantage of the opportunities
discovered during the risk analysis processes. This process also includes
assigning departments or individual staff members the responsibility of carrying
out the risk response plans you'll outline in this process. These folks are known
as risk owners.




  The more effective your risk response plans are, the better your chances for a
  successful project. Well-developed and well-written risk response plans will
  likely decrease overall project risk.

Generally, you'll want to develop risk response plans for risks with a
combination of high probability of occurrence and significant impact to the
project, those ranked high (or red) on the probability/impact matrix, or those
ranked high as a result of Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. Developing risk
response plans for risks of low severity or insignificant impact is not an efficient
or good use of the project team's time. Spend your time planning responses that
are appropriate given the impact the risk itself poses (or the opportunity the risk
presents), and don't spend more time, money, or energy to produce a response
than the risk event itself would produce if it occurred.
The inputs you'll use to assist you in this process are the risk register and the risk
management plan. Several strategies are used in this process to reduce or control
risk. It's important that you choose the right strategy for each risk so that the risk
and its impacts are dealt with effectively. After deciding on which strategy to
use, you'll develop an action plan to put this strategy into play should the risk
event occur. You might also choose to designate a secondary or backup strategy.

  Exam Spotlight
  The rank of the risk will dictate the level at which Plan Risk Responses
  should be performed. For example, a risk with low severity wouldn't warrant
  the time it takes to develop a detailed risk response plan. Risk responses
  should be cost effective--if the cost of the response is more than the
  consequences of the risk, you might want to examine a different risk
  response. Risk responses should also be timely, agreed to by all the project
  stakeholders, and assigned to an individual (risk owner) who is responsible
  for monitoring and carrying out the risk response plan if needed.


Tools and Techniques for Plan Risk Responses
The Plan Risk Responses process consists of four tools and techniques, and each
one of them involves a strategy. The tools and techniques are as follows:
    Strategies for negative risks or threats
    Strategies for positive risks or opportunities
    Contingent response strategies
    Expert judgment
You'll take a look at the first three next.

Strategies for Negative Risks or Threats
Four strategies exist to deal with negative risks or threats to the project
objectives: avoid, transfer, mitigate, and accept. Accept is a strategy you can use
for positive risks or opportunities also.

Avoid
To avoid a risk means you'll evade it altogether by eliminating the cause of the
risk event or by changing the project management plan to protect the project
objectives from the risk event. Let's say you're going to take a car trip from your
home to a point 800 miles away. You know--because your friends who just took
the same trip told you--that there is a long stretch of construction on one of the
highways you're planning on using. To avoid the risk of delay, you plan the trip
around the construction work and use another highway for that stretch of
driving. In this way, you change your plans, avoid the risk of getting held up in
construction traffic, and arrive at your destination on time.
With risk avoidance, you essentially eradicate the risk by eliminating its cause.
Here's another example: Suppose your project was kicked off without adequate
scope definition and requirements gathering. You run a high probability of
experiencing scope creep--ever-changing requirements--as the project
progresses, thereby impacting the project schedule. You can avoid this risk by
adequately documenting the project scope and requirements during the Planning
processes and taking steps to monitor and control changes to scope so it doesn't
get out of hand.
Risks that occur early in the project might easily be avoided by improving
communications, refining requirements, assigning additional resources to project
activities, refining the project scope to avoid risk events, and so on.

Transfer
The idea behind a risk transfer is to transfer the risk and the consequences of
that risk to a third party. The risk hasn't gone away, but the responsibility for the
management of that risk now rests with another party. Most companies aren't
willing to take on someone else's risk without a little cash thrown in for good
measure. This strategy will impact the project budget and should be included in
the cost estimate exercises if you know you're going to use it.
Transfer of risk can occur in many forms but is most effective when dealing with
financial risks. Insurance is one form of risk transfer. You are probably familiar
with how insurance works. Car insurance is a good example. You purchase car
insurance so that if you come upon an obstacle in the road and there is no way to
avoid hitting it, the cost to repair the damage to the car is paid by the insurance
company ... okay, minus the deductible and all the calculations for the age of the
car, the mileage, the color and make of the car, the weather conditions the day
you were driving--but I digress.
Another method of risk transfer is contracting. Contracting transfers specific
risks to the vendor, depending on the work required by the contract. The vendor
accepts the responsibility for the cost of failure. Again, this doesn't come without
accepts the responsibility for the cost of failure. Again, this doesn't come without
a price. Contractors charge for their services, and depending on the type of
contract you negotiate, the cost might be quite high. For example, in a fixed-
price contract, which I'll talk more about in Chapter 7, the vendor (or seller)
increases the cost of the contract to compensate for the level of risk they're
accepting. A cost reimbursable contract, however, leaves the majority of the risk
with you, the buyer. This type of contract might reduce costs if project changes
occur midway through the project.
Keep in mind that contracting isn't a cure-all. You might just be swapping one
risk for another. For example, say you hire a driver to go with you on your road
trip, and that person's job is to do all the driving. If the driver becomes ill or in
some way can't fulfill their obligation, you aren't going to get to your destination
on time. You've placed the risks associated with the trip on the contract driver;
however, you've taken on a risk of delay because of nonperformance, which
means you've just swapped one risk for another. You'll have to weigh your
options in cases like this and determine which side of the risk coin your
organization can more readily accept.
Other forms of transference include warranties, guarantees, and performance
bonds.

Mitigate
When you mitigate a risk, you attempt to reduce the probability of a risk event
occurring or reduce its impacts to an acceptable level. This strategy is a lot like
defensive driving. You see an obstacle in the road ahead, survey your options,
and take the necessary steps to avoid the obstacle and proceed safely on your
journey. Seeing the obstacle ahead (identifying risk) allows you to reduce the
threat by planning ways around it or planning ways to reduce its impact if the
risk does occur (mitigation strategies).
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the purpose of mitigation is to reduce the
probability that a risk will occur and/or reduce the impact of the risk to a level
where you can accept the risk and its outcomes. It's easier to take actions early
on that will reduce the probability of a risk event or its consequences than it is to
fix the damage once it has occurred. Some examples of risk mitigation include
performing more tests, using less complicated processes, creating prototypes,
and choosing more reliable vendors.

Accept
The acceptance strategy is used when you aren't able to eliminate all the threats
on the project. Acceptance of a risk event is a strategy that can be used for risks
that pose either threats or opportunities to the project. There are two alternatives
to the acceptance strategy. Passive acceptance means you won't make any plans
to try to avoid or mitigate the risk. You're willing to accept the consequences of
the risk should it occur. This strategy is often used when it's more cost-effective
to accept the impacts of the risk than to spend time or resources developing plans
to deal with the consequences. Passive acceptance might also be used because
the project team was unable to come up with an adequate response strategy and
must accept the risk and its consequences. Active acceptance is the second
strategy and might include developing contingency plans and reserves to deal
with risks should they occur. (You'll look at contingency reserves in the
Contingency Planning section.)
Let's revisit the road trip example. You could plan the trip using the original
route and just accept the risk of running into construction. If you get to that point
and you're delayed, you'll just accept it. This is passive acceptance. You could
also go ahead and make plans to take an alternative route but not enact those
plans until you actually reach the construction and know for certain that it is
going to impede your progress. This is active acceptance and might involve
developing a contingency plan.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand all the strategies and their characteristics in each Plan Risk
  Response tool and technique for the exam.




         Real World Scenario

  New Convention Center Wing
  You work for a small hotel and resort in western Colorado. Your company
  has taken on a project to expand the convention center by adding another
  wing. This wing will add six more meeting rooms (four of which can be
  combined into a large room by folding back the movable walls to
  combined into a large room by folding back the movable walls to
  accommodate large groups). This is a popular resort, and one of the risks
  identified with this project was an increase in demand for conference
  reservations after the construction finishes. The marketing team members
  decide they'll mitigate this risk by contacting the organizations who've
  consistently reserved space with them over the past three years and offer
  them incentives on their next reservation if they book their convention
  before the construction is completed. That way, their most important
  customers won't be turned away when the new reservations start pouring in.


Strategies for Positive Risk or Opportunities
Four strategies exist to deal with opportunities or positive risks that might
present themselves on the project: exploit, share, enhance, and accept. We
already covered accept, so we'll look at the remaining strategies next.

Exploit
When you exploit a risk event, you're looking for opportunities for positive
impacts. This is the strategy of choice when you've identified positive risks that
you want to make certain will occur on the project. Examples of exploiting a risk
include reducing the amount of time to complete the project by bringing on more
qualified resources or by providing even better quality than originally planned.

Share
The share strategy is similar to transferring because you'll assign the risk to a
third-party owner who is best able to bring about the opportunity the risk event
presents. For example, perhaps what your organization does best is investing.
However, it isn't so good at marketing. Forming a joint venture with a marketing
firm to capitalize on a positive risk will make the most of the opportunities.

Enhance
The enhance strategy closely watches the probability or impact of the risk event
to assure that the organization realizes the benefits. The primary point of this
strategy is to attempt to increase the probability and/or impact of positive risks.
This entails watching for and emphasizing risk triggers and identifying the root
causes of the risk to help enhance impacts or probability.

Contingency Planning
The last tool and technique of the Plan Risk Responses process we'll address is
called the contingent response strategy, better known as contingency planning.
Contingency planning involves planning alternatives to deal with certain risks
(such as those with accept strategies) should they occur. This is different from
mitigation planning in that mitigation looks to reduce the probability of the risk
and its impact, whereas contingency planning doesn't necessarily attempt to
reduce the probability of a risk event or its impacts.
Contingency comes into play when the risk event occurs. This implies you need
to plan for your contingencies well in advance of the threat or opportunity
occurring. After the risks have been identified and quantified, contingency plans
should be developed and kept at the ready.
Contingency reserves are a common contingency response. We talked about this
topic in the last chapter as well. Contingency reserve strategies for risk events
are similar to those for cost and activity durations. This may include setting aside
funding or resources or adding contingency time to the project schedule.
Fallback plans should be developed for risks with high impact or for risks with
identified strategies that might not be the most effective at dealing with the risk.
Fallback plans are not contingency plans. For example, in the information
technology field, we often have high-impact risks associated with upgrading
operating systems or implementing new applications. A contingency plan may
include calling the vendor to assist in the middle of the night (that's always when
things fall apart) when we can't figure out a solution. A fallback plan in this case
may describe how we are going to bring the old system back online so users can
still do their work while we figure out what went wrong with the
implementation.
In practice, you'll find that identifying, prioritizing, quantifying, and developing
responses for potential threats might happen simultaneously. In any case, you
don't want to be taken by surprise, and that's the point of the risk processes. If
you know about potential risks early, you can often mitigate them or prepare
appropriate response plans or contingency plans to deal with them.

Plan Risk Responses Outputs
As you've no doubt concluded, the purpose of the Plan Risk Responses process
is to develop risk responses for those risks with the highest threat to or best
opportunity for the project objectives. The Plan Risk Responses process has two
outputs: project management plan updates and project documents updates.
  Remember that you might need to revisit other Planning processes after
  performing Plan Risk Responses to modify project plans as a result of risk
  responses.


Project Management Plan Updates
As we've discussed throughout the book, the management plans created to
document how the schedule, budget, quality, procurement, and human resources
will be defined, managed, and controlled on the project become subsidiary plans
to the project management plan. Any and all of these management plans may
require updates after you perform the risk processes. In addition, the WBS, the
scope baseline, the schedule baseline, and cost baseline may require updates as
well.
Other project documents, such as technical documentation and the assumptions
documented in the project scope statement, could need an update after
performing these processes as well.

Project Documents Updates
For this output, you may need to update project documents, including the risk
register, technical documents, the assumptions log, and change requests. The risk
register is updated at the end of this process with the information you've
discovered during this process. The response plans are recorded in the risk
register. You'll recall that the risk register lists the risks in order of priority
(those with the highest potential for threat or opportunity first), so it makes sense
that the response plans you have for these risks will be more detailed than the
remaining lists. Some risks might not require response plans at all, but you
should put them on a watch list and monitor them throughout the project.
Let's take a look at what the risk register should contain at this point. According
to the PMBOK(R) Guide, after Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
and Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis are performed, the following elements
should appear in the risk register:
   Prioritized list of identified risks, including their descriptions, what WBS
   element (or area of the project) they impact, categories (RBS), root causes,
   and how the risk impacts the project objectives
   Risk ranking
   Risk owners and their responsibility
   Agreed-upon response strategies
   Actions needed to implement response plans
   Cost and schedule activities needed to implement risk responses
   Contingency plans
   Fallback plans
   List of residual and secondary risks
   Contingency reserves
The only elements in the preceding list I haven't talked about so far are residual
and secondary risks. A residual risk is a leftover risk, so to speak. After you've
implemented a risk response strategy--mitigation, for example--some minor
risk might still remain. The contingency reserve is set up to handle situations like
this.
Secondary risks are risks that come about as a result of implementing a risk
response. The example given previously where you transferred risk by hiring a
driver to take you to your destination but the person became ill along the way is
an example of a secondary risk. The driver's illness delayed your arrival time,
which is a risk directly caused by hiring the driver or implementing a risk
response. When planning for risk, identify and plan responses for secondary
risks.
Risks exist on all projects, and risk planning is an important part of the project
Planning processes. Just the act of identifying risks and planning responses can
decrease their impact if they occur. Don't take the "What I don't know won't hurt
me" approach to risk planning. This is definitely a case where not knowing
something can be devastating. Risks that are easily identified and have planned
responses aren't likely to kill projects or your career. Risks that you should have
known about but ignored could end up costing the organization thousands or
millions of dollars, causing schedule delays, causing loss of competitive
advantage, or ultimately killing the project. There could be a personal cost as
well, because cost and schedule overruns due to poor planning on your part are
not easily explained.
       Real World Scenario

Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
Ricardo knocks on your office door and asks whether you have a few
minutes to talk. "Of course," you reply, and he takes a seat on one of the
comfy chairs at the conference table. You have a feeling this might take a
while.
"I think you should know that I'm concerned about the availability of the T1
line. I've already put in the call to get us on the list because, as I said last
week, there's a 30-to 45-day lead time on these orders."
"We're only partway through the Planning processes. Do you need to order
the T1 so soon? We don't even know the store location yet," you say.
"Even though they say lead time is 30 to 45 days, I've waited as long as five
or six months to get a T1 installed in the past. I know we're really pushing
for the early February store opening, so I thought I'd get the ball rolling now.
What I need from you is the location address, and I'll need that pretty quick."
"We're narrowing down the choices between a couple of properties, so I
should have that for you within the next couple of weeks. Is that soon
enough?"
"The sooner, the better," Ricardo replies.
"Great. I'm glad you stopped by, Ricardo. I wanted to talk with you about
risk anyway, and you led us right into the discussion. Let me ask you, what
probability would you assign to the T1 line installation happening six
months from now?"
"I'd say the probability for six months is low. It's more likely that if there is a
delay, it would be within a three-to four-month time frame."
"If they didn't get to it for six months, would it be a showstopper? In other
words, is there some other way we could transfer Jill's data until the T1 did
get installed?"
"Sure, we could use other methods. Jill won't want to do that for very long,
but workarounds are available."
"Good. Now, what about the risk for contractor availability and hardware
availability and delivery schedules?" you ask.
You and Ricardo go on to discuss the risks associated with the IT tasks.
Later, you ask Jill and Jake the same kinds of questions and compile a list of
risks. In addition, you review the project information for the Atlanta store
opening because it's similar in size and scope to this store. You add the risks
from that store opening to your list as well. You divide some of the risks into
the following categories: IT, Facilities, and Retail. A sample portion of your
list appears as follows, with overall assignments made based on Perform
Qualitative Risk Analysis and the probability and impact matrix:
   Category: IT
       T1 line availability and installation. Risk score: Low
       Contractor availability for Ethernet installation. Risk score: Medium
       POS and server hardware availability. Risk score: Medium
   Category: Facilities
       Desirable location in the right price range. Risk score: High
       Contractor availability for build-out. Risk score: Low
       Availability of fixtures and shelving. Risk score: Low
   Category: Retail
       Product availability. Risk score: Medium
       Shipment dates for product. Risk score: Medium
After examining the risks, you decide that response plans should be
developed for the last two items listed under the IT source, the first item
under Facilities, and both of the risks listed under Retail.
Ricardo has already mitigated the T1 connection and installation risk by
signing up several months ahead of the date when the installation is needed.
The contractor availability can be handled with a contingency plan that
specifies a backup contractor should the first choice not be available. For the
POS terminals and hardware, you decide to use the transfer strategy. As part
of the contract, you'll require these vendors to deliver on time, and if they
cannot, they'll be required to provide and pay for rental equipment until they
can get your gear delivered.
The Facilities risk and Retail risks will be handled with a combination of
 The Facilities risk and Retail risks will be handled with a combination of
 acceptance, contingency plans, and mitigation.
 You've calculated the expected monetary value for several potential risk
 events. Two of them are detailed here.
 Desirable location has an expected monetary value of $780,000. The
 probability of choosing an incorrect or less than desirable location is 60
 percent. The potential loss in sales is the difference between $2.5 million in
 sales per year that a high-producing store generates versus $1.2 million in
 sales per year that an average store generates.
 The expected monetary value of the product availability event is $50,000.
 The probability of the event occurring is 40 percent. The potential loss in
 sales is $125,000 for not opening the store in conjunction with the Home and
 Garden Show.
 Project Case Study Checklist
    Plan Risk Management
    Identify Risks
        Documentation reviews
        Information-gathering techniques
    Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
        Risk probability and impact
        Probability and impact rating
        List of prioritized risks
    Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
        Interviewing
        Expected monetary value
    Plan Risk Responses
        Avoidance, transference, mitigation, and acceptance strategies
        Risk response plans documented


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
Risk management, and all the processes it involves, is not a process I
recommend you skip on a project of any size. This is where the Boy Scouts of
America motto, "Be Prepared," is wise advice. If you haven't examined what
could be lurking around the corner on your project and come up with a plan to
deal with it, then you can be assured you're in for some surprises. Then again, if
you like living on the edge, never knowing what might occur next, you'll
probably find yourself back on the job-hunting scene sooner than you planned
(oh, wait, you didn't plan because you're living on the edge).
In all seriousness, as with most of the Planning processes I've discussed so far,
risk management should be scaled to match the complexity and size of your
project. If you're working on a small project with a handful of team members
and a short timeline, it doesn't make sense to spend a lot of time on risk
planning. However, it does warrant spending some time identifying project risk,
determining impact and probability, and documenting a plan to deal with the
risk.
My favorite Identify Risks technique is brainstorming. I like its cousin the
Nominal Group technique too. Both techniques help you quickly get to the risks
with the greatest probability and impact because, more than likely, these are the
first risks that come to mind. Identify Risks can also help the project team find
alternative ways of completing the work of the project. Further digging and the
ideas generated from initial identification might reveal opportunities or
alternatives you wouldn't have thought about during the regular Planning
processes.
After you've identified the risks with the greatest impact to the project, document
response plans that are appropriate for the risk. Small projects might have only
one or two risks that need a response plan. The plans might consist of only a
sentence or two, depending on the size of the project. I would question a project
where no risks require a response plan. If it seems too good to be true, it
probably is.
The avoid, transfer, and mitigate strategies are the most often used strategies to
deal with risk, along with contingency planning. Of these, mitigation and
contingency planning are probably the most common. Mitigation generally
recognizes that the risk will likely occur and attempts to reduce the impact.
I have used brainstorming and the Nominal Group technique to strategize
response plans for risks on small projects. When you're working on a small
response plans for risks on small projects. When you're working on a small
project, you can typically identify, quantify, and create response plans for risks
at one meeting.
Identifying positive risk, in my experience, is fairly rare. Typically, when my
teams perform Identify Risks, it's to determine what can go wrong and how bad
the impact will be if it does. The most important concept from this chapter that
you should apply to your next project is that you and your team should identify
risks and create response plans to deal with the most significant ones.

Summary
Congratulations! You've completed another fun-filled, action-packed chapter,
and all of it on a single topic--risk. Risk is inherent in all projects, and risks
pose both threats to and opportunities for the project. Understanding the risks
facing the project better equips you to determine the appropriate strategies to
deal with those risks and helps you develop the response plans for the risks (and
the level of effort you should put into preparing those plans).
The Plan Risk Management process determines how you will plan for risks on
your project. Its only output is the risk management plan, which details how
you'll define, monitor, and control risks throughout the project. The risk
management plan is a subsidiary of the project management plan.
The Identify Risks process seeks to identify and document the project risks using
information-gathering techniques such as brainstorming, the Delphi technique,
interviewing, and root cause analysis. This list of risks gets recorded in the risk
register, the only output of this process.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis and Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
involve evaluating risks and assigning probability and impact values to them.
Many tools and techniques are used during these processes, including risk
probability and impact assessment, probability and impact matrix, interviewing,
probability distributions, expert judgment, sensitivity analysis, decision tree
analysis, and simulation.
A probability and impact matrix uses the probability multiplied by the impact
value to determine the risk score. The threshold of risk based on high, medium,
and low tolerances is determined by comparing the risk score based on the
probability level to the probability and impact matrix.
Monte Carlo simulation is a technique used to quantify schedule or cost risks.
Decision trees graphically display decisions and their various choices and
outcomes, and they are typically used in combination with expected monetary
outcomes, and they are typically used in combination with expected monetary
value.
The Plan Risk Responses process is the last Planning process and culminates
with an update to the risk register documenting the risk response plans. The risk
response plans detail the strategies you'll use to respond to risk and assign
individuals to manage each risk response. Risk response strategies for negative
risks include avoidance, mitigation, and transference. Risk strategies for positive
risks include exploit, share, and enhance. Acceptance is a strategy for both
negative and positive risks.
Contingency planning involves planning alternatives to deal with risk events
should they occur. Contingency reserves are set aside to deal with risks
associated with cost and time according to the stakeholder tolerance levels.

Exam Essentials
Be able to define the purpose of the risk management plan. The risk
management plan describes how you will define, monitor, and control risks
throughout the project. It details how risk management processes (including
Identify Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis, Plan Risk Responses, and Control Risks) will be implemented,
monitored, and controlled throughout the life of the project. It describes how you
will manage risks but does not attempt to define responses to individual risks.
The risk management plan is a subsidiary of the project management plan, and
it's the only output of the Plan Risk Management process.
Be able to name the purpose of Identify Risks. The purpose of the Identify
Risks process is to identify all risks that might impact the project and then
document them and identify their characteristics.
Be able to define the purpose of Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis determines the impact the identified risks will
have on the project and the probability they'll occur, and it puts the risks in
priority order according to their effects on the project objectives.
Be able to define the purpose of Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis.
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis evaluates the impacts of risk prioritized
during the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process and quantifies risk
exposure for the project by assigning numeric probabilities to each risk and their
impacts on project objectives.
Be able to define the purpose of the Plan Risk Responses process. Plan
Risk Responses is the process where risk response plans are developed using
strategies such as avoid, transfer, mitigate, accept, exploit, share, enhance,
develop contingent response strategies, and apply expert judgment. The risk
response plan describes the actions to take should the identified risks occur. It
should include all the identified risks, a description of the risks, how they'll
impact the project objectives, and the people assigned to manage the risk
responses.
Be able to define the risk register and some of its primary elements. The
risk register is an output of the Identify Risks process, and updates to the risk
register occur as an output of every risk process that follows this one. By the end
of the Plan Risk Responses process, the risk register contains these primary
elements: identified list of risks, risk owners, risk triggers, risk strategies,
contingency plans, and contingency reserves.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are a project manager for Fountain of Youth Spring Water bottlers.
   Your project involves installing a new accounting system, and you're
   performing the risk-planning processes. You have identified several
   problems along with the causes of those problems. Which of the following
   diagrams will you use to show each problem and its causes and effects?
   A. Decision tree diagram
    B. Fishbone diagram
    C. Benchmark diagram
   D. Simulation tree diagram
2. Assessing the probability and consequences of identified risks to the project
   objectives, assigning a risk score to each risk, and creating a list of
   prioritized risks describe which of the following processes?
   A. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
    B. Identify Risks
    C. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
   D. Plan Risk Management
3. Each of the following statements is true regarding the risk management plan
   except for which one?
   A. The risk management plan is an output of the Plan Risk Management
      process.
   B. The risk management plan includes a description of the responses to risks
      and triggers.
   C. The risk management plan includes thresholds, scoring and interpretation
      methods, responsible parties, and budgets.
   D. The risk management plan is an input to all the remaining risk-planning
      processes.
4. You are using the interviewing technique of the Perform Quantitative Risk
   Analysis process. You intend to use normal and lognormal distributions. All
   of the following statements are true regarding this question except which
   one?
   A. Interviewing techniques are used to quantify the probability and impact
      of the risks on project objectives.
   B. Normal and lognormal distributions use mean and standard deviation to
      quantify risks.
   C. Distributions graphically display the impacts of risk to the project
      objectives.
   D. Triangular distributions rely on optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely
      estimates to quantify risks.
5. The information-gathering techniques used in the Identify Risks process
   include all of the following except _______________________.
   A. root cause analysis
   B. the Delphi technique
   C. brainstorming
   D. checklist analysis
6. Which of the following processes assesses the likelihood of risk occurrences
   and their consequences using a numerical rating?
   A. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
   B. Identify Risks
   C. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
   D. Plan Risk Responses
7. You are the project manager for a new website for the local zoo. You need to
   perform the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. When you've
   completed this process, you'll produce all of the following as part of the
   project documents updates output except which one?
   A. Priority list of risks
   B. Watch list of low-priority risks
   C. Probability of achieving time and cost estimates
   D. Risks grouped by categories
8. You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save
   $100,000 in project costs if it occurs. Which of the following is true based on
   this statement?
   A. This is a risk event that should be accepted because the rewards outweigh
      the threat to the project.
   B. This risk event is an opportunity to the project and should be exploited.
   C. This risk event should be mitigated to take advantage of the savings.
   D. This is a risk event that should be avoided to take full advantage of the
      potential savings.
9. You've identified a risk event on your current project that could save
   $500,000 in project costs if it occurs. Your organization is considering hiring
   a consulting firm to help establish proper project management techniques in
   order to assure it realizes these savings. Which of the following is true based
   on this statement?
   A. This is a risk event that should be accepted because the rewards outweigh
      the threat to the project.
   B. This risk event is an opportunity to the project and should be exploited.
   C. This risk event should be mitigated to take advantage of the savings.
   D. This is a risk event that should be shared to take full advantage of the
        potential savings.
10. Your hardware vendor left you a voicemail saying that a snowstorm in the
    Midwest might prevent your equipment from arriving on time. She wanted to
    give you a heads-up and asked that you return the call. Which of the
    following statements is true?
    A. This is a trigger.
    B. This is a contingency plan.
    C. This is a residual risk.
    D. This is a secondary risk.
11. You are constructing a probability and impact matrix for your project. Which
    of the following statements is true?
    A. The probability and impact matrix multiplies the risk's probability by the
       cost of the impact to determine an expected value of the risk event.
    B. The probability and impact matrix multiplies the risk's probability--
       which falls from 0.0 to 1.0--and the risk's impact for each potential
       outcome and then adds the result of the potential outcomes together to
       determine a risk score.
    C. The probability and impact matrix are predetermined thresholds that use
       the risk's probability multiplied by the impact of the risk event to
       determine an overall risk score.
    D. The probability and impact matrix multiplies the risk's probability by the
       risk impact--which both fall from 0.0 to 1.0--to determine a risk score.
12. Your stakeholders have asked for an analysis of the cost risk. All of the
    following are true except for which one?
    A. Monte Carlo analysis is the preferred method to use to determine the cost
       risk.
    B. Monte Carlo analysis is a modeling technique that computes project costs
       one time.
    C. A traditional work breakdown structure can be used as an input variable
       for the cost analysis.
    D. Monte Carlo usually expresses its results as probability distributions of
       possible costs.
13. Your hardware vendor left you a voicemail saying that a snowstorm in the
    Midwest will prevent your equipment from arriving on time. You identified a
    risk response strategy for this risk and have arranged for a local company to
    lease you the needed equipment until yours arrives. This is an example of
    which risk response strategy?
    A. Transfer
    B. Acceptance
    C. Mitigate
    D. Avoid
14. Risk attitude is an enterprise environmental factor that you should evaluate
    when performing the Plan Risk Management process. Risk attitude consists
    of all of the following elements except for which one?
    A. Risk appetite
    B. Risk threshold
    C. Risk urgency
    D. Risk tolerance
15. You work for a large manufacturing plant. You are working on a new project
    to release an overseas product line. This is the company's first experience in
    the overseas market, and it wants to make a big splash with the introduction
    of this product. The stakeholders are a bit nervous about the project and
    historically proceed cautiously and take a considerable amount of time to
    examine information before making a final decision. The project entails
    producing your product in a concentrated formula and packaging it in
    smaller containers than the US product uses. A new machine is needed to
    mix the ingredients into a concentrated formula. After speaking with one of
    your stakeholders, you discover this will be the first machine your
    organization has purchased from your new supplier. Which of the following
    statements is true given the information in this question?
    A. The question describes risk tolerance levels of the stakeholders, which
       should be considered when performing the Plan Risk Management
       process.
    B. This question describes the interviewing tool and technique used during
       the Identify Risks process.
    C. This question describes risk triggers that are derived using interviewing
       techniques and recorded in the risk register during the Perform
       Qualitative Risk Analysis process.
    D. This question describes a risk that requires a response strategy from the
       positive risk category.
16. Your project team has identified several potential risks on your current
    project that could have a significant impact if they occurred. The team
    examined the impact of the risks by keeping all the uncertain elements at
    their baseline values. What type of diagram will the team use to display this
    information?
    A. Fishbone diagram
    B. Tornado diagram
    C. Influence diagram
    D. Process flowchart
17. Your project team is in the process of identifying project risks on your
    current project. The team has the option to use all of the following tools and
    techniques to diagram some of these potential risks except for which one?
    A. Ishikawa diagram
    B. Decision tree diagram
    C. Process flowchart
    D. Influence diagram
18. All of the following statements are true regarding the RBS except for which
    one?
    A. The RBS is contained in the risk management plan.
    B. It describes risk categories, which are a systematic way to identify risks
       and provide a foundation for understanding for everyone involved on the
       project.
    C. The lowest level of the RBS can be used as a checklist, which is a tool
       and technique of the Identify Risks process.
    D. The RBS is similar to the WBS in that the lowest levels of both are easily
       assigned to a responsible party or owner.
19. Your team has identified the risks on the project and determined their risk
    score. The team is in the midst of determining what strategies to put in place
    should the risks occur. After some discussion, the team members have
    determined that the risk of losing their network administrator is a risk they'll
    just deal with if and when it occurs. Although they think it's a possibility and
    the impact would be significant, they've decided to simply deal with it after
    the fact. Which of the following is true regarding this question?
    A. This is a negative response strategy.
    B. This is a positive response strategy.
    C. This is a response strategy for either positive or negative risk known as
       contingency planning.
    D. This is a response strategy for either positive or negative risks known as
       passive acceptance.
20. All of the following are true regarding the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
    process except which one?
    A. Probability and impact and expert interviews are used to help correct
       biases that occur in the data you've gathered during this process.
    B. The probability and impact matrix is used during this process to assign
       red, yellow, and green conditions to risks.
    C. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is an easy method of determining risk
       probability and impact and usually takes a good deal of time to perform.
    D. Risk urgency assessment is a tool and technique of this process used to
       determine which risks need near-term response plans.
CHAPTER 7
Planning Project Resources
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE PLANNING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 5: Develop the human resource management plan by defining
   the roles and responsibilities of the project team members in order to
   create a project organizational structure and provide guidance
   regarding how resources will be assigned and managed.
    Task 7: Develop the procurement management plan based on the
   project scope, budget, and schedule, in order to ensure that the required
   project resources will be available.
    Task 8: Develop the quality management plan and define the quality
   standards for the project and its products, based on the project scope,
   risks, and requirements, in order to prevent the occurrence of defects
   and control the cost of quality.
    Task 11: Present the project management plan to the relevant
   stakeholders according to applicable policies and procedures in order to
   obtain approval to proceed with project execution.
    Knowledge and Skills:
       Contract types and selection criteria
       Estimation tools and techniques
       Human resource planning
       Procurement planning
       Quality management planning
We're closing in on finishing up the Planning group processes. We're at a place
where we need to talk about some processes that aren't necessarily related to
each other but need to be completed before you can construct the project
schedule and budget. So, we'll start out this chapter by discussing resources.
All projects require resources. Some may require materials or goods, but all
projects require human resources to perform the activities to bring them to
projects require human resources to perform the activities to bring them to
completion. We'll discuss the Plan Procurement Management process, which
deals with the goods and services procurements and then move on to Plan
Human Resource Management, where you will develop the staffing management
plan. This plan will help guide you later when acquiring your project team
members in the Executing processes.
We'll wrap up the chapter with the Plan Quality Management process. This
process focuses on determining the quality standards that are necessary for the
project and for documenting how you'll go about meeting them. Let's get going.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Procurement Planning
Plan Procurement Management is a process of identifying what goods or
services you're going to purchase from outside the organization and which needs
the project team can meet. Part of what you'll accomplish in this process is
determining whether you should purchase the goods or services and, if so, how
much, when, and from which sellers. Keep in mind that I'm discussing the
procurement from the buyer's perspective, because this is the approach used in
the PMBOK(R) Guide.
The Plan Procurement Management process can influence the project schedule,
and the project schedule can influence this process. For example, the availability
of a contractor or special-order materials might have a significant impact on the
schedule. Conversely, your organization's business cycle might have an impact
on the Plan Procurement Management process if the organization is dependent
on seasonal activity. The Estimate Activity Resources process can also be
influenced by this process, as can make-or-buy decisions (I'll get to those
shortly).
  You need to perform each process in the Project Procurement Management
  Knowledge Area (beginning with Plan Procurement Management and
  ending with Close Procurements) for each product or service that you're
  buying outside the organization. If you're procuring all your resources from
  within the organization, the only process you'll perform in this Knowledge
  Area is the Plan Procurement Management process.

Sometimes, you'll procure all the materials and resources for your project from a
vendor. In cases like these, the vendor will have a project manager assigned to
the project. Your organization might have an internal project manager assigned
as well to act as the conduit between your company and the vendor and to
provide information and monitor your organization's deliverables. When this
happens, the vendor or contracting company is responsible for fulfilling all the
project management processes as part of the contract. In the case of an
outsourced project, the seller--also known as the vendor, supplier, or contractor
--manages the project and the buyer becomes the stakeholder. If you're hiring a
vendor, don't forget to consider permits or professional licenses that might be
required for the type of work you need them to perform.
Several inputs are needed when planning for purchases. You'll look at them next.

Plan Procurement Management Inputs
The Plan Procurement Management process has nine inputs:
   Project management plan
   Requirements documentation
   Risk register
   Activity resource requirements
   Project schedule
   Activity cost estimates
   Stakeholder register
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The important component of the project management plan for this process is the
scope baseline. You will recall that the scope baseline includes the project scope
statement that describes the need for the project and lists the deliverables and the
acceptance criteria for the product or service of the project. Obviously, you'll
want to consider these when thinking about procuring goods and services. You'll
also want to consider the constraints (issues such as availability and timing of
funds, availability of resources, delivery dates, and vendor availability) and
assumptions (issues such as reliability of the vendor, assuming availability of
key resources, and adequate stakeholder involvement). The product scope
description is included in the project scope statement as well and might alert you
to special considerations (services, technical requirements, and skills) needed to
create the project's product.
As part of the scope baseline, the WBS and WBS dictionary identify the
deliverables and describe the work required for each element of the WBS.
The risk register, which includes risk-related contract decisions, will guide you
in determining the types of services or goods needed for risk management. For
example, the transference strategy might require the purchase of insurance. You
should review each of these elements when determining which goods and
services will be performed within the project and which will be purchased.
Marketplace conditions are the key element of enterprise environmental factors
you should consider for this process. The organization's guidelines and
organizational policies (including any formal procurement policies), along with
the organization's supplier system that contains prequalified sellers, are the
elements of the organizational process assets you should pay attention to here.




  Many organizations have procurement departments that are responsible for
  procuring goods and services and writing and managing contracts. Some
  organizations also require that all contracts be reviewed by their legal
  department prior to signing. These are organizational process assets that you
  should consider when you need to procure goods and services.

It's important for the project manager to understand organizational policies
because they might impact many of the Planning processes, including the
procurement planning processes. For example, the organization might have
purchasing approval processes that must be followed. Perhaps orders for goods
or services that exceed certain dollar amounts need different levels of approval.
As the project manager, you need to be aware of policies like this so you're
certain you can execute the project smoothly. It's frustrating to find out later that
you should have followed a certain process or policy and now, because you
didn't, you've got schedule delays or worse. You could consider using the
"Sin now, ask forgiveness later" technique in extreme emergencies, but you
didn't hear that from me. (By the way, that's not a technique that's authorized by
the PMBOK(R) Guide.)
The project manager and the project team will be responsible for coordinating all
the organizational interfaces for the project, including technical, human
resources, purchasing, and finance. It will serve you well to understand the
policies and politics involved in each of these areas in your organization.




  I previously worked for an agency within state government and we were
  steeped in policy. (A government organization steeped in policy? Go figure!)
  It was so steeped in policy that we had to request the funds for large projects
  at least two years in advance. There were mounds and mounds of request
  forms, justification forms, approval forms, routing forms--you get the idea.
  My point is, if you miss one of the forms or don't fill out the information
  correctly, you can set your project back by a minimum of a year, if not two.
  Then once the money is awarded, there are more forms to fill out and
  policies to follow. Again, if you don't follow the policies correctly, you can
  jeopardize future project funds. Many organizations have a practice of not
  giving you all the project money up front in one lump sum. In other words,
  you must meet major milestones or complete a project phase before they'll
  fund your next phase. Know what your organizational policies are well
  ahead of time. Talk to the people who can walk you through the process and
  ask them to check your work to avoid surprises.

Keep in mind that if you are a seller, you may be managing the sale of your
goods or services as a project. If that's the case, you will be following all of the
processes in all of the Knowledge Areas and will want to assure that you
thoroughly understand the terms and conditions of the procurement documents
(contracts, purchase orders, statement of work, and so on) associated with the
(contracts, purchase orders, statement of work, and so on) associated with the
project.
Teaming agreements are not an official input of any of the processes. However,
teaming agreements by themselves are an input to the Planning process group.
Teaming agreements are contractual agreements between multiple parties that
are forming a partnership or joint venture to work on the project. Teaming
agreements are often used when two or more vendors form a partnership to work
together on a particular project. If teaming agreements are used on the project,
typically the scope of work, requirements for competition, buyer and seller roles,
and other important project concerns should be predefined.
Be aware that when teaming agreements are in force on a project, the planning
processes are significantly impacted. For example, the teaming agreement
predefines the scope of work, and that means that elements such as the
requirements and the deliverables may change the completion dates, thereby
impacting the project schedule, or they may affect the project budget, quality,
human resources availability, procurement decisions, and so on.

Tools and Techniques for Plan Procurement Management
The Plan Procurement Management process consists of four tools and
techniques. They are make-or-buy analysis, expert judgment, market research,
and meetings. I've already covered expert judgment and meetings, so you'll look
at make-or-buy analysis followed by market research. We'll close out this topic
with a discussion of contract types. Contracts are not a tool and technique of this
process, but they are a mechanism you might use to conduct business with
vendors.

Make-or-Buy Analysis
The main decision you're trying to get to in make-or-buy analysis is whether it's
more cost effective to buy the products and services or more cost effective for
the organization to produce the goods and services needed for the project. Costs
should include both direct costs (in other words, the actual cost to purchase the
product or service) and indirect costs, such as the salary of the manager
overseeing the purchase process or ongoing maintenance costs. Costs don't
necessarily mean the cost to purchase. In make-or-buy analysis, you might
weigh the cost of leasing items against the cost of buying them. For example,
perhaps your project requires using a specialized piece of hardware that you
know will be outdated by the end of the project. In a case like this, leasing might
be a better option so that when the project is ready to be implemented, a newer
version of the hardware can be tested and put into production during rollout.
Other considerations in make-or-buy analysis might include elements such as
capacity issues, skills, availability, and trade secrets. Strict control might be
needed for a certain process, and therefore, the process cannot be outsourced.
Perhaps your organization has the skills in-house to complete the project but
your current project list is so backlogged that you can't get to the new project for
months, so you need to bring in a vendor.
Make-or-buy analysis is considered a general management technique and
concludes with the decision to do one or the other.

Market Research
Market research can consist of a variety of methods to assist you or the team in
determining vendors and their capabilities, and experience. My first go-to is
using my favorite search engine. This can reveal information about experience,
market presence, customer reviews, and more. Conferences are my second
favorite method of discovering new vendors or new services from vendors I
know. I am generally concerned with a few key items when engaging vendor
services. First, I need to know their experience levels with my particular project
or industry. I also want to know the team members they are proposing for the
project and the depth and breadth of knowledge they have in the subject matter. I
want to interview them before they start work on the project and learn the
financial stability of the company.

Contract Types
A contract is a compulsory agreement between two or more parties and is used
to acquire products or services from outside the organization. Typically, money
is exchanged for the goods or services. Contracts are enforceable by law and
require an offer and an acceptance. Generally speaking, most organizations
require a more extensive approval process for contracts than for other types of
procurements. For example, contracts may require a signature from someone in
the legal department, an executive in the organization, the chief financial officer,
the procurement director, and the senior manager from the department that is
having the work performed.
There are different types of contracts for different purposes. The PMBOK(R)
Guide divides contracts into three categories:
   Fixed price
   Cost reimbursable
   Time and materials (T&M)
Within the fixed-price and cost-reimbursable categories are different types of
contracts. You'll look at each in the following sections. Keep in mind that
several factors will determine the type of contract you should use. The product
requirements (or service criteria) might drive the contract type. The market
conditions might drive availability and price--remember back in the dot-com era
when trying to hire anyone with programming skills was next to impossible?
Also, the amount of risk--for the seller, the buyer, and the project itself--will
help determine contract type.

  Exam Spotlight
  Contract types help determine the risk the buyer and seller will bear during
  the life of the contract. The project manager should take this into
  consideration when purchasing goods and services outside the organization
  and make certain it is in keeping with the risk attitudes of the organization
  and stakeholders. (We talked about this in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning.")
  There could always be an exam question or two regarding contract types, so
  spend some time getting familiar with them.


Fixed-Price Contracts
Fixed-price contracts can either set a specific, firm price for the goods or
services rendered (known as a firm fixed-price contract, or FFP contract) or
include incentives for meeting or exceeding certain contract deliverables.
Fixed-price contracts can be disastrous for both the buyer and the seller if the
scope of the project is not well defined or the scope changes dramatically. It's
important to have accurate, well-defined deliverables when you're using this type
of contract. Conversely, fixed-price contracts are relatively safe for both buyer
and seller when the original scope is well defined and remains unchanged. They
typically reap only small profits for the seller and force the contractor to work
productively and efficiently. This type of contract also minimizes cost and
quality uncertainty. For the exam, you should know three types of fixed-price
contracts:
Firm Fixed-Price (FFP) In the FFP contract, the buyer and seller agree on a
well-defined deliverable for a set price. The good news for the buyer is the price
never goes up. However, if the deliverables are not well defined, the buyer can
incur additional costs in the form of change orders. It's important that you clearly
describe the work to avoid additional cost.
In this kind of contract, the biggest risk is borne by the seller. The seller--or
contractor--must take great strides to assure they've covered their costs and will
make a comfortable profit on the transaction. The seller assumes the risks of
increasing costs, nonperformance, or other problems. However, to counter these
unforeseen risks, the seller builds in the cost of the risk to the contract price.
This is the most common type of contract and the most often used.
Fixed-Price Incentive Fee (FPIF) Fixed-price incentive fee (FPIF) contracts
are another type of fixed-price contract. The difference here is that the contract
includes an incentive--or bonus--for early completion or for some other agreed-
upon performance criterion that meets or exceeds contract specifications. The
criteria for early completion, or other performance enhancements, are typically
related to cost, schedule, or technical performance and must be spelled out in the
contract so both parties understand the terms and conditions. The fixed price,
much like the FFP, is set and never goes up. The seller assumes the risk for
completing the work no matter the cost.
Another aspect of fixed-price incentive fee contracts to consider is that some of
the risk is borne by the buyer, unlike the firm fixed-price contract where most of
the risk is borne by the seller. The buyer takes some risk, albeit minimal, by
offering the incentive to, for example, get the work done earlier. Suppose the
buyer would like the product delivered 30 days prior to when the seller thinks
they can deliver. In this case, the buyer assumes the risk for the early delivery
via the incentive.
Fixed-Price with Economic Price Adjustment (FP-EPA) There's one more
type of fixed-price contract, known as a fixed-price with economic price
adjustment (FP-EPA) contract. This contract allows for adjustments due to
changes in economic conditions such as cost increases or decreases, inflation,
and so on. These contracts are typically used when the project spans many years.
This type of contract protects both the buyer and seller from economic
conditions that are outside of their control.

  Exam Spotlight
  The economic adjustment section of an FP-EPA contract should be tied to a
  The economic adjustment section of an FP-EPA contract should be tied to a
  known financial index.


Cost-Reimbursable Contracts
Cost-reimbursable contracts are as the name implies. The allowable costs--
allowable is defined by the contract--associated with producing the goods or
services are charged to the buyer. All the costs the seller takes on during the
project are charged back to the buyer; therefore, the seller is reimbursed.
These contracts carry the highest risk to the buyer because the total costs are
uncertain. As problems arise, the buyer has to shell out even more money to
correct the problems. However, the advantage to the buyer with this type of
contract is that scope changes are easy to make and can be made as often as you
want--but it will cost you.
Cost-reimbursable contracts have a lot of uncertainty associated with them. The
contractor has little incentive to work efficiently or be productive. This type of
contract protects the contractor's profit because increasing costs are passed to the
buyer rather than taken out of profits, as would be the case with a fixed-price
contract. Be certain to audit your statements when using a contract like this so
that charges from some other project the vendor is working on don't accidentally
end up on your bill.
Cost-reimbursable contracts are used most often when the project scope contains
a lot of uncertainty, such as for cutting-edge projects and research and
development. They are also used for projects that have large investments early in
the project life. Incentives for completing early, or not so early, or meeting or
exceeding other performance criteria may be included in cost-reimbursable
contracts much like the FPIF. We'll look at four types of cost-reimbursable
contracts:
Cost Plus Fixed Fee (CPFF) Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contracts charge
back all allowable project costs to the buyer and include a fixed fee upon
completion of the contract. This is how the seller makes money on the deal; the
fixed fee portion is the seller's profit. The fee is always firm in this kind of
contract, but the costs are variable. The seller doesn't necessarily have a lot of
motivation to control costs with this type of contract, as you can imagine, and
one of the strongest motivators for completing the project is driven by the fixed
fee portion of the contract.
Cost Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) The next category of cost-reimbursable
contract is cost plus incentive fee (CPIF). This is the type of contract in which
the buyer reimburses the seller for the seller's allowable costs and includes an
incentive for meeting or exceeding the performance criteria laid out in the
contract. An incentive fee actually encourages better cost performance by the
seller, and a possibility of shared savings exists between the seller and buyer if
performance criteria are exceeded. The qualification for exceeded performance
must be written into the contract and agreed to by both parties, as should the
definition of allowable costs; the seller can possibly lose the incentive fee if
agreed-upon targets are not reached.
There is moderate risk for the buyer under the cost plus incentive fee contract,
and if well written, it can be more beneficial for both the seller and the buyer
than a cost-reimbursable contract.
Cost Plus Percentage of Cost (CPPC) In the cost plus percentage of cost
(CPPC) contract, the seller is reimbursed for allowable costs plus a fee that's
calculated as a percentage of the costs. The percentage is agreed upon
beforehand and documented in the contract. Because the fee is based on costs,
the fee is variable. The lower the costs, the lower the fee, so the seller doesn't
have a lot of motivation to keep costs low. This is not a commonly used contract
type.
Cost Plus Award Fee (CPAF) The cost plus award fee (CPAF) contract is the
riskiest of the cost plus contracts for the seller. In this contract, the seller will
recoup all the costs expended during the project but the award fee portion is
subject to the sole discretion of the buyer. The performance criteria for earning
the award is spelled out in the contract, but these criteria can be subjective and
the awards are not usually contestable.

Time and Materials (T&M) Contracts
Time and materials (T&M) contracts are a cross between fixed-price and cost-
reimbursable contracts. The full amount of the material costs is not known at the
time the contract is awarded. This resembles a cost-reimbursable contract
because the costs will continue to grow during the contract's life and are
reimbursable to the contractor. The buyer bears the biggest risk in this type of
contract.
T&M contracts can resemble fixed-price contracts when unit rates are used, for
example. Unit rates might be used to preset the rates of certain elements or
portions of the project. For example, a contracting agency might charge you
$150 per hour for a .NET programmer, or a leasing company might charge you
$150 per hour for a .NET programmer, or a leasing company might charge you
$2,000 per month for the hardware you're leasing during the testing phase of
your project. These rates are preset and agreed upon by the buyer and seller
ahead of time. T&M contracts are most often used when you need human
resources with specific skills and when you can quickly and precisely define the
scope of work needed for the project.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand the difference between fixed-price, cost-reimbursable, and time
  and materials contracts for the exam. Also know when each type of contract
  should be used, and know which party bears the most risk under each type of
  contract.


Plan Procurement Management Outputs
The Plan Procurement Management process consists of seven outputs. The first
is the procurement management plan. You've seen a few of the other
management plan outputs, so you're probably already ahead of me on this one.
But hold the phone--I'll be sure to touch on the important points. The other
outputs are the procurement statement of work, make-or-buy decisions,
procurement documents, source selection criteria, change requests, and project
documents updates.

Procurement Management Plan
The procurement management plan details how the procurement process will be
managed. The procurement management plan is based primarily on the project
scope, budget, and schedule and it ensures that the resources you'll need
throughout the project are available at the right time. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, it includes the following information:
   The types of contract to use
   The authority of the project team in the procurement process
   How the procurement process will be integrated with other project processes
   Where to find standard procurement documents (provided your organization
   uses standard documents)
   How many vendors or contractors are involved and how they'll be managed
   How the procurement process will be coordinated with other project
   processes, such as performance reporting and scheduling
   How the constraints and assumptions might be impacted by purchasing
   How independent estimates and make-or-buy decisions will be used during
   these processes and in developing activity resource estimates and the project
   schedule
   Coordinating scheduled dates in the contract with the project schedule
   How multiple vendors or contractors will be managed
   The coordination of purchasing lead times with the development of the
   project schedule
   The schedule dates that are determined in each contract
   Identification of prequalified sellers (if known)
   Risk management issues
   Procurement metrics for managing contracts and for evaluating sellers
The procurement management plan, like all the other management plans, is a
component of the project management plan.



        Real World Scenario

 Streamlining Purchases
 Russ is a project manager for a real estate development company in
 Hometown, USA. Recently he transferred to the office headquarters to
 develop a process for streamlining purchases and purchase requests for the
 construction teams in the field. His first step was to develop a procurement
 management plan for the construction managers to use when ordering
 materials and equipment. Russ decided the procurement management plan
 could be used as a template for all new projects. That meant the project
 managers in the field didn't have to write their own procurement
 management plans when starting new construction projects. They could use
 the template, which had many of the fields prepopulated with corporate
 headquarters processes, and then they could fill in the information specific to
  headquarters processes, and then they could fill in the information specific to
  their project. For example, the Types of Contracts section states that all
  equipment and materials purchases require fixed-price contracts. When
  human resources are needed for the project on a contract basis, a T&M
  contract should be used with the unit rates stated in the contract. A "not to
  exceed" amount should also be written into the contract so that there are no
  surprises as to the total amount of dollars the company will be charged for
  the resources.


Procurement Statement of Work
A procurement statement of work (SOW) contains the details of the procurement
item in clear, concise terms. It includes the following elements:
   The project objectives
   A description of the work of the project and any postproject operational
   support needed
   Concise specifications of the products or services required
   The project schedule, time period of services, and work location
The procurement SOW might be prepared by either the buyer or the seller.
Buyers might prepare the SOW and give it to the sellers, who in turn rewrite it
so that they can price the work properly. If the buyer does not know how to
prepare an SOW or the seller would be better at creating the SOW because of
their expertise about the product or service, the seller might prepare it and then
give it to the buyer to review. In either case, the procurement statement of work
is developed from the project scope statement and the WBS and WBS
dictionary.
The seller uses the SOW to determine whether they are able to produce the
goods or services as specified. In addition, it wouldn't hurt to include a copy of
the WBS with the SOW. Any information the seller can use to properly price the
goods or services helps both sides understand what's needed and how it will be
provided.
Projects might require some or all of the work of the project to be provided by a
vendor. The Plan Procurement Management process determines whether goods
or services should be produced within the organization or procured from outside,
and if goods or services are procured from outside, it describes what will be
outsourced and what kind of contract to use and then documents the information
outsourced and what kind of contract to use and then documents the information
in the SOW and procurement management plan. The SOW will undergo
progressive elaboration as you proceed through the procurement processes.
There will likely be several iterations of the SOW before you get to the actual
contract award.




  You used an SOW during the Develop Project Charter process. You can use
  that SOW as the procurement SOW during this process if you're contracting
  out the entire project. Otherwise, you can use just those portions of the SOW
  that describe the work you've contracted.


Make-or-Buy Decisions
The make-or-buy decision is a document that outlines the decisions made during
the process regarding which goods and/or services will be produced by the
organization and which will be purchased. This can include any number of
items, including services, products, insurance policies, performance, and
performance bonds.

Procurement Documents
Procurement documents are used to solicit vendors and suppliers to bid on your
procurement needs. You're probably familiar with some of the titles of
procurement documents. They might be called request for proposal (RFP),
request for information (RFI), invitation for bid (IFB), request for quotation
(RFQ), and so on.
Procurement documents should clearly state the description of the work
requested, they should include the contract SOW, and they should explain how
sellers should format and submit their responses. These documents are prepared
by the buyer to ensure as accurate and complete a response as possible from all
potential bidders. Any special provisions or contractual needs should be spelled
out as well. For example, many organizations have data concerning their
marketing policies, new product introductions planned for the next few years,
trade secrets, and so on. The vendor will have access to this private information,
and to guarantee that they maintain confidentiality, you should require that they
sign a nondisclosure agreement.
A few terms that you should understand are used during this process; they are
usually used interchangeably even though they have distinct definitions. When
your decision is going to be made primarily on price, the terms bid and quotation
are used, as in IFB or RFQ. When considerations other than price (such as
technology or specific approaches to the project) are the deciding factors, the
term proposal is used, as in RFP. These terms are used interchangeably in
practice, even though they have specific meanings in the PMBOK(R) Guide.




  In my organization, all solicitation requests are submitted as RFPs, even
  though our primary decision factor is price.




  Exam Spotlight
  Understand the difference between bid and/or quotation and proposal for the
  exam. Bids or quotations are used when price is the only deciding factor
  among bidders. Proposals are used when there are considerations other than
  price.

Procurement documents are posted or advertised according to your
organizational policies. This might include ads in newspapers and magazines or
ads/posts on the Internet.

Source Selection Criteria
The term source selection criteria refers to the method your organization will
use to choose a vendor from among the proposals you receive. The criteria might
be subjective or objective. In some cases, price might be the only criterion, and
that means the vendor that submits the lowest bid will win the contract. You
should use purchase price (which should include costs associated with purchase
price, such as delivery and setup charges) as the sole criterion only when you
have multiple qualified sellers from which to choose.
Other projects might require more extensive criteria than price alone. In this
case, you might use scoring models as well as rating models, or you might use
purely subjective methods of selection. I described an example weighted-scoring
method in Chapter 2, "Creating the Project Charter." You can use this method to
score vendor proposals.
Sometimes, the source selection criteria are made public in the procurement
process so that vendors know exactly what you want in a vendor. This approach
has pros and cons. If the organization typically makes known the source
selection criteria, you'll find that almost all the vendors that bid on the project
meet every criterion you've outlined (in writing, that is). When it comes time to
perform the contract, however, you might encounter some surprises. The vendor
might have done a great job of writing the bid based on your criteria, but in
reality they don't know how to put the criteria into practice. On the other hand,
having all the criteria publicly known beforehand gives ground to great
discussion points and discovery later in the procurement processes.
The following list includes some of the criteria you can consider using for
evaluating proposals and bids:
   Comprehension and understanding of the needs of the project as documented
   in the contract SOW
   Cost, up front as well as total cost of ownership over the life of the product
   or service
   Technical ability of vendor and its proposed team
   Technical approach
   Risk
   Experience on projects of similar size and scope, including references
   Project management approach
   Management approach
   Business type and size
   Financial stability and capacity
   Production capacity
   Warranty or guarantee
   Reputation, references, and past performance
   Intellectual and proprietary rights
You could include many of these in a weighted scoring model and rate each
You could include many of these in a weighted scoring model and rate each
vendor on how well they responded to these issues.




 When considering business type and size, also consider whether the business
 is a small business, a disadvantaged or minority-owned business, or a
 women-owned business. Government organizations in particular may require
 awarding a certain percentage of procurements to businesses that fall within
 these categories.




        Real World Scenario

 The Customer Relationship Management System
 Response
 Ryan Hunter is preparing the source selection criteria for an RFP for a
 customer relationship management (CRM) software system. After meeting
 with key stakeholders and other project managers in the company who've
 had experience working on projects of this size and scope, he devised the
 first draft of the source selection criteria. A partial list is as follows:
     Successful bidder's response must detail how business processes (as
     documented in the RFP page 24) will be addressed with their solution.
     Successful bidder must document their project management approach,
     which must follow the PMBOK(R)Guide project practices. They must
     provide an example project management plan based on a previous
     project experience of similar size and scope to the one documented in the
     RFP.
     Successful bidder must document previous successful implementations,
     including integration with existing organization's PBX and network
     operating system, and must provide references.
     Successful bidder must provide financial statements for the previous
      three years.


Change Requests
As you perform the Plan Procurement Management process, the project
management plan, including its subsidiary plans, may require changes due to
vendor availability, vendor capability, or the vendor's proposed solution, as well
as cost and quality considerations. Change requests must be processed through
the Perform Integrated Change Control process that we'll discuss in Chapter 10,
"Measuring and Controlling Project Performance."

Project Documents Updates
We've seen this output several times before. Some of the documents that may
require updating as a result of the procurement processes are the requirements
document, the requirements traceability matrix, the risk register, and others as
needed.
Now we'll switch our focus to the human resource needs for the project and
discuss the Plan Human Resource Management process next.

Developing the Human Resource Management
Plan
All projects require human resources, from the smallest project to the largest.
The Plan Human Resource Management process documents the roles and
responsibilities of individuals or groups for various project elements and then
documents the reporting relationships for each. Reporting relationships can be
assigned to groups as well as to individuals, and the groups or individuals might
be internal or external to the organization or a combination of both. Plan
Communications Management goes hand in hand with Plan Human Resource
Management because the organizational structure affects the way
communications are carried out among project participants and the project
interfaces.
When developing the human resource management plan, the only output of this
process, you'll have to consider factors such as the availability of resources, skill
levels, training needs, and more. Each of these factors can have an impact on the
project cost, schedule, and quality and may introduce risks not previously
considered.
Plan Human Resource Management Inputs
Plan Human Resource Management has four inputs: project management plan,
activity resource requirements, enterprise environmental factors, and
organizational process assets. We'll look at the key elements of each of these
next.

Project Management Plan
The project management plan consists of many of the subsidiary plans we have
already discussed. During this process, you might want to consider several of
them, including the stakeholder management plan and the stakeholder register.
These documents describe the communication needs of the stakeholders.
Another document to consider is the risk register. It lists the risk owners and
their responsibility, so be certain to check this document when outlining roles
and responsibilities. The change control and configuration management plans are
important to understand as well as the project life cycle processes you'll use in
each phase of the project.

Activity Resource Requirements
Human resources are needed to perform and complete the activities outlined in
the activity resource requirements output of the Estimate Activity Resources
process. During the Plan Human Resource Management process, you'll define
those resource needs in further detail.

Key Enterprise Environmental Factors
Enterprise environmental factors play a key role in determining human resource
roles and responsibilities. The type of organization you work in, the reporting
relationships, and the technical skills needed to complete the project work are a
few of the factors you should consider when developing the staffing
management plan, which is a subset of the human resource management plan.
Here is a list of some of the factors you should consider during this process:
Organizational Factors Consider what departments or organization units will
have a role in the project, the interactions between and among departments,
organizational culture, and the level of formality among these working
relationships.
Existing Human Resources and Marketplace Conditions The existing base
of human resources that are employed by, or available to, the organization
should be considered when developing the human resource management plan.
Marketplace conditions will dictate the availability of resources you're acquiring
outside the organization and their going rate.
Personnel Policies Be certain you have an understanding of the personnel
policies in the organization regarding hiring, firing, and tasking employees.
Other considerations include holiday schedules, leave time policies, and so on.
Technical Factors Consider the types of specialized skills needed to complete
the work of the project (for example, programming languages, engineering
skills, knowledge of pharmaceuticals) and any technical considerations during
handoff from phase to phase or from project completion to production.
Interpersonal Factors Interpersonal factors have to do with potential project
team members. You should consider their experience, skills, current reporting
relationships, cultural considerations, and perceptions regarding their levels of
trust and respect for coworkers and superiors.
Location and Logistics Consider where the project team is physically located
and whether they are all located together or at separate facilities (or cities or
countries).
Political Factors Political factors involve your stakeholders. Consider the
amount of influence the stakeholders have, their interactions and influence with
each other, and the power they can exert over the project.
In addition to these factors, you should consider constraints that pertain to
project teams, including the following:
Organizational Structures Organizational structures can be constraints. For
example, a strong matrix organization provides the project manager with much
more authority and power than the weak matrix organization does. Functional
organizations typically do not empower their project managers with the proper
authority to carry out a project. If you work in a functional organization as I do,
it's important to be aware that you'll likely face power struggles with other
managers and, in some cases, a flat-out lack of cooperation. Don't tell them I
said this, but functional managers tend to be territorial and aren't likely to give
up control easily. Here's the best advice I have for you in this case:
   Establish open communications early in the project.
   Include all the functional managers with key roles in important decisions.
   Get the support of your project sponsor to empower you (as the project
   manager) with as much authority as possible. It's important that the sponsor
   makes it clear to the other managers that their cooperation on project
   activities is expected.
Collective Bargaining Agreements Collective bargaining agreements are
actually contractual obligations of the organization to the employees. Collective
bargaining is typically associated with unions and organized employee
associations. Other organized employee associations or groups might require
specialized reporting relationships as well--especially if they involve
contractual obligations. You will not likely be involved in the negotiations of
collective bargaining agreements, but if you have an opportunity to voice
opinions regarding employee duties or agreements that would be helpful to your
project or future projects, by all means take it.
Economic Conditions These conditions refer to the availability of funds for
the project team to perform training, hire staff, and travel. If funds are severely
limited and your project requires frequent trips to other locations, you have an
economic constraint on your hands.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, understand the key environmental factors (organizational
  factors, existing human resources and market conditions, personnel policies,
  technical factors, interpersonal factors, location and logistics, and political
  factors) and the three constraints (organizational structures, collective
  bargaining agreements, and economic conditions) that can impact the Plan
  Human Resource Management process.


Organizational Process Assets
You should consider four primary elements of the organizational process assets
input during this process. They are organizational processes and standardized
role descriptions, templates and checklists, historical information, and escalation
procedures for the team and the organization as a whole.
The term templates, in this case, refers to documentation such as project
descriptions, organizational charts, performance appraisals, and the
organization's conflict management process. Checklists might include elements
such as training requirements, project roles and responsibilities, skills and
competency levels, and safety issues.
  Exam Spotlight
  Using templates and checklists is one way to ensure that you don't miss any
  key responsibilities when planning the project and will help reduce the
  amount of time spent on project planning.


Plan Human Resource Management Tools and Techniques
The Plan Human Resource Management process consists of five tools and
techniques. Remember that your goal is to produce the human resource
management plan output of this process that includes a description of the team's
roles and responsibilities, organizational charts, and a staffing management plan.
You'll see that the tools and techniques of this process directly contribute to the
components of the human resource management plan. They are organization
charts and position descriptions, networking, organizational theory, expert
judgment, and meetings. We'll look at the first three of these tools and
techniques in the following sections.

Organization Charts and Position Descriptions
We've all seen an organization chart. It usually documents your name, your
position, your boss, your boss's boss, your boss's boss's boss, and so on. The
important point to note about this tool and technique is that this information
might be presented in one of three ways:
Hierarchical Charts Hierarchical charts, like a WBS, are designed in a top-
down format. For example, the organization or department head is at the top, the
management employees who report to the organization head are next, and so on,
descending down the structure. An organization breakdown structure (OBS) is a
form of organization chart that shows the departments, work units, or teams
within an organization (rather than individuals) and their respective work
packages.
A resource breakdown structure (RBS) is another type of hierarchical chart that
breaks down the work of the project according to the types of resources needed.
(RBS also stands for risk breakdown structure, as you learned in the previous
chapter.) For example, you might have programmers, database analysts, and
network analysts as resource types on the RBS. However, they won't all
necessarily work on the project team. You might have programmers reporting to
the project team, the finance department, and the customer service department,
for example. An RBS can help track project costs because it ties to the
organization's accounting system. Let's suppose you have programming
resources in the RBS at the junior, advanced, and senior levels. Each of these
levels of programmer has an average hourly salary recorded in the accounting
system that makes it easy for you to track project costs. Ten senior programmers,
14 advanced programmers, and 25 junior-level programmers are easy to
calculate and track.
Matrix-Based Charts Matrix-based charts are used to show the type of
resources and the responsibility they have on the project. Many times a project
manager will use a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) to graphically
display this information. A RAM is usually depicted as a chart with resource
names listed in each row (for example, programmers, testers, and trainers) and
project phases or WBS elements listed as the columns. (It can also be
constructed using team member names.) Indicators in the intersections show
where the resources are needed. However, the level of detail is up to you. One
RAM might be developed showing only project phases; another RAM might
show level-two WBS elements for a complex project, with more RAMs
subsequently produced for the additional WBS levels; or a RAM might be
constructed with level-three elements only.

  Exam Spotlight
  The RAM relates the OBS to the WBS to ensure that every component of the
  work of the project is assigned to an individual.

Table 7.1 shows a type of RAM called an RACI chart for a software
development team. In this example, the RACI chart shows the level of
accountability each of the participants has on the project. The letters in the
acronym RACI are the designations shown in the chart:
   R = Responsible for performing the work
   A = Accountable, the one who is responsible for producing the deliverable or
   work package and approves or signs off on the work
   C = Consult, someone who has input to the work or decisions
   I = Inform, someone who must be informed of the decisions or results
Table 7.1 Sample RACI* chart, a type of RAM
                                          Olga Rae Jantira Nirmit
                          Design          R    A C         C
                          Test            I    R C         A
                          Implement C            I      R    A
*R = Responsible, A = Accountable, C = Consult, I = Inform

In this example, Olga is responsible for design, meaning she creates the software
programming design document, but Rae is accountable and is the one who must
make sure the work of the project is completed and approved. This is a great tool
because it shows at a glance not only where a resource is working but what that
resource's responsibility level is on the project.
Keep in mind that this is only one type of RAM chart. You may choose to use
other designations in place of R-A-C-I.
Text-Oriented Formats Text-oriented formats are used when you have a
significant amount of detail to record. These are also called position descriptions
or role-responsibility-authority forms. These forms detail (as the name implies)
the role, responsibility, and authority of the resource, and they make great
templates to use for future projects.

Networking
Networking in this process doesn't refer to the technical kind of networking with
servers, switches, and fiber. It means human resource networking; that is, you
know someone who knows someone and you can share information, learn new
techniques, and interact with each other. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide,
several types of networking activities exist, including proactive communication,
lunch meetings (my personal favorite), informal conversations (ah, the
information you learn by hanging out at the espresso machine), and trade
conferences (another favorite because they get you out of the office).
Networking might help when you have a specific resource need on the project
but can't seem to locate someone with that set of skills.

Organizational Theory
Organizational theory refers to all the theories that attempt to explain what
makes people, teams, and work units perform the way they do. I'll talk more
about motivation techniques (which are a type of organizational theory) in
Chapter 8, "Developing the Project Team." Organizational theory improves the
probability that planning will be effective and helps shorten the amount of time
it takes to produce the Plan Human Resource Management outputs.

Plan Human Resource Management Outputs
The Plan Human Resource Management process has one output, the human
resource management plan. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the human
resource management plan, a subsidiary or component of the project
management plan, documents how human resources should be defined, staffed,
managed and controlled, and released from the project when their activities are
complete. It also helps in establishing an effective project team by defining the
types of resources needed during the project, documenting when they're needed,
and providing direction regarding how the resources should be managed.
This output has three components:
    Roles and responsibilities
    Project organizational charts
    Staffing management plan
The human resource management plan will help you to create the project
organizational structure. This structure will be documented using project
organizational charts. I've already covered this in detail, so we'll look at the other
two components of the human resource management plan now.

Roles and Responsibilities
This output is the list of roles and responsibilities for the project team. It can take
the form of the RAM or RACI chart I talked about earlier, or the roles and
responsibilities can be recorded in text format. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, the following are the key elements you should include in the roles and
responsibilities documentation:
Role Describes the parts of the project for which the individuals or teams are
accountable. This should also include a description of authority levels,
responsibilities, and what work is not included as part of the role.
Authority Describes the amount of authority the resource has to make
decisions, dictate direction, and approve the work.
Responsibility Describes the work the person is required to perform to
complete the project activities.
Competency Describes the skills and ability needed to perform the project
activities.

Staffing Management Plan
The staffing management plan is a part of the human resource management plan
that documents how and when human resources are introduced to the project and
the criteria for releasing them. As with the other management plans I've
discussed, the level and amount of detail contained in this plan are up to you. It
can be formal or informal, and it can contain lots of detail or only high-level
detail.
The staffing management plan should be updated throughout the project.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, you should consider several elements for
inclusion in the staffing management plan, including the following:
Staff Acquisition This describes how team members are acquired (from inside
or outside the organization), where they're located, and the costs for specific
skills and expertise. I'll talk more about staff acquisition in Chapter 8.
Resource Calendars This describes the time frames in which the resources
will be needed on the project and when the recruitment process should begin.
The resources can be described individually, by teams, or by function
(programmers, testers, and so on). Many staffing management plans use a
resource histogram. This is usually drawn in chart form, with project time along
the horizontal axis and hours needed along the vertical axis. Figure 7.1 is an
example of a histogram that shows the hours needed for an asphalt crew on a
construction project.
Figure 7.1 Sample resource histogram

 Exam Spotlight
 Project calendars are used in the Develop Schedule process we talked about
 in Chapter 4, "Creating the Project Schedule." They describe the working
 and nonworking days (or shifts) for the entire project, including company
 holidays and weekends. Resource calendars describe availability for
 individuals or for categories or groups of resources. For example, a resource
 calendar shows planned vacation time for an individual or nonworking time
 for a category of resources.

Staff Release Plan Attention should be given to how you'll release project
team members at the end of their assignments. You should have reassignment
procedures in place to move folks on to other projects or back to assignments
they had before the project. This reduces overall project costs because you pay
them only for the time they work and then release them. You won't have a
tendency to simply keep them busy between assignments or until the end of their
scheduled end date if they complete their activities early. Having these
procedures in place will also improve morale because everyone will be clear
about how reassignment will occur. This should reduce anxiety about their
opportunities for employment at the conclusion of the project or their
assignments.
Training Needs This describes any training plans needed for team members
who don't have the required skills or abilities to perform project tasks.
Recognition and Rewards This describes the systems you'll use to reward and
reinforce desired behavior. I'll talk more about recognition and rewards in
Chapter 8.
Compliance If your project involves regulations that must be met or
contractual obligations (such as union contracts), the staffing management plan
should detail these and any human resource policies the organization has in place
that deal with compliance issues.
Safety Any safety policies and procedures that are applicable to the project or
industry you work in should be included in the staffing management plan.

  Exam Spotlight
  Be sure you understand the roles and responsibilities and the staffing
  management elements of the human resource management plan for the
  exam.

In the next section, we'll shift our focus once again but to a completely new
topic. We'll look at quality and its effect on the project planning processes.

Quality Planning
Quality is affected by the triple constraints (project scope, schedule, and cost),
and quality concerns are found in all projects. Quality typically defines whether
stakeholder expectations were met. Being on time and on budget is one thing; if
you deliver the wrong product or an inferior product, on time and on budget
suddenly don't mean much.
The Plan Quality Management process is concerned with targeting quality
standards that are relevant to the project at hand and devising a plan to meet and
satisfy those standards. The quality management plan is an output of this process
that describes how the quality policy will be implemented by the project
management team during the course of the project. Another key output of this
process is the process improvement plan, which documents the actions for
analyzing processes to ultimately increase customer value. Everything discussed
in this section, including the inputs and tools and techniques of this process, will
be used to help develop these two primary outputs.

  Exam Spotlight
  Plan Quality Management is a key process performed during the Planning
  processes and when developing the project management plan. It should be
  performed in conjunction with other Planning processes. According to the
  PMBOK(R) Guide, quality should be planned, designed, and built in--not just
  inspected.


Plan Quality Management Inputs
The Plan Quality Management process has several inputs:
   Project management plan
   Stakeholder register
   Risk register
   Requirements documentation
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
One of the key components of the project management plan is the scope
baseline. We talked about the scope baseline in Chapter 3, "Developing the
Project Scope Statement"; recall that the scope baseline consists of the approved
project scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. For the exam,
remember that the scope baseline is based on the project scope and requirements.
The other baselines you should consider are the schedule baseline, which
includes the project and activity start and finish dates, and the cost baseline.
The two key elements I'll cover regarding inputs are standards and regulations,
which are part of the enterprise environmental factors input, and the quality
policy, which is part of the organizational process assets input.

Standards and Regulations
The project manager should consider any standards, regulations, guidelines, or
rules that exist concerning the work of the project when writing the quality plan.
A standard is something that's approved by a recognized body and that employs
rules, guidelines, or characteristics that should be followed. For example, the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) has established standards for web page
designers that outline alternative viewing options of web pages for people with
disabilities. PMI(R) guidelines regarding project management are another example
of standards.
Standards aren't legally mandatory, but it's a good idea to follow them. Many
organizations (or industries) have standards in place that are proven best practice
techniques. Disregarding accepted standards can have significant consequences.
For example, if you're creating a new software product that ignores standard
protocols, your customers won't be able to use it. Standards can be set by the
organization, independent bodies, organizations such as the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), and so on. ISO develops and publishes
international standards on various subjects, including mathematics, information
technology, railway engineering, construction materials and building, and much
more. There are more than 160 countries that have participating members (one
member per country) in ISO's national standards institutes. ISO is not a
government organization, but it works closely with government and the private
sector to establish standards in many disciplines to meet the needs of business
and society. You can find out more about ISO at www.iso.org. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, the Project Quality Management Knowledge Area is designed
to be in alignment with the ISO.
A regulation is mandatory. Regulations are almost always imposed by
governments or institutions such as the American Medical Association.
Organizations might have their own self-imposed regulations that you should be
aware of as well. Regulations require strict adherence, particularly in the case of
government-imposed regulations, or stiff penalties and fines could result--
maybe even jail time if the offense is serious enough. Hmm, it might be tough to
practice project management from behind bars--not a recommended career
move.
If possible, it's a good idea to include information from the quality policy (I'll
cover this in the next section) and any standards, regulations, or guidelines that
affect the project in the quality management plan. If it's not possible to include
this information in the quality management plan, then at least refer to the
information and where it can be found. It's the project management team's
responsibility to be certain all stakeholders are aware of and understand the
policy issues and standards or regulations that might impact the project.
policy issues and standards or regulations that might impact the project.




  Contracts might have certain provisions for quality requirements that you
  should account for in the quality management plan. If the quality
  management plan was written prior to the Plan Procurement
  Management process, you should update the quality management plan to
  reflect it.


Quality Policy
The quality policy is part of the organizational process assets input. It's a
guideline published by executive management that describes what quality
policies should be adopted for projects the company undertakes. It's up to the
project manager to understand this policy and incorporate any predetermined
company guidelines into the quality plan. If a quality policy does not exist, it's
up to the project management team to create one for the project.

  Exam Spotlight
  It is the responsibility of the project management team to ensure that all key
  project stakeholders are aware of and have received copies of the quality
  policy.


Tools and Techniques for Plan Quality Management
The Plan Quality Management process has eight tools and techniques used to
help construct the quality management plan:
   Cost-benefit analysis
   Cost of quality
   Seven Basic Quality Tools
   Benchmarking
   Design of experiments
   Statistical sampling
   Additional quality planning tools
   Meetings
Make sure you understand each of these tools and techniques and its purpose for
the exam. We'll take a look at them now with the exception of meetings.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
You've seen the cost-benefit analysis technique before in the Initiating process
group. In the case of quality management, you'll want to consider the trade-offs
of the cost of quality. It's cheaper and more efficient to prevent defects in the
first place than to spend time and money fixing them later. The benefits of
meeting quality requirements are as follows:
   Stakeholder satisfaction is increased.
   Costs are lower.
   Productivity is higher.
   There is less rework.
The primary cost of meeting quality requirements for a project is the expense
incurred while performing project quality management activities.

Cost of Quality
The cost of quality (COQ) is the total cost to produce the product or service of
the project according to the quality standards and/or the cost to make a product
or service that does not meet the quality requirements. These costs include all the
work necessary to meet the product requirements whether the work was planned
or unplanned. It also includes the costs of work performed due to nonconforming
quality requirements, assessing whether the product or service meets
requirements, and rework.
Three costs are associated with the cost of quality:
Prevention Costs Prevention means keeping defects out of the hands of
customers. Prevention costs are the costs associated with satisfying customer
requirements by creating a product without defects. These costs are manifested
early in the process and include aspects such as Plan Quality Management,
training, equipment, documenting, and taking the time to do things right.
Appraisal Costs Appraisal costs are the costs expended to examine the
product or process and make certain the requirements are being met. Appraisal
costs might include costs associated with aspects such as inspections and testing.
Prevention and appraisal costs are often passed on to the acquiring organization
because of the limited duration of the project.
Failure Costs Failure costs are what it costs when things don't go according to
plan. Failure costs are also known as cost of poor quality. Two types of failure
costs exist:
   Internal Failure Costs These result when customer requirements are not
   satisfied while the product is still in the control of the organization. Internal
   failure costs might include corrective action, rework, scrapping, and
   downtime.
   External Failure Costs External failure costs, unfortunately, are when the
   customer determines that the requirements have not been met. Costs
   associated with external failure costs might include inspections at the
   customer site, warranty work, returns, liabilities, lost business, and additional
   customer service costs.
There are two categories of costs within COQ, the cost of conformance and the
cost of nonconformance. Conformance costs are associated with activities
undertaken to avoid failures, whereas nonconformance costs are those
undertaken because a failure has occurred. All of the types of costs of quality we
just covered fall into one of these categories. Table 7.2 is a quick reference.
Table 7.2 Cost of conformance and nonconformance
                  Conformance Costs Nonconformance Costs
                  Prevention costs  Internal failure costs
                  Appraisal costs   External failure costs




  The cost of quality can be affected by project decisions. Let's say you're
  producing a new product. Unfortunately, the product scope description or
  project scope statement was inadequate in describing the functionality of the
  product. The project team created the product exactly as specified in the
  project scope statement, the WBS, and other planning documents. Once the
  product hit the store shelves, the organization was bombarded with returns
  and warranty claims because of the poor quality. Therefore, your project
  decisions impacted the cost of quality. Recalls of products can also impact
  the cost of quality.

Cost of quality is a topic you'll likely encounter on the exam. The following
sections will discuss some of the pioneers in this field. To make sure the product
or service meets stakeholders' expectations, quality must be planned into the
project and not inspected in after the fact.
Four people in particular are responsible for the rise of the modern quality
management movement and the theories behind the cost of quality: Philip B.
Crosby, Joseph M. Juran, W. Edwards Deming, and Walter Shewhart. Each of
these men developed steps or points that led to commonly accepted quality
processes that we use today and either developed or were the foundation for the
development of quality theories such as Total Quality Management, Six Sigma,
cost of quality, and continuous improvement. I'll also cover a quality technique
called the Kaizen approach that originated in Japan and discuss Capability
Maturity Model Integration.

Philip B. Crosby
Philip B. Crosby devised the zero defects practice, which means, basically, do it
right the first time. (Didn't your dad use to tell you that?) Crosby says that costs
will increase when quality planning isn't performed up front, which means you'll
have to engage in rework, thereby affecting productivity. Prevention is the key to
Crosby's theory. If you prevent the defect from occurring in the first place, costs
are lower, conformance to requirements is easily met, and the cost measurement
for quality becomes the cost of nonconformance rather than the cost of rework.

Joseph M. Juran
Joseph M. Juran is noted for his fitness for use premise. Simply put, this means
the stakeholders' and customers' expectations are met or exceeded. This says
that conformance to specifications--meaning the product of the project that was
produced is what the project set out to produce--is met or exceeded. Fitness for
use specifically reflects the customers' or stakeholders' view of quality and
answers the following questions:
   Did the product or service produced meet the quality expectation?
   Did it satisfy a real need?
   Is it reliable and safe?
   Is it reliable and safe?
Juran also proposed that there could be grades of quality. However, you should
not confuse grade with quality. Grade is a category for products or services that
are of the same type but have differing technical characteristics. Quality
describes how well the product or service (or characteristics of the product or
service) fulfills the requirements. Low quality is usually not an acceptable
condition; however, low grade might be. For example, your new Dad's Dollars
Credit Card software tracking system might be of high quality, meaning it has no
bugs and the product performs as advertised, but of low grade, meaning it has
few features. You'll almost always want to strive for high quality, regardless of
the acceptable grade level.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand the difference between quality and grade for the exam.


W. Edwards Deming
W. Edwards Deming suggested that as much as 85 percent of the cost of quality
is management's problem and responsibility. Once the quality issue has hit the
floor, or the worker level, the workers have little control. For example, if you're
constructing a new highway and the management team that bid on the project
proposed using inferior-grade asphalt, the workers laying the asphalt have little
control over its quality. They're at the mercy of the management team
responsible for purchasing the supplies.
Deming also proposed that workers cannot figure out quality on their own and,
therefore, cannot perform at their best until they are shown what acceptable
quality is. He believed that workers need to be shown what acceptable quality is
and that they need to be made to understand that quality and continuous
improvement are necessary elements of any organization--or project, in your
case.
Many consider Deming to be a major contributor to the Total Quality
Management (TQM) theory. TQM, like Deming, says that the process is the
problem, not people. Every person and all activities the company undertakes are
involved with quality. TQM stipulates that quality must be managed in and that
quality improvement should be a continuous way of doing business, not a
onetime performance of a specific task or process.
  Exam Spotlight
  There is some controversy surrounding who is the actual founder of TQM.
  Some say Deming, but others say Armand V. Feigenbaum. For the exam, I
  recommend knowing that Feigenbaum is the founder of TQM and Deming
  believes quality is a management issue. Six Sigma is a quality management
  approach that is similar to TQM and is typically used in manufacturing and
  service-related industries. Six Sigma is a measurement-based strategy that
  focuses on process improvement and variation reduction, which you can
  achieve by applying Six Sigma methodologies to the project. There are two
  Six Sigma methodologies. The first is known as DMADV (define, measure,
  analyze, design, and verify) and is used to develop new processes or
  products at the Six Sigma level. The second is called DMAIC (define,
  measure, analyze, improve, and control) and is used to improve existing
  processes or products. Another tidbit you should know about Six Sigma is
  that it aims to eliminate defects and stipulates that no more than 3.4 defects
  per million are produced.


Walter Shewhart
Some sources say that Walter Shewhart is the grandfather of TQM, which was
further popularized by Feigenbaum and Deming. Shewhart developed statistical
tools to examine when a corrective action must be applied to a process. He
invented control chart techniques (control charts are a tool and technique of the
Perform Quality Control process) and was also the inventor of the Plan-Do-
Check-Act cycle that I talked about in Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?"

Kaizen Approach
The Kaizen approach is a quality technique from Japan. In fact, Kaizen means
continuous improvement in Japanese. With this technique, all project team
members and managers should be constantly watching for quality improvement
opportunities. The Kaizen approach states that you should improve the quality of
the people first and then the quality of the products or service.
Continuous improvement involves everyone in the organization watching for
ways to improve quality, whether incrementally or by incorporating new ideas
into the process. This involves taking measurements, improving processes by
making them repeatable and systemized, reducing variations in production or
performance, reducing defects, and improving cycle times. TQM and Six Sigma
performance, reducing defects, and improving cycle times. TQM and Six Sigma
are examples of continuous improvement.

Capability Maturity Model Integration
The Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) is used to help
organizations assess and improve performance. CMMI is used in many areas
such as engineering, project management, organizational development, and
more. CMMI models are based on five stages of development ranging from
almost no formal processes to the fifth stage, where a state of continuous,
sustained improvements is reached. You may have heard about CMMI as it
relates to project management. There are differing measures and stages of
development depending on the industry, but most CMMI models have the
following stages:
1. No formal processes are in place.
2. Basic processes exist but aren't standardized across the organization.
3. Best practices are in place and are standardized across the organization.
4. Best practices are in place and standardized across the organization, and they
   are measurable using quantifiable methods.
5. Continuous, sustained improvements are realized.
You can measure your organization's maturity regarding project management
practices as a whole, or you can take it one step further and measure maturity in
each of the 10 Knowledge Areas. Since we're discussing quality in this chapter,
remember that CMMI can also be used to measure quality processes.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, understand each of these theories on the cost of quality. Here's
  a key to help you remember:
     Crosby = Zero defects and prevention of rework results.
     Juran = Fitness for use, conformance. Quality by design.
     Deming = Quality is a management problem.
     Feigenbaum = Founder of TQM.
     Shewhart = Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle.
     TQM = Quality must be managed and must be a continuous process.
     Six Sigma = Six Sigma is a measurement-based strategy; no more than
     3.4 defects per million opportunities.
     Kaizen = Continuous improvement; improve quality of people first.
     Continuous improvement = Watch continuously for ways to improve
     quality.
     CMMI = Assesses and improves performance by measuring the maturity
     levels of the organization.


Seven Basic Quality Tools
The term Seven Basic Quality Tools refers to seven techniques used to
graphically display and diagnose quality issues. According to the PMBOK(R)
Guide, the Seven Basic Quality Tools are used in conjunction with the Plan-Do-
Check-Act cycle we talked about in Chapter 1. The charts and diagrams within
this tool you should understand for the exam are as follows:
   Cause-and-effect diagrams
   Flowcharts (also known as stratification charts)
   Checksheets
   Pareto diagrams
   Histograms
   Control charts
   Scatter diagrams
Cause-and-effect diagrams, also known as Ishikawa diagrams or fishbone
diagrams, associate the source of the problem back to a root cause. We discussed
cause-and-effect diagrams in Chapter 6.
Flowcharts are another tool associated with the Seven Basic Quality Tools that
we discussed in Chapter 6. You will recall that a flowchart graphically depicts
the relationships between and among steps. They typically show activities,
decision points, and the flow or order of steps in a process. Flowcharts may point
out possible quality issues and are a great tool for the project team to use when
reviewing quality results. They can also be helpful in determining the cost of
quality by estimating the expected costs of conformance and nonconformance.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, flowcharts are useful to understand the
processes that exist within the Supplier, Input, Process, Output, Customer
(SIPOC) model.
Checksheets are similar to checklists and are used during the quality processes to
gather or verify data regarding quality problems. They are particularly useful
when inspecting quality results.
We talked about histograms earlier in this chapter. I will cover Pareto diagrams,
control charts, and scatter diagrams in more depth in Chapter 11, "Controlling
Work Results."

Benchmarking
Benchmarking is a process of comparing previous similar activities to the current
project activities to provide a standard to measure performance against. This
comparison will also help you derive ideas for quality improvements on the
current project. For example, if your current printer can produce 8 pages per
minute and you're considering a new printer that produces 14 pages per minute,
the benchmark is 8 pages per minute.

Design of Experiments
Design of experiments (DOE) is a statistical technique that identifies the
elements--or variables--that will have the greatest effect on overall project
outcomes. It is used most often concerning the product of the project but can
also be applied to project management processes to examine trade-offs. DOE
designs and sets up experiments to determine the ideal solution for a problem
using a limited number of sample cases. It analyzes several variables at once,
allowing you to change all (or some of) the variables at the same time and
determine which combination will produce the best result at a reasonable cost.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that the key to DOE is that it equips you with a
  statistical framework that allows you to change the variables that have the
  greatest effect on overall project outcomes at once instead of changing one
  variable at a time.


Statistical Sampling
Statistical sampling involves taking a sample number of parts from the whole
population and inspecting them to determine whether they fall within acceptable
variances. We will discuss statistical sampling in more detail in Chapter 11,
"Controlling Work Results."

Additional Quality Planning Tools
The PMBOK(R) Guide lists the following tools as part of the additional quality
planning tools tool and technique:
   Brainstorming
   Force field analysis
   Nominal Group technique
   Quality management and control tools
We covered brainstorming and the Nominal Group technique in Chapter 6. Let's
briefly look at the remaining tools next.
Force field analysis is a method of examining the drivers and resistors of a
decision. You could use the old T-square approach and list all the drivers down
the left column and all the resistors in the right. Determine which of the elements
in the list are barriers and which are enablers to the project. Assign a priority or
rank to each, and develop strategies for leveraging the strengths of the high-
priority enablers while minimizing the highest-ranked barriers.
Quality management and control tools consists of several tools, including
affinity diagrams, process decision program charts, interrelationship digraphs,
tree diagrams, prioritization matrices, activity network diagrams, and matrix
diagrams. We will cover each of these in Chapter 9.
You should memorize the names of these additional Plan Quality Management
tools for the exam, but more important, you should know both the names and
concepts of the other tools and techniques I talked about earlier in this chapter,
as well as when to use them.

Plan Quality Management Outputs
Plan Quality Management uses many techniques to determine the areas of
quality improvement that can be implemented, controlled, and measured
throughout the rest of the project, as you've seen. These are recorded in the
primary output of this process, which is called the quality management plan. The
following list includes all the outputs of this process:
   Quality management plan
   Process improvement plan
   Quality metrics
   Quality checklists
   Project documents updates
Project documents updates include updates to the stakeholder register and the
RAM and may also involve updates to the WBS and WBS dictionary. We'll talk
about the Perform Quality Assurance process in Chapter 9. We'll look at the
remaining outputs of Plan Quality Management next.

Quality Management Plan
The quality management plan describes how the project management team will
carry out the quality policy. It should document the resources needed to carry out
the quality management plan, the responsibilities of the project team in
implementing quality, and all the processes and procedures the project team and
organization should use to satisfy quality requirements, including quality
control, quality assurance techniques, and continuous improvement processes.
This plan should also address the quality standards for both the project and the
products produced by the project. As with other plans, you should consider
project scope, risks, and requirements when writing this plan so that quality
defects can hopefully be avoided, also allowing you to have better control of the
cost of quality.
The project manager, in cooperation with the project staff, writes the quality
management plan. You can assign quality actions to the activities listed on the
WBS based on the quality plan requirements. Isn't that WBS a handy thing?
Later in the Control Quality process, measurements will be taken to determine
whether the quality to date is on track with the quality standards outlined in the
quality management plan.

  Exam Spotlight
  The Project Quality Management Knowledge Area, which includes the Plan
  Quality Management, Perform Quality Assurance, and Control Quality
  processes, involves the quality management of the project as well as the
  quality aspects of the product or service the project was undertaken to
quality aspects of the product or service the project was undertaken to
produce. We'll discuss Quality Assurance and Quality Control in later
chapters.




       Real World Scenario

Candy Works
Juliette Walters is a contract project manager for Candy Works. She is
leading a project that will introduce a new line of hard candy drops in
various exotic flavors: cafe latte, hot buttered popcorn, and jalapeno spice,
just to name a few.
Juliette is writing the quality management plan for this project. After
interviewing stakeholders and key team members, she has found several
quality factors of importance to the organization. Quality will be measured
by the following criteria:
Candy Size Each piece should measure 3 mm.
Appearance No visible cracks or breaks should appear in the candy.
Flavor   Flavor must be distinguishable when the candy is taste tested.
Number Produced The production target is 9,000 pieces per week. The
current machine has been benchmarked at 9,200 candies per week.
Intensity of Color There should be no opaqueness in the darker colors.
Wrappers Properly fitting wrappers cover the candies, folding over twice
in back and twisted on each side. There is a different wrapper for each flavor
of candy, and they must match exactly.
The candy is cooked and then pulled into a long cylinder shape roughly 6'
long and 2" in diameter. This cylinder is fed into the machine that molds and
cuts the candy into drops. The cylinders vary a little in size because they're
hand-stretched by expert candy makers, who then feed the candies into the
drop maker machine. As a result, the end of one flavor batch--the cafe latte
flavor--and the beginning of the next batch--the hot buttered popcorn
flavor--merge. This means the drops that fall into the collection bins are
  flavor--merge. This means the drops that fall into the collection bins are
  intermingled during the last run of the first flavor batch. In other words, the
  last bin of the cafe latte flavor run has some hot buttered popcorn drops
  mixed in. There is no way to separate the drops once they've hit the bin.
  From there, the drops go on to the candy-wrapping machine, where brightly
  colored wrappers are matched to the candy flavor. According to the quality
  plan, hot buttered popcorn drops cannot be wrapped as cafe latte drops.
  Juliette ponders what to do.
  As she tosses and turns that night thinking about the problem, it occurs to
  her to present this problem to the company as an opportunity rather than as a
  problem. To keep production in the 9,000 candies per week category, the
  machines can't be stopped every time a new batch is introduced. So, Juliette
  comes up with the idea to wrap candies from the intermixed bins with
  wrappers that say "Mystery Flavor." This way, production keeps pace with
  the plan and the wrapper/flavor quality problem is mitigated.


Process Improvement Plan
The process improvement plan focuses on finding inefficiencies in a process or
activity and eliminating them. The idea here is that if you're doing activities or
performing processes that don't add any value, you'll want to either stop doing
what you're doing or modify the process so that you are adding value. You
should note that the process improvement plan is a subsidiary plan of the project
management plan. Some of the elements you should consider when thinking
about process improvement are the process boundaries, which describe the
purpose for the process and its expected start and end dates; the process
configuration so that you know what processes are performed when and how
they interact; the process metrics; and any specific elements you want to target
for improvement.

Quality Metrics
A quality metric, also known as an operational definition, describes what is
being measured and how it will be measured during the Control Quality process.
For example, let's say you're managing the opening of a new restaurant in July of
next year. Perhaps one of the deliverables is the procurement of flatware for 500
place settings. The operational definition in this case might include the date the
flatware must be delivered and a counting or inventory process to ensure that
you received the number of place settings you ordered. Measurements of this
variable consist of actual values, not "yes" or "no" results. In our example,
receiving the flatware is a "yes" or "no" attribute result (you have it or you
don't), but the date it was delivered and the number of pieces delivered are actual
values. Failure rates are another type of quality metric that is measurable, as are
reliability, availability, test coverage, and defect density measurements.

Quality Checklists
If you're like me, you start your day at the office with a big to-do list that has so
many items on it you won't be able to finish them all. Nevertheless, you
faithfully write the list every day and check off the items that you accomplish
throughout the day. Checklists are like this in that they provide a means to
determine whether the required steps in a process have been followed. As each
step is completed, it's checked off the list. Checklists can be activity specific or
industry specific and might be complex or easy to follow. Sometimes,
organizations might have standard checklists they use for projects. You might
also be able to obtain checklists from professional associations.

  Exam Spotlight
  Be aware that a checklist shows up as an input, an output, and a tool and
  technique. Quality checklists are an output of the Plan Quality Management
  process and an input to the Control Quality process, and checklist analysis is
  a tool and technique of the Identify Risks process.




  One of the results of the Plan Quality Management process is that your
  product or process might require adjustments to conform to the quality
  policy and standards. These changes might result in cost changes and
  schedule changes. You might also discover that you'll need to perform risk
  analysis techniques for problems you uncover or when making adjustments
  as a result of this process.
Bringing It All Together
Believe it or not, you have officially completed the Planning process group.
Along the way, I've mentioned gaining approvals for portions of the project plan
such as the schedule and budget.
The project management plan is the approved, formal, documented plan that's
used to guide you throughout the project Executing process group. The plan
consists of all the outputs of the Planning process group, including the subsidiary
plans and baselines. It's the map that tells you where you're going and how to
perform the activities of the project plan during the Direct and Manage Project
Work process. It serves several purposes, the most important of which is
tracking and measuring project performance through the Executing and
Monitoring and Controlling processes and making future project decisions. The
project management plan is critical in all communications you'll have from here
forward with the stakeholders, management, and customers. The project
management plan also documents all project planning assumptions, all project
planning decisions, and important management reviews needed.
The project management plan encompasses everything I've talked about up to
now and is represented in a formal document, or collection of documents. This
document contains the project scope statement, deliverables, assumptions, risks,
WBS, milestones, project schedule, resources, and more. It becomes the baseline
you'll use to measure and track progress against. It's also used to help you
control the components that tend to stray from the original plan so you can get
them back in line.

  Exam Spotlight
  Performance measurement baselines are management controls that should
  change only infrequently. Examples of the performance measurement
  baselines you've looked at so far are budget, scope, and schedule baselines.
  However, the project management plan itself also becomes a baseline. If
  changes in scope or schedule do occur after the Planning processes are
  complete, you should go through a formalized process (which I'll cover in
  Chapter 10) to implement the changes.

The project management plan is used as a communication and information tool
for stakeholders, team members, and the management team. They will use the
plan to review and gauge progress as well.
plan to review and gauge progress as well.
Don't forget that sign-off on the project management plan is important to the
project's success. It isn't necessary for the sponsor and key stakeholders to sign
off on every individual project document, but you should obtain signatures on
the project management plan. I would never embark on a project of any size
without sign-off from at least the project sponsor as well as a few key
stakeholders, the latter depending on the size, risk, and complexity of the project.
If they've been an integral part of the Planning processes all along (and I know
you know how important this is), obtaining sign-off on the project management
plan should simply be a formality. Once you obtain sign-off, you have the
approval to move into the Executing processes.
The project management plan consists of several components, and I've recapped
them here for your reference. You can find the differences between project
management plan components and project documents in a handy table (Table 4-
1) in the PMBOK(R) Guide in Chapter 4:
   Change Management Plan
   Communications Management Plan
   Configuration Management Plan
   Cost Management Plan
   Cost Baseline
   Human Resource Management Plan
   Process Improvement Plan
   Procurement Management Plan
   Quality Management Plan
   Requirements Management Plan
   Risk Management Plan
   Schedule Baseline
   Schedule Management Plan
   Scope Baseline
   Scope Management Plan
   Stakeholder Management Plan
"But wait," I hear you saying, "we didn't discuss the configuration management
"But wait," I hear you saying, "we didn't discuss the configuration management
plan." In a nutshell, configuration management is similar to change
management, but configuration changes deal with the components of the product
of the project, such as functional ability or physical attributes, rather than the
project process itself. I will cover these topics in much more depth in Chapter
10.
Note that you will use all the management plans I discussed during the Planning
processes--all those just listed--throughout the Executing process group to
manage the project and keep the performance of the project on track with the
project objectives. If you don't have a project management plan, you'll have no
way of managing the process. You'll find that even with a project management
plan, project scope has a way of changing. Stakeholders and others tend to sneak
in a few of the "Oh, I didn't understand that before" statements and hope that
they slide right by you. With that signed, approved project management plan in
your files, you are allowed to gently remind them that they read and agreed to
the project plan and you're sticking to it.



         Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  You're just finishing a phone conversation with Jill, and you see Dirk headed
  toward your office.
  Dirk walks in, crosses his arms over his chest, and stands next to your desk
  with an "I'm here for answers" look.
  "I thought I'd drop by and see whether you have signed a lease and gotten
  Jake started on that build-out yet," says Dirk.
  "I just got off the phone with Jill," you reply. "The real estate agent found a
  great location, and we've set up a tour for tomorrow."
  "What has been the holdup?" Dirk asks. "I thought we'd be ready to start the
  build-out about now."
  "I've been working on the project plans."
  "Project plans," Dirk interrupts. "We already have a plan. That schedule
  thing and risk stuff and the budget you drew up over the last couple of weeks
  spelled things out pretty clearly."
spelled things out pretty clearly."
"I'm almost finished with the project plans. I'd like you to take a look at the
human resource management plan after I review with you what we've done
to date."
"I don't understand why you're wasting all this time planning. We all know
what the objectives are."
"Dirk," you reply, "if we put the right amount of effort and time into
planning, the actual work of the project should go pretty smoothly. Planning
is probably one of the most important things we can do on this project. If we
don't plan correctly, we might miss something very important that could
delay the store opening. That date is pretty firm, I thought."
"Yes, the date is firm. But I don't see how we could miss anything. You and
I have met several times, and I know you've met with Jill and Jake. They're
the other key players on this."
"Let me finish," you reply. "I have met with all the key stakeholders, and
after you review these last few documents I have for you, we're finished with
the planning phase of this project. Ricardo drafted a procurement statement
of work. He needs to hire some external resources--and I noted that in the
human resource management plan by the way--to help run Ethernet cable,
procure a T1 line, and purchase some routers and switches. The purchase of
the routers and switches will be accomplished using a fixed-price contract,
and the human resources he needs will be procured using a time and
materials contract. Jill also drew up a procurement statement of work for the
gourmet and cookware lines purchase. I documented a lot of the human
resource management plan when we worked through the activity estimating
and duration exercise and put some finishing touches on it yesterday. It
includes an RACI chart for all our project key deliverables." You sneak in a
quick breath because you don't want Dirk to interrupt. "And the quality
management plan is complete. After your review, I'll distribute it to the key
stakeholders. The quality management plan describes how we'll implement
our quality policy. You know the old saying, `Do it right the first time.' I
took the time to write down the specific quality metrics we're looking for,
including the lease signing date (this one must start and finish on time) and
the IT equipment specifications, and Jill has documented the gourmet
products and the cookware line specifications."
Dirk looks impressed, but you can't tell for sure.
"After I look at the last of these planning documents, are we ready to
 "After I look at the last of these planning documents, are we ready to
 actually start working?"
 "Yes, as soon as the lease is signed. I anticipate that happening by the end of
 this week. Tomorrow's tour is the fifth location Jill will look at. She's very
 happy with the third property she saw but wants to look at this last property
 before she makes her final decision."
 "Great. Let's take a look at that human plan or whatever it is."
 After reviewing the last of the planning documents, Dirk signs off on the
 project plan.
     Procurement
         Fixed-price contract
         Time and materials contract
         Procurement documents prepared
         Procurement statement of work prepared
     Plan Human Resource Management
         Roles and responsibilities documented
         RACI chart developed
         Organizational chart developed
     Quality Management Plan and Quality Metrics
         Lease signing start and end dates
         IT equipment specifications
         Gourmet products--availability rates and defects
         Cookware products--availability rates
         Organizational chart developed
     Obtain approval and sign-off on project plan


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
In my organization, the Plan Procurement Management process comes right after
In my organization, the Plan Procurement Management process comes right after
finalizing project scope because it takes a great deal of time and effort to procure
goods and services. That means we have to start procuring resources as early in
the project as possible in order to meet the project deadlines.
In all the organizations I've worked in, someone has always been responsible for
procurement--whether it was a single person or an entire department. Typically,
the procurement department defines many elements of the procurement
management plan. Sure, the project team determines how many vendors need to
be involved and how they'll be managed along with the schedule dates, but many
other elements are predetermined, such as the type of contract to use, the
authority of the project team regarding the contract, how multiple vendors will
be managed, and the identification of prequalified sellers.
The procurement department also determines what type of procurement
document you should use depending on the types of resources you're acquiring
and the amount of money you're spending. Typically, they'll have a template for
you to use with all the legalese sections prepopulated, and you'll work on the
sections that describe the work or resources you need for the project, milestones
or schedule dates, and evaluation criteria.
Don't make the mistake of thinking your procurement department will take care
of all the paperwork for you. At a minimum, you will likely be responsible for
writing the statement of work, writing the RFP, writing the contract
requirements (as they pertain to the work of the project), creating the vendor
selection criteria, and determining the schedule dates for contract work.
Plan Human Resource Management is a process you might not need to complete,
depending on the size and complexity of the project. I typically work with the
same team members over and over again, so I know their skills, capabilities, and
availability. However, if you're hiring contract resources for the project or you
typically work with new team members on each project, I recommend creating a
staffing management plan.
The quality management plan is another important element of your project
management plan. You should take into consideration the final result or product
of the project and the complexity of the project to determine if you need a multi-
page document with detailed specifications or if the plan can be more informal
and broad in nature. Again, depending on the project complexity, the
measurements or criteria you'll use to determine the quality objective could be a
few simple sentences or bullet items or a more formal, detailed document. The
quality baseline should be documented during this process as well.
Summary
This chapter's focus was on planning for project resources. Several aspects are
involved in these planning activities, including procuring goods and services,
planning human resources, and defining the activities in which human resources
will be involved.
This chapter started with the Plan Procurement Management process. This
process identifies the goods or services you're going to purchase from outside the
organization and determines which goods or services the project team can make
or perform. This involves tools and techniques such as make-or-buy decisions,
expert judgment, and contract types. The procurement management plan is one
of the outputs of this process and describes how procurement services will be
managed throughout the project. The procurement SOW (another output of this
process) describes the work that will be contracted.
In our discussion of contract types, we covered fixed-price, cost plus, and time
and materials contracts and the benefits and risks of using them.
The Plan Human Resource Management process identifies and assigns roles and
responsibilities and reporting relationships. Many times the roles and
responsibilities assignments are depicted in a responsibility assignment matrix
(RAM) or an RACI chart. The staffing management plan describes how and
when project team members will be acquired and is part of the human resource
management plan output of this process.
Plan Quality Management targets the quality standards that are relevant to your
project. The quality management plan outlines how the project team will enact
the quality policy.
You need to take into account the cost of quality when considering stakeholder
needs. Four men led to the rise of the cost of quality theories. Crosby is known
for his zero defects theory, Juran for the fitness for use theory, Deming for
attributing 85 percent of cost of quality to the management team, and Shewhart
for the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The Kaizen approach says that the project
team should continuously be on the lookout for ways to improve the process and
that people should be improved first and then the quality of the products or
services. TQM and Six Sigma are examples of continuous improvement
techniques.
Cost-benefit analysis considers trade-offs in the Plan Quality Management
process. Benchmarking compares previous similar activities to the current
project activities to provide a standard to measure performance against. Design
project activities to provide a standard to measure performance against. Design
of experiments is an analytical technique that determines what variables have the
greatest effect on the project outcomes. This technique equips you with a
statistical framework, allowing you to change all the important variables at once
instead of changing one variable at a time.
Cost of quality involves three types of costs: prevention, appraisal, and failure
costs; the latter is also known as the cost of poor quality. Failure costs include
the costs of both internal and external failures.
The process improvement plan is a subsidiary plan of the project management
plan and targets inefficiencies in a process or activity. The quality baseline is
used to document the quality objectives of the project and is used as a basis for
future quality processes.

Exam Essentials
Be able to name the purpose of the Plan Procurement Management
process. The purpose of the Plan Procurement Management process is to
identify which project needs should be obtained from outside the organization.
Make-or-buy analysis is used as a tool and technique to help determine this.
Be familiar with the contract types and their usage. Contract types are a
tool and technique of the Plan Procurement Management process and include
fixed-price and cost-reimbursable contracts. Use fixed-price contracts for well-
defined projects with a high value to the company, and use cost-reimbursable
contracts for projects with uncertainty and large investments early in the project
life. The three types of fixed-price contracts are FFP, FPIF, and FP-EPA. The
four types of cost-reimbursable contracts are CPFF, CPIF, CPF (or CPPC), and
CPAF. Time and materials contracts are a cross between fixed-price and cost-
reimbursable contracts.
Know the outputs of the Plan Procurement Management process. The
outputs of Plan Procurement Management are procurement management plan,
procurement statement of work, make-or-buy decisions, procurement
documents, source selection criteria, change requests, and project documents
updates.
Be able to name the purpose of the Plan Human Resource Management
process. Plan Human Resource Management involves determining roles and
responsibilities, reporting relationships for the project, and creating the staffing
management plan, which describes how team members are acquired and the
criteria for their release.
Be able to list the benefits of meeting quality requirements. The benefits of
meeting quality requirements include increased stakeholder satisfaction, lower
costs, higher productivity, and less rework and are discovered during the Plan
Quality Management process.
Be able to define the cost of quality. The COQ is the total cost to produce the
product or service of the project according to the quality standards. These costs
include all the work necessary to meet the product requirements for quality. The
three costs associated with cost of quality are prevention, appraisal, and failure
costs (also known as cost of poor quality).
Be able to name four people associated with COQ and some of the
techniques they helped establish. The four are Crosby, Juran, Deming, and
Shewhart. Some of the techniques they helped to establish are TQM, Six Sigma,
cost of quality, and continuous improvement. The Kaizen approach concerns
continuous improvement and says people should be improved first.
Be able to name the tools and techniques of the Plan Quality Management
process. The Plan Quality Management process consists of cost-benefit
analysis, cost of quality, Seven Basic Quality Tools, benchmarking, design of
experiments, statistical sampling, flowcharting, additional quality planning tools,
and meetings.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are the project manager for an upcoming outdoor concert event. You're
   working on the procurement plan for the computer software program that
   will control the lighting and screen projections during the concert. You're
   comparing the cost of purchasing a software product to the cost of your
   company programmers writing a custom software program. You are engaged
   in which of the following?
    A. Procurement planning
    B. Using expert judgment
    C. Creating the procurement management plan
    D. Make-or-buy analysis
2. You are the project manager for an outdoor concert event scheduled for one
   year from today. You're working on the procurement documents for the
   computer software program that will control the lighting and screen
   projections during the concert. You've decided to contract with a
   professional services company that specializes in writing custom software
   programs. You want to minimize the risk to the organization, so you'll opt
   for which contract type?
   A. FPIF
   B. CPFF
   C. FFP
   D. CPIF
3. You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company.
   Your company is introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep
   Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a
   vendor. The vendor has requested a procurement SOW. All of the following
   statements are true except for which one?
   A. The procurement SOW contains a description of the new clothing line.
   B. As the purchaser, you are required to write the procurement SOW.
   C. The procurement SOW contains the objectives of the project.
   D. The vendor requires a procurement SOW to determine whether it can
      produce the clothing line given the detailed specifications of this product.
4. You are the project manager for the Heart of Texas casual clothing company.
   Your company is introducing a new line of clothing called Black Sheep
   Ranch Wear. You will outsource the production of this clothing line to a
   vendor. Your legal department has recommended you use a contract that
   reimburses the seller's allowable costs and builds in a bonus based on the
   vendor achieving the performance criteria they've outlined in their memo.
   Which of the following contract types will you use?
   A. CPIF
   B. CPFF
   C. CPF
   D. FPIF
5. All of the following statements are true regarding the Plan Human Resource
   Management process except for which one?
   A. The Plan Human Resource Management process involves determining
      roles and responsibilities.
   B. Included in the Plan Human Resource Management output are project
      organization charts that show the project's reporting relationships.
   C. The staffing management plan created in this process describes how and
      when resources will be acquired and released.
   D. A RAM (or RACI chart) is an output of this process that allows you to
      see all the people assigned to an activity.
6. Sally is a project manager working on a project that will require a specially
   engineered machine. Only three manufacturers can make the machine to the
   specifications Sally needs. The price of this machine is particularly critical to
   this project. The budget is limited, and there's no chance of securing
   additional funds if the bids for the machine come in higher than budgeted.
   She's developing the source selection criteria for the bidders' responses and
   knows all of the following are true except for which one?
   A. Sally will use understanding of need and warranties as two of the criteria
      for evaluation.
   B. Sally will review the project management plan, requirements documents,
      and risk register as some of the inputs to this process.
   C. Sally will base the source selection criteria on price alone because the
      budget is a constraint.
   D. Sally will document an SOW, the desired form of response, and any
      required contractual provisions in the RFP.
7. Which of the following are constraints that you might find during the Plan
   Human Resource Management process?
   A. Organizational structures, collective bargaining agreements, and
      economic conditions
   B. Organizational structures, technical interfaces, and interpersonal
      interfaces
   C. Organizational interfaces, collective bargaining agreements, and
      economic conditions
    D. Organizational interfaces, technical interfaces, and interpersonal
       interfaces
 8. You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards.
    Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers.
    Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet
    so that legal age can be established. You know this project will require new
    hardware and an update to some existing infrastructure. You will have to hire
    an expert to help with the infrastructure assessment and upgrades. You also
    know that the module to verify registration must be written and tested using
    data from Grapevine's existing database. This new module cannot be tested
    until the data from the existing system is loaded. You are going to hire a
    vendor to perform the programming and testing tasks for this module to help
    speed up the project schedule. The vendor will be reimbursed for all their
    costs, and you want to use a contract type that will allow you to give the
    vendor a little something extra if you are satisfied with the work they do.
    You know all of the following apply in this situation except for which one?
    A. Contract type is determined by the risk shared between the buyer and
       seller.
    B. You'll use a FPIF contract for the programming vendor.
    C. Fixed-price contracts can include incentives for meeting or exceeding
       performance criteria.
    D. Each procurement item needs an SOW.
 9. You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your
    new project involves creating a prototype display at several stores across the
    country. You are using an RACI chart to display individuals and activities.
    What does RACI stand for?
    A. Responsible, accountable, consult, inform
    B. Responsible, assignment, control, inform
    C. Resource, activity, control, identify
    D. Resource, accountable, consult, identify
10. Which process has the greatest ability to directly influence the project
    schedule?
    A. Plan Human Resource Management
    B. Plan Procurement Management
    C. Plan Communications
    D. Plan Quality Management
11. You are the project manager for BB Tops, a nationwide toy store chain. Your
    new project involves creating a prototype display at several stores across the
    country. You are hiring a contractor for portions of the project. The contract
    stipulates that you'll pay all allowable costs and a 6 percent fee over and
    above the allowable costs at the end of the contract. Which of the following
    describes this contract type?
    A. CPPF
    B. CPPC
    C. CPF
    D. CPIF
12. All of the following are true regarding the Plan Quality Management process
    except for which one?
    A. DOE is a tool and technique of this process that provides statistical
       analysis for changing product or process elements one at a time to
       optimize the process.
    B. This is one of the key processes performed during the Planning process
       group and during the development of the project management plan.
    C. Changes to the product as a result of meeting quality standards might
       require cost or schedule adjustments.
    D. Some of the tools and techniques of this process are cost-benefit analysis,
       COQ, Seven Basic Quality Tools, benchmarking, DOE, and statistical
       sampling.
13. Four people are responsible for establishing cost of quality theories. Crosby
    and Juran are two them, and their theories are ___________________,
    respectively.
    A. Grades of quality and fitness for use
    B. Fitness for use and zero defects
    C. Zero defects and fitness for use
    D. Cost of quality and zero defects
14. The theory that 85 percent of the cost of quality is a management problem is
    attributed to ___________________.
    A. Deming
    B. Shewhart
    C. Juran
    D. Crosby
15. All of the following are benefits of meeting quality requirements except
    which one?
    A. An increase in stakeholder satisfaction
    B. Less rework
    C. Lower risk
    D. Higher productivity
16. Which of the following describes the cost of quality associated with
    scrapping, rework, and downtime?
    A. Internal failure costs
    B. External failure costs
    C. Prevention costs
    D. Appraisal costs
17. The quality management plan documents how the project team will
    implement the quality policy. It should address at least all of the following
    except which one?
    A. The resources needed to carry out the quality plan
    B. The quality metrics and tolerances and what will be measured
    C. The responsibilities the project team has in implementing quality
    D. The processes to use to satisfy quality requirements
18. You work for a furniture manufacturer. Your project is going to design and
    produce a new office chair. The chair will have the ability to function as a
    regular chair and also the ability to move its occupant into an upright,
    kneeling position. The design team is trying to determine the combination of
    comfort and ease of transformation to the new position that will give the
    chair the best characteristics while keeping the costs reasonable. Several
    different combinations have been tested. This is an example of which of the
    following tools and techniques of Plan Quality Management?
    A. Benchmarking
    B. Quality metrics
    C. COQ
    D. DOE
19. Which of the following best characterizes Six Sigma?
    A. Stipulates that quality must be managed in
    B. Focuses on process improvement and variation reduction by using a
       measurement-based strategy
    C. Asserts that quality must be a continuous way of doing business
    D. Focuses on improving the quality of the people first, then improving the
       quality of the process or project
20. Your organization is embarking on a long-term project that will require
    additional human resources on a contract basis to complete the work of the
    project. Since the project will span several years, you know one vendor
    probably can't supply all the resources you'll need over the course of the
    contract. However, you want to work with only one vendor throughout the
    project to minimize the amount of procurement documents you'll have to
    produce. So, you'll specify in your procurement documents that contractors
    will have to form partnerships to work on this project. You know all of the
    following are true regarding this question except for which one?
    A. You will use an RFP, which is part of the procurement documents output
       of the Plan Procurement Management process, as your procurement
       document for this project.
    B. You'll use an FP-EPA contract because this project spans several years.
    C. You should consider teaming agreements, which are an input to the Plan
       Procurement Management process.
    D. Some of the quality metrics you'll use for this project include on-time
       performance, failure rates, budget control, and test coverage. Quality
       metrics are an output of the Plan Quality Management process.
CHAPTER 8
Developing the Project Team
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE EXECUTING THE
PROJECT PERFORMANCE DOMAINS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER
INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 1: Acquire and manage project resources by following the
   human resource and procurement management plans in order to meet
   project requirements.
    Task 2: Manage task execution based on the project management
   plan by leading and developing the project team in order to achieve
   project deliverables.
    Knowledge and Skills:
       Interdependencies among project elements
       Vendor management techniques
This chapter begins the project Executing process group. I'll cover four of the
processes in this chapter: Direct and Manage Project Work, Acquire Project
Team, Develop Project Team, and Manage Project Team. I'll cover the
remaining four Executing processes in the next chapter.
Direct and Manage Project Work is the action process. This is where you'll put
the plans into action and begin working on the project activities. Execution also
involves keeping the project in line with the original project management plan
and bringing wayward activities back into alignment.
The Acquire, Develop, and Manage Project Team processes are all interrelated,
as you can imagine, and work together to help obtain the best project team
available.
Several things happen during the Executing processes. The majority of the
project budget will be spent during this process group, and often the majority of
the project time is expended here as well. The greatest conflicts you'll see during
the project Executing processes are schedule conflicts. In addition, the product
description will be finalized here and contain more detail than it did in the
Planning processes.
There might be several exam questions from every process within the Executing
process group. Don't skip studying these processes and the ones in Chapter 9,
"Conducting Procurements and Sharing Information," because 31 percent of the
exam questions concern the Executing process group. Are you ready to dive into
Executing? Let's go.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials are based on
  content from A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
  (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Directing and Managing Project Work
The purpose of the Direct and Manage Project Work process is to carry out the
project management plan and perform the work of the project. This is where
your project comes to life and the work of the project happens. The work is
authorized to begin and activities are performed. Resources are committed and
people carry out their assigned activities to create the product, result, or service
of the project. Funds are spent to accomplish project objectives. Performing
project activities, training, selecting sellers, collecting project data, utilizing
resources, and so on are all integrated with or are part of this process.
Direct and Manage Project Work is where the rubber meets the road. If you've
done a good job planning the project, things should go relatively smoothly for
you during this process. The deliverables and requirements are agreed on, the
resources have been identified and are ready to go, and the stakeholders know
exactly where you're headed because you had them review, agree to, and
approve the project plan.
Some project managers think this is the time for them to kick back and put their
feet up. After all, the project management plan is done, everyone knows what to
do and what's expected of them, and the work of the project should almost carry
itself out because your plan is a work of genius, right? Wrong! You must stay
involved. Your job now is a matter of overseeing the actual work, producing
deliverables, communicating, issuing change requests, implementing approved
changes, managing the schedule, managing risks, managing stakeholders,
changes, managing the schedule, managing risks, managing stakeholders,
staying on top of issues and problems, and keeping the work lined up with the
project management plan.

  Exam Spotlight
  The project management plan serves as the project baseline. During the
  Executing processes, you should continually compare and monitor project
  performance against the baseline so that corrective actions can be taken and
  implemented at the right time to prevent disaster. This information will also
  be fed into the Monitoring and Controlling processes for further analysis.

One of the most difficult aspects of this process is coordinating and integrating
all the elements of the project. Although you do have the project management
plan as your guide, you still have a lot of balls in the air. You'll find yourself
coordinating and monitoring many project elements--occasionally all at the
same time--during the course of the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
You might be negotiating for team members at the same time you're negotiating
with vendors at the same time you're working with another manager to get a
project component completed so your deliverables stay on schedule. You should
monitor risks and risk triggers closely. The Plan Procurement Management
process might need intervention or cause you delays. The organizational,
technical, and interpersonal interfaces might require intense coordination and
oversight. Of course, you should always be concerned about the pulse of your
stakeholders. Are they actively involved in the project? Are they throwing up
roadblocks now that the work has started?
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this process also requires implementing
corrective actions to bring the work of the project back into alignment with the
project management plan, preventive actions to reduce the probability of
negative consequences, and defect repairs to correct product defects discovered
during the quality processes.
As you can see, your work as project manager is not done yet. Many elements of
the project require your attention, so let's get to work.




  Later in this chapter I'll also talk about Develop Project Team because this is
  an integral part of the Direct and Manage Project Work process as well.
  You'll want to lead and develop the project team and monitor their
  performance, the status of their work, and their interactions with you and
  other team members as you execute the project management plan in order to
  achieve the project deliverables.


Direct and Manage Project Work Inputs
Direct and Manage Project Work has four inputs:
   Project management plan
   Approved change requests
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The project management plan documents the collection of outputs of the
Planning processes and describes and defines how the project should be
executed, monitored, controlled, and closed. The project management plan
documents the goals of the project and the actual work you and the team will
execute in order to meet those goals. Once the project management plan is
complete, you will know all of the work and actions needed to meet the
deliverables of the project and will have a plan for executing those actions.
You'll take a brief look at each of the other inputs next.

Approved Change Requests
Approved change requests come about as a result of the approved change
requests output of the Perform Integrated Change Control process. (We'll cover
this process in Chapter 10, "Measuring and Controlling Project Performance.")
Change requests are approved or denied during this process, and once the
decision has been made, approved changes come back through the Direct and
Manage Project Work process for the project team to implement.
Approved changes might either expand or reduce project scope and may also
cause revisions to project budgets, schedules, procedures, the project
management plan, and so on. Change requests can be internal or external to the
project or organization. For example, you may need to make changes because of
a new law that affects your project.
Enterprise Environmental Factors
When performing this process, you will need to consider several enterprise
environmental factors, including the company culture and organizational
structure, the facilities available to the project team, personnel guidelines and
hiring practices, risk tolerance levels, and project management information
systems.

Organizational Process Assets
As with many of the other processes we've covered, historical information from
past projects, organizational guidelines, and work processes are some of the
organizational process assets you should consider when performing this process.
In addition, measurement databases and issue and defect databases can be used
in this process to compare past projects to the current project and to capture
information about the current project for future reference.

Tools and Techniques of Direct and Manage Project Work
The tools and techniques of the Direct and Manage Project Work process are
expert judgment, project management information system, and meetings. You've
looked at all of these before. Remember that in the Executing processes, you'll
be actively using all of these tools; consulting and meeting with stakeholders,
professionals, and others; employing the project management methodology you
developed in the Planning processes; and using the project management
information system to update and track progress.
Some of the outputs of this process are going to look familiar and some are new.
We'll examine them next.

Outputs of Direct and Manage Project Work
The outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process are as follows:
   Deliverables
   Work performance data
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
The three most important outputs of this process are deliverables (meaning
actually accomplishing the activities leading to the completion of the product,
actually accomplishing the activities leading to the completion of the product,
result, or service you set out to produce), work performance data, and change
requests. Almost every process you've performed up to this point has defined
and outlined what the work of the project entails and what the final results
should look like. Now you're ready to begin performing the work. Let's look at
these three outputs that will help us document our progress.

Deliverables
During Direct and Manage Project Work, you'll gather and record information
regarding the outcomes of the work, including activity completion dates,
milestone completions, the status of the deliverables, the quality of the
deliverables, costs, schedule progress and updates, and so on. Deliverables aren't
always tangible, but they are always unique and verifiable. For example, perhaps
your team members require training on a piece of specialized equipment.
Completion of the training is recorded as a work result. Capabilities required to
perform a service that's described in the project management plan are also
considered a deliverable. All of this information gets used during the Control
Communications process, which I'll discuss during the Monitoring and
Controlling processes.
Executing and Monitoring and Controlling are two process groups that work
hand in hand. As you gather the information from work results, you'll measure
the outputs and take corrective actions where necessary. This means you'll loop
back through the Executing processes to put the corrections into place. The
PMBOK(R) Guide breaks these processes up for ease of explanation, but in
practice, you'll work through several of the Executing and Monitoring and
Controlling processes together.

Work Performance Data
Work performance data concerns observing, gathering, documenting, and
recording the status of project activities. The types of information you might
gather during this process include some of the following:
   Schedule status and progress
   Status of deliverable completion
   Progress and status of schedule activities, including start and end dates
   Percent of overall work complete
   Adherence to quality standards
   Number of change requests
   Status of costs (those authorized and costs incurred to date)
   Schedule activity completion estimates for those activities started
   Schedule activities percent complete
   Lessons learned
   Resource consumption and utilization
Work performance data becomes an input to a few of the Monitoring and
Controlling processes where you'll perform further analysis on the data. It's
important that you document this information so that when you get to the
Monitoring and Controlling processes, you don't have to backtrack.

Change Requests
As a result of working through activities and producing your product, service, or
result, you will inevitably come upon things that need to be changed. Changes
can also come about from stakeholder requests, external sources, technological
advances, and so on. These change requests might encompass schedule, scope,
requirement, or resource changes. The list could go on. Your job as project
manager, if you choose to accept it, is to collect the change requests and make
determinations about their impact on the project.

  Exam Spotlight

  According the PMBOK(R) Guide, a change request is a formal request to bring
  about a change that will require revising a document, a project baseline, a
  deliverable, or some combination of all three.

Implementation of change requests may incorporate two types of actions:
corrective actions or preventive actions. They may also require defect repairs or
updates. Each of these topics is described next.
Corrective Actions In my organization, a corrective action means an
employee is in big trouble. Fortunately, this isn't what's meant here. Corrective
actions are taken to get the anticipated future project outcomes to align with the
project management plan. Maybe you've discovered that one of your
programmers is adding an unplanned feature to the software project because he's
friends with the user. You'll have to redirect him to the activities assigned to him
originally to avoid schedule delays. Perhaps your vendor isn't able to deliver the
laboratory equipment needed for the next project phase. You'll want to exercise
your contract options (let's hope there's a clause in the contract that says the
vendor must provide rental equipment until they can deliver your order), put
your contingency plan into place, and get the lab the equipment that's needed to
keep the project on schedule.
Preventive Actions A preventive action involves anything that will reduce the
potential negative impacts of risk events should they occur. Contingency plans
and risk responses are examples of preventive actions. I described these and
other risk responses while talking about the Plan Risk Response process in
Chapter 6, "Risk Planning." You should be aware of contingency plans and risk
responses so that you're ready to implement them at the first sign of trouble.
Defect Repairs A defect occurs when a project component does not meet the
requirements or specifications. Defects might be discovered when conducting
quality audits in the Perform Quality Assurance process or when performing
inspections during the Control Quality process.
For the exam, you should understand the difference between a validated defect
repair and a defect repair. A validated defect repair is the result of a reinspection
of the original defect repair. In other words, you found a problem with the
product during the Quality processes, you corrected the problem (defect repair),
and now you're reinspecting that repair (validated defect repair) to make certain
the fix is accurate and correct and fixed the problem.
Updates Changes may require updates to the project documents so that the
new information is captured and recorded. For example, some of the documents
that might require an update could include the scope statement, budget
documents, the schedule, risk management plan or risk response plans, and so
on.
I'll discuss change requests more in the coming chapters as well. Change
requests are an output of several processes, including the Direct and Manage
Project Work process and the Control Communications process in the
Monitoring and Controlling process group. Remember that the Executing
process group outputs and the Monitoring and Controlling process group outputs
feed each other as inputs. In this particular case, approved change requests are an
input, and change requests are an output of the same process.
  Exam Spotlight
  Direct and Manage Project Work is where the work of the project is
  performed and the project management plan is put into action and carried
  out. In this process, the project manager is like an orchestra conductor
  signaling the instruments to begin their activities, monitoring what should be
  winding down, and keeping that smile going to remind everyone that they
  should be enjoying themselves. I recommend that you know the outputs of
  the Direct and Manage Project Work process for the exam.

I told you the Executing process group is about performing the work of the
project, and in order to do that, you need resources. You'll look at two processes,
Acquire Project Team and Develop Project Team, in the next few sections.



         Real World Scenario

  We All Scream for Ice Cream
  Heather is a pharmaceutical salesperson who is fed up with the rat race. She
  ran the numbers, decided to quit her day job, and bought an ice cream shop
  in a quaint tourist town. Having been involved in a few research and
  development projects, she understands the value of project management
  planning and using that plan as her guide to perform the work of the project.
  Heather documented the deliverables needed to prepare for opening day in
  her scope statement. Some of those deliverables are as follows: remodel,
  develop staffing plan, procure equipment, and procure materials. Confident
  in her planning, Heather hired a contractor and began remodeling the shop.
  Then real life happened. The contractors discovered a water problem in the
  storage room. They installed a sump pump, which took care of the water, but
  discovered an even bigger problem when they moved the storage shelves.
  Mold was growing up the drywall. The drywall had to be removed, as did
  the insulation behind it, and the mold remaining on permanent fixtures had
  to be eliminated. Then new insulation and drywall had to be installed. The
  drywall had to be primed and painted. Because that portion of the storage
  room was getting a fresh coat of paint, Heather decided the contractors
  might as well paint the entire room.
  might as well paint the entire room.
  All of these actions required another pass through the Planning processes.
  The schedule didn't require much modification because other work could be
  started while the water problem was being addressed, but the budget needed
  to be modified as a result of the additional work. To avoid more surprises,
  Heather requested that the contractor perform a thorough inspection of the
  property and determine whether there were any other hidden issues. Armed
  with the inspection report, Heather could knowledgeably plan corrective
  action for other items that needed to be addressed.


Acquiring the Project Team
The Acquire Project Team process involves attaining and assigning human
resources to the project. Project staff might come from inside the company or
from outside the company in the form of employees hired specifically for the
project or as contract help. In any case, it's your job as the project manager to
ensure that resources are available and skilled in the project activities to which
they're assigned. However, in practice, you might find that you don't always
have control over the selection of team members. Someone else, the big boss for
example, might handpick the folks they want working on the project, and it's up
to you to assess their skills and decide where they best fit on the project.

Acquire Project Team Inputs
The Acquire Project Team process inputs are as follows:
   Human resource management plan
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
The human resource management plan describes the roles and responsibilities
and includes project organization charts and the staffing management plan,
including the time periods needed by team members on the project. This plan
will be your guide in both acquiring and managing your project resources. Keep
in mind that you may not have direct authority over the project resources due to
matrix managed organizations, collective bargaining agreements, the use of
contractors and subcontractors, and so on. You should document this in the
human resource management plan.
Enterprise environmental factors in this process account for project activities that
might require special skills or knowledge in order to be completed. These may
also consider personal interests, cost rates, prior experience, and availability of
potential team members before making assignments. For example, consider the
previous experience of the staff member you're thinking of assigning to a
specific activity. Have they performed this function before? Do they have the
experience necessary for the level of complexity this project activity requires?
Are they competent and proficient at these skills?
Personal interests and personal characteristics play a big role as well. If the
person you're thinking of just isn't interested in the project, they aren't likely to
perform at their best. If you can, think about assigning someone else in a case
like this. Unfortunately, some people just don't play well with others. When
you're assigning staff, if at all possible, don't put the only two people in the
whole company who can't get along together on the same project. If a staff
member you need has a skill no one else has or they can perform a function like
no one else can, you might not have a choice. In this case, you'll have to employ
other techniques to keep the team cohesive and working well together despite the
not-so-friendly relationship between the two staff members.
Here's one final consideration: Check on the availability of key team members.
If the team member you must have for the activity scheduled in February is on
their honeymoon, you probably aren't going to win the toss.

  Exam Spotlight
  Remember that the availability, experience levels, interests, cost, and
  abilities of your resources are considered part of the enterprise
  environmental factors input. You should understand these inputs and their
  importance to the Acquire Project Team process for the exam.

The organizational process assets input refers to standard processes, policies, and
procedures the organization has in place. Recruitment practices are one example
to watch for in this process. You'll want to make certain you're following the
organization's recruitment procedures and processes when hiring and assigning
staff. You should also note that organizational policies that dictate recruitment
practices are constraints.
Let's move on to the tools and techniques of this process.
Tools and Techniques of Acquire Project Team
The tools and techniques of the Acquire Project Team process are as follows:
   Preassignment
   Negotiation
   Acquisition
   Virtual teams
   Multi-criteria decision analysis
Preassignment Preassignment can happen when the project is put out for bid
and specific team members are promised as part of the proposal or when internal
project team members are promised and assigned as a condition of the project.
When staff members are promised as part of the project proposal--particularly
on internal projects--they should be identified in the project charter.
Negotiation As the project manager, you will use the negotiation technique a
lot, so brush up on those skills every chance you get. You'll have to negotiate
with functional managers and other organizational department managers (and
sometimes with the vendor if you want to get some of their best people) for
resources for your project and for the timing of those resources.
Availability is one part of the negotiating equation. You'll have to work with the
functional manager or other project managers to ensure that the staff member
you're requesting is available when the schedule says they're needed.
The second part of the equation is the competency level of the staff member
they're assigning to your project. I remember hearing someone once say that
availability is not a skill set. Be wary of functional managers who are willing to
offer up certain individuals "anytime" while others are "never available." Be
certain your negotiations include discussions about the skills and personal
characteristics of the team members you want on your project.
Acquisition Acquisition involves hiring individuals or teams of people for
certain project activities, either as employees or as contract help during the
course of the project or project phase or for specific project activities.
Procurement is usually required when the organization does not have employees
with the required skills and competencies available to work on the project.
  We talked about Plan Procurement Management in Chapter 7, "Planning
  Project Resources."

Virtual Teams Virtual teams don't usually work in the same location, but their
members all share the goals of the project and have a role to fulfill. This type of
team allows you to include folks from different geographic locations, those who
work different hours or shifts than the other team members, those with mobility
limitations, and so on. The idea is that virtual teams can meet the objectives of
the project and perform their roles without meeting face to face. In today's
wonderful world of technology, team members can use the Internet, email,
videoconferencing, teleconferencing, and more to meet and communicate on a
regular basis. This of course brings to light the importance of communication.
Make certain all team members are aware of the protocols for communicating in
a virtual team environment, understand the expectations, and are clear regarding
decision-making processes.
It's vital in this type of team structure that you, as the project manager, give
credit to the appropriate team members for their performance and actions on the
project. You might be the only one who fully understands the contributions
individual team members have made. When teams are co-located, members have
the opportunity to see for themselves the extraordinary efforts others are making
on the project. Virtual team members don't necessarily know what their
teammates have contributed to the project (or the level of effort they've exerted),
so it's up to you to let everyone know about outstanding performance.
Multi-criteria Decision Analysis Selecting team members, just like selecting
vendors, requires some type of criteria and analysis to determine whether the
potential candidate is a fit. You could use any number of factors, including
experience, education, skills, availability, and more, to rank and score candidates
and choose among them.

Outputs of Acquire Project Team
The resulting outputs of the Acquire Project Team process are as follows:
   Project staff assignments
   Resource calendars
   Project management plan updates
Project Staff Assignments Your ability to influence the selection of resources
(using the negotiating technique) will impact the project staff assignments
output. After determining elements such as the roles and responsibilities,
reviewing recruitment practices, and negotiating for staff, you assign project
team members to project activities. Along with this output, a project team
directory is published listing the names of all project team members and
stakeholders. Don't forget to also include team member names in project
organization charts, RAM charts, and other planning documents if their
assignments or names weren't known when you created those documents.
Resource Calendars Resource calendars show the team members' availability
and the times they are scheduled to work on the project. A composite resource
calendar includes availability information for potential resources as well as their
capabilities and skills. (Resource calendars are an input to the Estimate Activity
Resources process.) This comes in handy when you're creating the final schedule
and assigning resources to activities.
Project Management Plan Updates The time periods your project staff are
available are documented in the resource calendars output. The human resource
management plan and staffing management plan might require updates to
document the project roles and responsibilities of the staff assigned to the
project. These documents might require updates throughout the project if staff
members leave because of a promotion or, heaven forbid, if they leave for
employment in another company (unless you want them to leave--that's another
story).
Now that you have the team, what do you do with them? You'll look at topics
such as motivation, rewards, and recognition in the next process, Develop
Project Team.



         Real World Scenario

  The Only Candidate
  "Hey, did you hear?" your friend Story asks, "Roger has been assigned to
  the project team."
  the project team."
  "Over my dead body," you reply, pushing away from your computer screen.
  You head straight for the project manager's office and don't wait for a
  response from Story.
  Ann sets the phone into the cradle just as you walk through the door.
  Fortunately for you, Ann's door is always open, and she welcomes drop-ins.
  "Seems like something is on your mind," Ann says. "What can I help with?"
  "Story just told me that Roger has been assigned to the project team. I can't
  work with Roger. He's arrogant and doesn't respect anyone's work but his
  own. He belittles me in front of others, and I don't deserve that. I write good
  code, and I don't need Roger looking over my shoulder. I want to be on this
  team, but not if Roger is part of it."
  Ann thinks for a minute and replies, "I want you to work on this project; it's
  a great opportunity for you. But there isn't anyone else who can work on the
  analysis phase of this project except Roger. He's the only one left who has a
  solid understanding of the mainframe legacy code. Unfortunately, those old
  programs were never documented well, and they've evolved over the years
  into programs on top of programs. Without Roger's knowledge of the
  existing system, we'd blow the budget and time estimates already established
  for this project. Since I need both of you on this project, here's what I
  propose: I will clearly outline the roles and responsibilities for all the key
  team members at the kickoff meeting. I'll also make it clear that negative
  team interactions won't be allowed. If you have a problem with Roger that
  you can't resolve on your own, you should get me involved right away."


Developing the Project Team
Projects exist to create a unique product, result, or service within a limited time
frame. Projects are performed by people, and most projects require more than
one person to perform all of the activities. If you've got more than one person
working on your project, you've got a team. If you've got a team, you've got a
wide assortment of personalities, skills, needs, and issues in the mix. Couple this
with part-time team members, teams based in functional organizations whose
loyalty lies with the functional manager, teams based in matrix organizations
that report to you for project-related activities and another manager for their
functional duties, or teams with members who are scattered around the globe and
you could have some real challenges on your hands. Good luck! Okay, I won't
you could have some real challenges on your hands. Good luck! Okay, I won't
leave you hanging like that.
The Develop Project Team process is about creating an open, encouraging
environment for your team and developing it into an effective, functioning,
coordinated group. Projects are performed by individuals, and the better they
work together, the smoother and more efficient the execution of the project will
be. I'm sure you have had the experience of working with a team who pitched in
and shared workloads when the work became unbalanced. I'm also sure you have
worked with teams who didn't do this--teams whose members took on a "me
first" attitude and couldn't care less about the plight of their fellow team
members. I'd much rather work with a team like the first example.




  The proper development of the team is critical to a successful project, and as
  the project manager, you should know that developing the team is one of
  your most important duties. Because teams are made up of individuals,
  individual development becomes a critical factor to project success.
  Individual team members need the proper development and training to
  perform the activities of the project or to enhance their existing knowledge
  and skills. The development needed will depend on the project. Perhaps you
  have a team member who's ready to make the jump into a lead role but they
  don't have any experience at lead work. Give them some exposure by
  assigning them a limited amount of activities in a lead capacity, provide
  them with some training if needed, and be available to coach and mentor
  where needed. The best option is to work with the management team to
  provide this person with the development they need prior to the start of the
  project (if you're lucky enough to know early on who your resources might
  be and what their existing skills are).

Develop Project Team inputs include the human resource management plan,
project staff assignments, and resource calendars. Funny thing is, two of these
inputs are outputs that I discussed in the Acquire Project Team process, and the
human resource management plan was covered previously, so we'll move on.

Tools and Techniques of Develop Project Team
The tools and techniques of Develop Project Team are as follows:
   Interpersonal skills
   Training
   Team-building activities
   Ground rules
   Co-location
   Recognition and rewards
   Personnel assessment tools
I'll cover all these tools and techniques next.

Interpersonal Skills
Interpersonal skills are often referred to as soft skills or emotional intelligence.
Soft skills include such things as leadership, influence, negotiation,
communications, empathy, and creativity. For example, it's important for you as
the project manager to understand your project team members' attitudes and
opinions about their work. Bad attitudes, as the saying goes, are contagious. It
doesn't mean the person who has the attitude is bad, but if you're paying
attention to your team members and taking the appropriate amount of time to
listen to their legitimate concerns and issues, and taking action on them, you can
go a long way toward stemming bad attitudes.
Soft skills can be learned, but in my experience they are more often inherent in
project managers' personalities. However, just because certain soft skills may
not be in your nature, it doesn't mean you can't observe this behavior in others
and incorporate those skills into your management techniques.
One other issue to consider regarding this tool and technique is that you'll have
resources from other departments who have assignments on the project that
you're responsible for overseeing. For example, the finance department and the
marketing department might have assigned project activities, and as the project
manager, you'll manage their progress. This implies that you'll need general
knowledge management skills to understand what the assignments entail and
strong leadership and negotiation skills to influence the departments to stay on
schedule.

Training
Training is a matter of assessing your team members' skills and abilities,
assessing the project needs, and providing the training necessary for the team
members to carry out their assigned activities. Training can be formal or
informal. Formal training may include classroom training, online training, or
training performed on the job. Informal training might occur by observing others
or asking others how to perform a task. Training can sometimes be a reward as
well. In the software industry, programmers seek out positions that offer training
on the latest and greatest technologies, and they consider it a benefit or bonus to
attend training on the company dollar and time. If you know early in the
Planning processes that training is necessary, include the details of this in the
staffing management plan. During the course of the project, you might observe
team members who need training, or they might ask for training. Update the
staffing management plan with this information.

Team-Building Activities
Many times, project teams consist of folks who don't know each other. They
aren't necessarily aware of the project objectives and might not even want to be a
part of the team. Or the project manager might not have previously worked with
the people assigned to the project team. Does this sound like a recipe for
disaster? It's not. Thousands of projects are started with team members and
project managers who don't know each other, and those projects come to a
successful completion. How is that done? It's a result of the project manager's
team-building and communication skills.
The project manager's job is to bring the team together, get its members all
headed in the right direction, and provide motivation, reward, and recognition to
keep the team in tip-top shape. This is done using a variety of team-building
techniques and exercises. Team building is simply getting a diverse group of
people to work together in the most efficient and effective manner possible. This
might involve events organized by the management team or individual actions
designed to improve team performance. There are entire volumes on this subject,
and it's beyond the scope of this book to go into all the team-building
possibilities. The exam tends to focus more on the theories behind team building
and the characteristics of effective teams, so that's what you'll spend your time
exploring.
Dr. Bruce Tuckman and Mary Ann Jensen developed a model that describes how
teams develop and mature. According to Tuckman-Jensen, all newly formed
teams go through five stages of development:
1. Forming
2. Storming
3. Norming
4. Performing
5. Adjourning
Tuckman-Jensen originally devised this theory using the first four stages of
development. Based on later research by the Tuckman-Jensen team, a fifth stage
of development was added called adjourning. You've probably seen this model
elsewhere, but because these stages might show up on the exam, you'll want to
memorize them. Take a brief look at each of them:
Forming This one is easy. Forming is the beginning stage of team formation,
when all the members are brought together, introduced, and told the objectives
of the project. This is where team members learn why they're working together.
During this stage, team members tend to be formal and reserved and take on an
"all-business" approach.
Your role as the project manager in this stage of development is communication.
If the team is small, I recommend meeting with each of the members one-on-one
and as a group. In my experience, team members who clearly understand why
they are assigned to the project, what's expected of them regarding individual
and team deliverables, and how to inform the project manager of their needs and
issues will generally outperform their peers who do not have or understand this
information.
Storming Storming is where the action begins. Team members become
confrontational with each other as they're vying for position and control during
this stage. They're working through who is going to be the top dog and jockeying
for status.
Your role as the project manager during this stage is to remind the team of the
project goals and keep everyone centered on those goals. Conflicts aren't bad in
this case; they're necessary to get the team into the next stage. During this stage,
it is best if you can limit your intervention and let team members resolve their
own issues as often as possible. Team members need to get a feel for where they
stand, where the extent of their responsibility lies, and how they'll accomplish
their tasks working with the other personalities of the team, and that usually
involves some tussles. Questioning and conflict help clarify the goals of the
project for everyone on the team, not just the person in conflict, so encourage
your team members to ask questions and discuss conflicts openly. However, you
won't progress to the next stage until the team has resolved the conflicts.
won't progress to the next stage until the team has resolved the conflicts.
Norming Now things begin to calm down. Team members know each other
fairly well by now. They're comfortable with their positions in the team, and
they begin to deal with project problems instead of people problems. In the
norming stage, they confront the project concerns and problems instead of each
other. Decisions are made jointly at this stage, and team members exhibit mutual
respect and familiarity with one another.
As the project manager, you should continue to hold team meetings, especially
during this stage, because team members can fall back into the storming stage if
left to their own devices. During this stage, you should intervene more often
when conflicts arise to keep the team moving forward. Monitor each team
member's participation, and encourage the team to continue to remain focused on
the project's goals and alert you of any problems as soon as they arise.
Teams in the norming stage are efficient, functioning teams. If your team has
progressed to this stage, they'll likely be productive and work effectively toward
meeting the project goals. They still aren't performing at their absolute best,
though--that happens in the next stage.

  Exam Spotlight
  Different teams progress through the stages of development at different
  rates. When new team members are brought onto the team, the development
  stages start all over again. It doesn't matter where the team is in the first four
  phases of the development process--a new member will start the cycle all
  over again.

Performing Ahh, perfection. Well, almost, anyway. This is where great teams
end up. This stage is where the team is productive and effective. The level of
trust among team members is high, and great things are achieved. This is the
mature development stage.
Your role as project manager during this stage should be more focused on the
project management processes than on the team itself. Teams in this stage are
usually self-directed and will hum along smoothly, provided you continue to
update them on project progress and keep the lines of communication open.
Adjourning As the name implies, this phase refers to the breakup of the team
after the work is completed.
As the project manager, you need to realize that many team members may
experience a sense of loss at the end of the project, particularly long-term
projects. Guide the team through a closure process. Team celebrations at the
conclusion of the project are one way to accomplish this. Acknowledge their
contributions and let them know you are grateful for their efforts and for any
sacrifices they've made during the course of the project.
According to Tuckman-Jensen, leaders adapt their leadership styles as the teams
develop maturity and progress through the development stages. For example,
early in the forming stage, leaders take on a direct style of leadership. As the
team progresses, their leaders will employ a coaching, participating, and then
delegating style of leadership to match the level of development the team has
achieved.
You'll now take a closer look at focusing your team members throughout these
stages of development, along with some of the characteristics of effective teams.

Team Focus
Have you ever watched any of those old pirate movies on late-night TV?
Remember the scenes where the captain goes down into the bowels of the ship to
check on the teams of rowers? He scrutinizes the crew and literally whips the
rowers who aren't pulling their weight into shape. I don't recommend this as a
team-building technique, but imagine for a minute that your project team
members are like those rowing teams. If the members on the left are rowing one
way and the members on the right are rowing another, you're creating a lot of
energy and looking busy, but in the end you aren't making any progress.
It's paramount that the team members know and understand the goals and
objectives of the project. They should all understand the direction you're headed
and work toward that end. After all, that's the reason they were brought together
in the first place. Keep in mind that people see and hear things from their own
perspective. A room full of people attending a speech will each come away with
something a little different because what was said speaks to their particular
situation in life at the time. In other words, their own perceptions filter what they
hear. It's your job as project manager to make sure the team members understand
the project goals and their own assignments correctly. I suggest you use solid
communication skills to get your point across. Ask your team members to tell
you in their own words what they believe the project goals are. This is a great
way to know whether you've got everyone on board and a great opportunity for
you to clarify any misunderstandings regarding the project goals.
Effective Team Characteristics
Effective teams are typically very energetic teams. They often are characterized
as high-performance teams and are motivated by results and the successful
completion of tasks. Their enthusiasm is contagious, and it feeds on itself. They
generate a lot of creativity and become good problem solvers. Teams like this
are every project manager's dream. Investing yourself in team building as well as
relationship building--especially when you don't think you have the time to do
so--will bring many benefits. Here's a sample of the benefits:
   Better conflict resolution
   Commitment to the project
   Commitment to the project team members and project manager
   High job satisfaction
   Enhanced communication
   A sense of belonging and purpose
   Enhanced feelings of trust
   Lower project costs
   Improved productivity
   Improved quality
   A successful project
Dysfunctional teams will typically produce the opposite results of the benefits
just listed. Dysfunctional teams don't just happen by themselves any more than
great teams do. Sure, sometimes you're lucky enough to get the right
combination of folks together right off the bat. But usually, team building takes
work and dedication on the part of the project manager. Even in the situations
where you do get that dynamite combination of people, they will benefit from
team-building exercises and feedback.
Unfortunately, sour attitudes are just as contagious as enthusiasm. Watch for
these symptoms among your team members, and take action to correct the
situation before the entire team is affected:
   Lack of motivation or "don't care" attitudes
   Project work that isn't satisfactory
   Status meetings that turn into whining sessions
   Poor communication
   Lack of respect for and lack of trust in the project manager




  No amount of team building will make up for poor project planning or
  ineffective project management techniques. Neglecting these things and
  fooling yourself into thinking that your project team is good enough to make
  up for the poor planning or poor techniques could spell doom for your
  project. Besides that, it's not fair to your project team to put them in that
  position.


Ground Rules
Ground rules are expectations set by the project manager and project team that
describe acceptable team behavior. For example, one of my pet peeves is team
members who interrupt each other. In this case, one of the ground rules is one
person speaks at a time during a meeting. Another ground rule might be
reporting potential issues as soon as the team member becomes aware of them.
Outlining ground rules like this helps the team understand expectations
regarding acceptable behavior and increases productivity.

Co-location
Co-location, also known as tight matrix, brings team members together in one
physical location for the entire project, or for important periods during the
project life cycle. Many times on large projects the project manager will make
provisions in the project budget to bring the team together at the same location.
One way to achieve co-location might be to set aside a common meeting room,
sometimes called a war room, for team members who are located in different
buildings or across town to meet and exchange information.
Multiple locations can also be a big time-waster for you as the project manager
and for your team members. If some team members are located in one part of
town and another set of team members are located across town, you'll find
yourself in the car (or the bus) driving back and forth to make face-to-face
contact and get status updates. Conducting team meetings also becomes a hassle
as one set of team members or the other must drive to another location (or both
to a central location) to have a meeting.
Our busy, conflicting schedules and differences in location don't always allow
for face-to-face communication, so email is the next best thing. Email can keep
the information flowing when you aren't able to meet in person, and it can even
help take the heat out of conflicts that might escalate if you were meeting one-
on-one. However, email cannot reveal tone of voice, facial expressions, or body
language and sometimes words alone are misinterpreted. Sometimes those
nonverbal cues are more important than what's being said. If you don't know
your team members or stakeholders well, I recommend meeting with them
personally whenever you can. Once you've established good relationships with
them, you should be able to balance the use of email and personal interactions
and know when it's time to call a face-to-face meeting. In reality, it's often
difficult to get your team together physically. A good solution in lieu of having
people relocate is videoconferencing or Internet meetings. Team members
scattered across the country have access to the Internet, and it's relatively easy to
find a time everyone can meet via the Web. Videoconferencing or video web
conferencing are the best options if available because they allow intonation and
nonverbal behaviors to be part of the communication process.

Recognition and Rewards
I have quite a bit of ground to cover with recognition and rewards. As I said
earlier, you could see several exam questions regarding team building, so dig out
all your favorite memorization techniques and put them to use.
Team building starts with project planning and doesn't stop until the project is
completed. It involves employing techniques to improve your team's
performance and keeping team members motivated. Motivation helps people
work more efficiently and produce better results. If clear expectations, clear
procedures, and the right motivational tools are used, project teams will excel.
Motivation can be extrinsic or intrinsic. Intrinsic motivators are specific to the
individual. Some people are just naturally driven to achieve--it's part of their
nature. (I suspect this is a motivator for you since you're reading this book.)
Cultural and religious influences are forms of intrinsic motivators as well.
Extrinsic motivators are material rewards and might include bonuses, the use of
a company car, stock options, gift certificates, training opportunities, extra time
off, and so on. Reward and recognition--a tool and technique of the Develop
Project Team process--is an example of an extrinsic motivator. We'll look at
them next.
them next.
Recognition and rewards are important parts of team motivation. They are
formal ways of recognizing and promoting desirable behavior and are most
effective when carried out by the management team and the project manager.
You should develop and document the criteria for rewards, especially monetary
awards. Although rewards and recognition help build a team, they can also kill
morale if you don't have an established method or criteria for handing them out.
Track who is receiving awards throughout the project. For example, if you have
consistent overachievers on the team, you could kill morale by consistently
rewarding the same one or two people repeatedly. It could also be perceived that
you're playing favorites. If team members believe the rewards are win-lose (also
known as zero-sum) and that only certain team members will be rewarded, you
might end up hurting morale more than helping. If you find yourself in this
position, consider team awards. This is a win-win because all team members are
recognized for their contributions. Recognition and rewards should be
proportional to the achievement. In other words, appropriately link the reward to
the performance. For example, a project manager who has responsibility for the
project budget and the procurement process and keeps the costs substantially
under budget without sacrificing the results of the project should be rewarded for
this achievement. However, if these responsibilities are assigned to a functional
manager in the organization, it wouldn't be appropriate to reward a project
manager who was not the one responsible for keeping the costs in line.



         Real World Scenario

  Baker's Gift Baskets
  You're a contract project manager for Baker's Gift Baskets. This company
  assembles gift baskets of all styles and shapes with every edible treat
  imaginable. The company has recently experienced explosive growth, and
  you've been brought on board to manage its new project. The owners of the
  company want to offer "pick-your-own" baskets that allow customers to pick
  the individual items they want included in the baskets. In addition, they're
  introducing a new line of containers to choose from, including items such as
  miniature golf bags, flowerpots, serving bowls, and the like. This means
  changes to the catalog and the website to accommodate the new offerings.
  The deadline for this project is the driving constraint. The website changes
  The deadline for this project is the driving constraint. The website changes
  won't cause any problems with the deadline. However, the catalog must go
  to press quickly to meet holiday mailing deadlines, which in turn are driving
  the project deadline.
  Your team members put their heads together and came up with an ingenious
  plan to meet the catalog deadline. It required lots of overtime and some
  weekend work on their part to pull it off, but they met the date.
  You decide this is a perfect opportunity to recognize and reward the team for
  their outstanding efforts. You've arranged a slot on the agenda at the next
  all-company meeting to bring your team up front and praise them for their
  cooperation and efforts to get the catalog to the printers on time. You'll also
  present each of them with two days of paid time off and a gift certificate for
  a dinner with their family at an exclusive restaurant in the city.

Team members should be rewarded for going above and beyond the call of duty.
Perhaps they put in a significant amount of overtime to meet a project goal or
spent nights round-the-clock babysitting ill-performing equipment. These types
of behaviors should be rewarded and formally recognized by the project
manager and the management team. On the other hand, if the ill-performing
equipment was a direct result of mistakes made or if it happened because of poor
planning, rewards would not be appropriate, obviously.
Consider individual preferences and cultural differences when using rewards and
recognitions. Some people don't like to be recognized in front of a group; others
thrive on it. Some people appreciate an honest thank-you with minimal fanfare,
and others just won't accept individual rewards because their culture doesn't
allow it. Keep this in mind when devising your reward system.
There are many theories on motivation. As a project manager, it's important to
understand them so that you can tailor your recognition and rewards programs to
take into account the reasons people do what they do. You might encounter
questions on these theories on the exam, so we'll discuss their primary points in
the following sections.

Motivational Theories
Motivational theories came about during the modern age. Prior to today's
information-and service-type jobs and yesterday's factory work, the majority of
people worked the land and barely kept enough food on the table to feed their
family. No one was concerned about motivation at work. You worked because
you wouldn't have anything to eat if you didn't. Fortunately, that isn't the only
reason most people work today.
Today we have a new set of problems in the workplace. Workers in the service-
and knowledge-based industries aren't concerned with starvation--that need has
been replaced with other needs, such as job satisfaction, a sense of belonging
and commitment to the project, good working conditions, and so on.
Motivational theories present ideas on why people act the way they do and how
you can influence them to act in certain ways to get the results you want. Again,
there are libraries full of books on this topic. I'll cover four of those theories
here.

Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
You have probably seen this classic example of motivational theory. Abraham
Maslow theorized that humans have five basic needs arranged in hierarchical
order. The first needs are physical needs, such as the need for food, clothing, and
shelter. The idea is that these needs must be met before the person can move to
the next level of needs in the hierarchy, which includes safety and security
needs. Here, the concern is for the person's physical welfare and the security of
their belongings. Once that need is met, they progress to the next level, and so
on.
Maslow's hierarchy of needs theory suggests that once a lower-level need has
been met, it no longer serves as a motivator and the next higher level becomes
the driving motivator in a person's life. Maslow conjectures that humans are
always in one state of need or another. Here is a recap of each of the needs,
starting with the highest level and ending with the lowest:
Self-Actualization Performing at your peak potential
Self-Esteem Needs Accomplishment, respect for self, capability
Social Needs    A sense of belonging, love, acceptance, friendship
Safety and Security Needs      Your physical welfare and the security of your
belongings
Basic Physical Needs Food, clothing, shelter
The highest level of motivation in this theory is the state of self-actualization.
Several years ago, the United States Army had a slogan that I think encapsulates
self-actualization very well: "Be all that you can be." When all the physical,
safety, social, and self-esteem needs have been met, a person reaches a state of
safety, social, and self-esteem needs have been met, a person reaches a state of
independence where they're able to express themselves and perform at their
peak. They'll do good work just for the sake of doing good work. Recognition
and self-esteem are the motivators at lower levels; now the need for being the
best they can be is reached.




  In Maslow's later work, he discussed three additional aspects of motivation:
  cognitive, aesthetic, and transcendence. The five key needs are the ones
  you'll most likely need to know for the exam, but it wouldn't hurt to be
  familiar with the names of the three additional motivational levels. Also note
  that people are not "stuck" at a certain level forever. You will traverse the
  pyramid, up and down, throughout your life and career.


Hygiene Theory
Frederick Herzberg came up with the Hygiene Theory, also known as the
Motivation-Hygiene Theory. He postulates that two factors contribute to
motivation: hygiene factors and motivators. Hygiene factors deal with work
environment issues. The thing to remember about hygiene factors is that they
prevent dissatisfaction. Examples of hygiene factors are pay, benefits, the
conditions of the work environment, and relationships with peers and managers.
Pay is considered a hygiene factor because Herzberg believed that over the long
term, pay is not a motivator. Being paid for the work prevents dissatisfaction but
doesn't necessarily bring satisfaction in and of itself. He believed this to be true
as long as the pay system is equitable. If two workers performing the same
functions have large disparities in pay, then pay can become a motivator.
Motivators deal with the substance of the work itself and the satisfaction one
derives from performing the functions of the job. Motivators lead to satisfaction.
The ability to advance, the opportunity to learn new skills, and the challenges
involved in the work are all motivators, according to Herzberg.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that Herzberg was the inventor of the Hygiene
  Theory and that this theory claims that hygiene factors (pay, benefits, and
  working conditions) prevent dissatisfaction while motivators (challenging
  working conditions) prevent dissatisfaction while motivators (challenging
  work, opportunities to learn, and advancement) lead to satisfaction.


Expectancy Theory
The Expectancy Theory, first proposed by Victor Vroom, says that the
expectation of a positive outcome drives motivation. People will behave in
certain ways if they think there will be good rewards for doing so. Also note that
this theory says the strength of the expectancy drives the behavior. This means
the expectation or likelihood of the reward is linked to the behavior. For
example, if you tell your two-year-old to put the toys back in the toy box and
you'll give her a cookie to do so, chances are she'll put the toys away. This is a
reasonable reward for a reasonable action. However, if you promise your project
team members vacations in Hawaii if they get the project done early and they
know there is no way you can deliver that reward, there is little motivation to
work toward it. Also make certain you are using rewards that motivate your team
members. If you make a trip to Hawaii the reward, and you can make good on
that promise in this example, but your team members are deathly afraid of
flying, the reward won't have a motivating effect.
This theory also says that people become what you expect of them. If you openly
praise your project team members and treat them like valuable contributors,
you'll likely have a high-performing team on your hands. Conversely, when you
publicly criticize people or let them know that you have low expectations
regarding their performance, they'll likely live up (or down as the case might be)
to that expectation as well.

Achievement Theory
The Achievement Theory, attributed to David McClelland, says that people are
motivated by the need for three things: achievement, power, and affiliation. The
achievement motivation is obviously the need to achieve or succeed. The power
motivation involves a desire for influencing the behavior of others, and the need
for affiliation is relationship oriented. Workers want to have friendships with
their coworkers and a sense of camaraderie with their fellow team members. The
strength of your team members' desire for each of these will drive their
performance on various activities.

  Exam Spotlight
  Make certain you understand the theories of motivation and their premises
  Make certain you understand the theories of motivation and their premises
  for the exam. Here's a summary to help you memorize them:
  Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs         Abraham Maslow. Needs must be satisfied
  in a hierarchical order.
  Hygiene Theory Frederick Herzberg. Work environment (pay, benefits,
  and working conditions) prevents dissatisfaction.
  Expectancy Theory       Victor Vroom. Expectation of positive outcomes
  drives motivation.
  Achievement Theory David McClelland. People are motivated by
  achievement, power, and affiliation.

I'll cover two more theories in the leadership section, which is next. They deal
specifically with how leaders interact with their project team members.

Leadership vs. Management
Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?," introduced the differences between leaders and
managers. I'll add a bit more information here regarding leadership theories and
the types of power leaders possess, but first I'll recap leadership and
management.
Recall that leadership is about imparting vision and rallying people around that
vision. Leaders motivate and inspire and are concerned with strategic vision.
Leaders have a knack for getting others to do what needs to be done.
Two of the techniques they use to do this are power and politics. Power is the
ability to get people to do what they wouldn't do ordinarily. It's also the ability to
influence behavior. Politics imparts pressure to conform regardless of whether
people agree with the decision. Leaders understand the difference between
power and politics and when to employ each technique. I'll talk more about
power shortly.
Good leaders have committed team members who believe in the vision of the
leader. Leaders set direction and time frames and have the ability to attract good
talent to work for them. Leaders inspire a vision and get things done through
others by earning loyalty, respect, and cooperation from team members. They set
the course and lead the way. Good leaders are directive in their approach but
allow for plenty of feedback and input. Good leaders commonly have strong
interpersonal skills and are well respected.
Managers are generally task oriented and concerned with issues such as plans,
Managers are generally task oriented and concerned with issues such as plans,
controls, budgets, policies, and procedures. They're generalists with a broad base
of planning and organizational skills, and their primary goal is satisfying
stakeholder needs. They also possess motivational skills and the ability to
recognize and reward behavior.




  Project managers need to use the traits of both leaders and managers at
  different times during a project. On large projects, a project manager will act
  more like a leader inspiring the subproject managers to get on board with the
  objectives. On small projects, project managers will act more like managers
  because they're responsible for all the planning and coordinating functions.

I'll discuss six theories regarding leadership and management. They are Douglas
McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y, Dr. William Ouchi's Theory Z, the
Contingency Theory, the Tannenbaum and Schmidt Continuum Management
Theory, and the Situational Leadership Theory. Then I'll discuss the types of
power leaders use and leadership styles.

Theory X, Theory Y, and Theory Z
Douglas McGregor defined two models of worker behavior, Theory X and
Theory Y, that attempt to explain how different managers deal with their team
members. Theory X managers believe most people do not like work and will try
to steer clear of it; they believe people have little to no ambition, need constant
supervision, and won't actually perform the duties of their job unless threatened.
As a result, Theory X managers are like dictators and impose very rigid controls
over their people. They believe people are motivated only by punishment,
money, or position. Unfortunately for the team members, Theory X managers
unknowingly also subscribe to the Expectancy Theory. If they expect people to
be lazy and unproductive and treat them as such, their team members probably
will be lazy and unproductive.
Theory Y managers believe people are interested in performing their best given
the right motivation and proper expectations. These managers provide support to
their teams, are concerned about their team members, and are good listeners.
Theory Y managers believe people are creative and committed to the project
goals, that they like responsibility and seek it out, and that they are able to
perform the functions of their positions with limited supervision.
Theory Z was developed by Dr. William Ouchi. This theory is concerned with
increasing employee loyalty to their organizations. It came about in Japan in the
1980s when jobs were often offered for life. This theory results in increased
productivity, it puts an emphasis on the well-being of the employees both at
work and outside of work, it encourages steady employment, and it leads to high
employee satisfaction and morale.

Contingency Theory
The Contingency Theory builds on a combination of Theory Y behaviors and the
Hygiene Theory. The Contingency Theory, in a nutshell, says that people are
motivated to achieve levels of competency and will continue to be motivated by
this need even after competency is reached.

Tannenbaum and Schmidt Continuum Management Theory
Robert Tannenbaum and Warren Schmidt developed a leadership theory, called
the Tannenbaum and Schmidt Continuum Management Theory, that describes
the level of authority a manager exerts on the team versus the freedom a team
has to make decisions (under the guidance of the manager). They outline seven
levels of delegated freedom ranging from the manager making all decisions and
announcing them to the team to the manager allowing the team to identify the
problem, determine alternatives, and make the final recommendation regarding
the action needed to solve the problem. The level of freedom you use depends on
the maturity and experience of the team and the manager. As the team
progresses, their decision making matures, and more and more freedom can be
delegated. The manager is always engaged at all levels of this model, but their
authority level will decrease as they delegate decision-making responsibility to
the team.

Situational Leadership Theory
Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard developed the Situational Leadership Theory
during the mid-1970s. This theory's main premise is that the leadership style you
use depends on the situation. For example, perhaps you have a new employee
fresh out of school and they are learning a new task. Obviously, this employee
will need a lot more guidance and direction than an employee who has been with
the organization for some time and knows how to perform the task at hand. Both
Hersey and Blanchard went on to develop their own situational leadership
models. Blanchard's model, Situational Leadership II, describes four styles of
leadership that depend on the situation: directing, coaching, supporting, and
delegating.

The Power of Leaders
As stated earlier, power is the ability to influence others to do what you want
them to do. Power can be used in a positive manner or a negative one. But that
old saying of your grandmother's about attracting more flies with honey than
vinegar still holds true today.
Leaders, managers, and project managers use power to convince others to do
tasks in a specific way. The kind of power they use to accomplish this depends
on their personality, their personal values, and the company culture.
A project manager might use several forms of power. I've already talked about
reward power, which is the ability to grant bonuses or incentive awards for a job
well done. Here are a few more:
Punishment Power Punishment, also known as coercive or penalty power, is
just the opposite of reward power. The employee is threatened with
consequences if expectations are not met.
Expert Power Expert power occurs when the person being influenced believes
the manager, or the person doing the influencing, is knowledgeable about the
subject or has special abilities that make them an expert. The person goes along
just because they think the influencer knows what they're doing and it's the best
thing for the situation.
Legitimate Power Legitimate, or formal, power comes about as a result of the
influencer's position. Because that person is the project manager, executive vice
president, or CEO, they have the power to call the shots and make decisions.
Referent Power Referent power is inferred to the influencer by their
subordinates. Project team members who have a great deal of respect and high
regard for their project managers willingly go along with decisions made by the
project manager because of referent power.
Punishment power should be used as a last resort and only after all other forms
have been exhausted. Sometimes, you'll have to use this method, but I hope
much less often than the other three forms of power. Sometimes, you'll have
team members who won't live up to expectations and their performance suffers
as a result. This is a case where punishment power is enacted to get the
employee to correct their behavior.
employee to correct their behavior.

Leadership Styles
Extensive research has been done in the area of leadership styles. I will highlight
a few of the well-known styles for exam purposes, but I encourage you to read
more about leadership on your own. You can train almost anyone to follow the
principles and practices of sound project management, but you won't have much
of a team to lead if you haven't mastered the art of great leadership.
Autocratic Autocratic leaders are essentially dictators. All decisions are made
by the leader with little to no input from the team.
Laissez-faire This leadership style is the opposite of the autocratic style. The
leader allows the team to drive decisions and recommend actions and has little
involvement in the process.
Democratic Democratic, or participative, driven leaders gather all the facts
and ask for input from the team before making a decision. In this style, all team
members participate in the decision-making process.
Situational As we discussed earlier, the Blanchard theory of situational
leadership has four styles. Directing is used when a team member needs to know
the step-by-step procedures for the problem. Coaching is used with team
members who have limited experience with the task at hand. They can perform
some minor functions of the task but need direction with the majority of the task.
Supporting is used with team members who have completed the same types of
tasks in the past and are able to complete the majority of the task at hand on their
own. They may need to ask a question or two to obtain guidance along the way.
Delegating is used when team members have performed the same tasks in the
past and are capable of making decisions regarding unexpected issues that may
occur. Delegating involves little to no input from the leader.
Transactional and Transformational Transactional and transformational
leadership styles were first developed by Bernard Bass, who was a professor
emeritus in the School of Management at Binghamton. He describes
transactional leaders as autocratic, activity focused, and autonomous, and they
use contingent reward systems and manage by exception.
Transformational leaders tend to focus on relationships rather than activities;
they are collaborative and influential and inspire and motivate their teams to
perform. Bass describes transformational leaders as empowering and concerned
with social justice, equity, and fairness.
Exam Spotlight
Know the difference between leaders and managers, the motivational and
leadership theories, and the types of power for the PMP(R) exam. Here's a
summary to help you memorize them:
Leaders Leaders motivate, inspire, and create buy-ins for the
organization's strategic vision. Leaders use power and politics to accomplish
the vision.
Managers Managers are task oriented and concerned with satisfying
stakeholder needs.
Theory X - McGregor Most people don't like work.
Theory Y - McGregor People are motivated to perform their best given
proper expectations and motivation.
Theory Z - Ouchi The implementation of this theory increases employee
loyalty and leads to high satisfaction and morale.
Contingency Theory People are motivated to achieve levels of
competency and will continue to be motivated after competency is reached.
Tannenbaum and Schmidt Continuum Management Theory                 You use
seven levels of delegated freedom when working with the team.
Situational Leadership Theory Hersey and Blanchard developed this
theory, which states that different situations call for different leadership
styles. Blanchard describes the styles in the Situational Leadership II Model
as directing, coaching, supportive, and delegating.
Reward Power      You reward desirable behavior with incentives or bonuses.
Punishment Power You threaten team members with consequences if
expectations are not met (also known as penalty or coercive power).
Expert Power The person doing the influencing has significant knowledge
or skills regarding the subject.
Legitimate Power This is the power of the position held by the influencer
(the president or vice president, for example), also known as formal power.
Referent Power This is power that's inferred to the influencer.
Personnel Assessment Tools
The final tool and technique of this process is personnel assessment tools. These
tools help highlight the strengths and weaknesses of the team by assessing
various aspects of the team, such as communication techniques, interpersonal
skills and preferences, organizational skills, decision-making skills, and more.

Outputs of Develop Project Team
You're now ready to close out the Develop Project Team process. This process
has only two outputs: team performance assessments and enterprise
environmental factors updates. Team performance assessments involve
determining a team's effectiveness. As a result of positive team-building
experiences, you'll see individuals improving their skills, team behaviors and
relationships improving, conflict resolutions going smoothly, reduced turnover,
and team members recommending ways to improve the work of the project. I
talked about effective team characteristics earlier in this chapter. Assessing these
characteristics will help you determine where (or whether) the project team
needs improvements.




  Project managers wear a lot of hats. This is one of the things that make this
  job so interesting. You need organization and planning skills to plan the
  project. You need motivation and sometimes disciplinary skills to execute
  the project plans. You need to exercise leadership and power where
  appropriate--and all the while, you have a host of relationships to manage,
  involving team members, stakeholders, managers, and customers. It's a great
  job and brings terrific satisfaction.


Managing Project Teams
The Manage Project Team process is concerned with tracking and reporting on
the performance of individual team members. During this process, performance
appraisals are prepared and conducted, issues are identified and resolved, and
feedback is given to the team members. Some team behavior is also observed
during this process, but the main focus here is on individuals and their
performance.

  Exam Spotlight

  Take note that the PMBOK(R) Guide states that one of the outcomes or results
  of the Manage Project Team process is an update to the human resource
  management plan, which is part of the project management plan updates
  output of this process. Other outcomes to note are that issues are resolved
  and information is provided for performance appraisals and lessons learned.

With the exception of issue log and work performance reports, you've seen all
the inputs to this process before:
   Human resource management plan
   Project staff assignments
   Team performance assessments
   Issue log
   Work performance reports
   Organizational process assets
The issue log is a place to document the issues that keep the project team from
meeting project goals. These issues can range from differences of opinion to
newly surfaced responsibilities that need to be assigned to a project team
member. Each issue should be recorded in the log along with the person
responsible for resolving it. You should also note the date the resolution is
needed.
Work performance reports document the status of the project compared to the
forecasts, including but not limited to cost control, scope validation, schedule
control, and quality control. Keep in mind that work performance reports are an
output of the Monitor and Control Project Work process and an input to this one
(an Executing process).

Tools and Techniques for Managing Teams
Most of the tools and techniques for this process are new. Don't skip studying
any of them because you'll likely see exam questions regarding them. The tools
and techniques of the Manage Project Team process are as follows:
   Observation and conversation
   Project performance appraisals
   Conflict management
   Interpersonal skills
We'll take a closer look at each of these tools in the following sections.

Observation and Conversation
Observation and conversation is another one of those tools and techniques that is
self-evident. To assess team member performance, you have to observe it. I hope
you've also learned how important communication is to the success of the
project. This includes communicating with your team members. I know project
managers who are reticent to engaging their teams in conversation unless it's
official project business. I've even known project managers who've instructed
their administrative assistants to give specific directions to other team members.
It's difficult to understand a team member's attitude or viewpoint toward the
project if you're communicating through someone else. Establish an open door
policy with your team members and live up to it. The benefits are so great that
it's worth a few minutes a day of chitchat to establish that feeling of trust and
camaraderie. If your team perceives you as open, honest, and willing to listen,
you'll be the first person they come to when issues arise.



         Real World Scenario

  What Not to Do
  Tina is a newly minted project manager. She has worked on many projects
  as the assistant project manager, but this is the first time she has led the
  charge. Tina is so shy she finds it difficult to give team members any kind of
  direction or to assign tasks, so she has her administrative assistant do it for
  her. Tina tells her administrative assistant what needs to be done and who
  needs to do it and leaves it to the assistant to inform the appropriate team
  members.
  As the project progresses, schedule milestone dates are missed, and Tina
  discovers tasks that haven't started that were scheduled to begin two weeks
  ago. Coming in from lunch one day she sees several project team members
  ago. Coming in from lunch one day she sees several project team members
  huddled around her administrative assistant's desk. From what she overhears,
  they are discussing a risk event that occurred on the project.
  Fortunately for Tina, one of the project managers she has worked for in the
  past understands what is happening. Because the administrative assistant is
  the one who has established relationships with the team and is in effect
  giving the orders, the team is treating her as the project manager instead of
  Tina. Tina's friend has a one-on-one coaching session with Tina about her
  management style and the importance of conversation and observation.
  Together they are able to get the project back on track.


Project Performance Appraisals
Project performance appraisals are typically annual or semiannual affairs where
managers let their employees know what they think of their performance over
the past year and rate them accordingly. They are also the perfect time to review
the employee's job description and clarify roles and responsibilities. Appraisals
are usually manager-to-employee exchanges but can incorporate a 360-degree
review, which takes in feedback from just about everyone the team member
interacts with, including stakeholders, customers, project manager, peers,
subordinates, and the delivery person if they have a significant amount of project
interaction. I'm not a fan of 360-degree reviews because they make most
nonmanager types uncomfortable. "I don't want to rate my peer," is a typical
response. I also find 360-degree reviews are biased. At best you'll get a response
like this: "Oh, Ken is great, just great. No problems--a good guy." Or you'll get
exactly the opposite if the person you're speaking with doesn't like the team
member you're reviewing. Performance appraisal should be a bit more
constructive than this. Nonetheless, understand the 360-degree concept for the
exam.
No matter what type of appraisal is conducted, project managers should
contribute to the performance appraisals of all project team members. You
should be aware of potential loyalty issues when you're working in a matrix
organizational structure. The team member in this structure reports to both you
(as the project manager) and a functional manager. If the project manager does
not have an equal say, or at least some say, about the employee's performance, it
will cause the team member to be loyal to the functional manager and show little
loyalty to the project or project manager. Managing these dual-reporting
relationships is often a critical success factor for the project, and it is the project
manager's responsibility to ensure that these relationships are managed
manager's responsibility to ensure that these relationships are managed
effectively.
Performance appraisal time is also a good time to explore training needs, clarify
roles and responsibilities, set goals for the future, and so on.

Conflict Management
I said earlier in this chapter that if you have more than one person working on
your project, you have a team. Here's another fact: If you have more than one
person working on your project, you'll have conflict.
Everyone has desires, needs, and goals. Conflict comes into the picture when the
desires, needs, or goals of one party are incompatible with the desires, needs, or
goals of another party (or parties). Conflict, simply put, is the incompatibility of
goals, which often leads to one party resisting or blocking the other party from
attaining their goals. Wait--this doesn't sound like a party!

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that conflict can be reduced by implementing
  team ground rules and group norms and utilizing well-grounded project
  management processes. Regular and effective communication, and clear
  definitions of roles and responsibilities of team members, will also go a long
  way in keeping conflict to a minimum.

There are five styles of resolving conflict that might show up on the exam:
Force/Direct Force or direct is just as it sounds. One person forces a solution
on the other parties. This is where the boss puts on the "Because I'm the boss and
I said so" hat. Although this is a permanent solution, it isn't necessarily the best
solution. People will go along with it because, well, they're forced to go along
with it. It doesn't mean they agree with the solution. This isn't the best technique
to use when you're trying to build a team. This is an example of a win-lose
conflict resolution technique. The forcing party wins, and the losers are those
who are forced to go along with the decision.
Smooth/Accommodate The smooth or accommodate technique does not lead
to a permanent solution. It's a temporary way to resolve conflict, where the areas
of agreement are emphasized over the areas of difference so the real issue stays
buried. Smoothing can also occur when someone attempts to make the conflict
appear less important than it is. Everyone looks at each other and scratches their
head and wonders why they thought the conflict was such a big deal anyway. As
a result, a compromise is reached, and everyone feels good about the solution
until they get back to their desk and start thinking about the issue again. When
they realize that the conflict was smoothed over and is more important than they
were led to believe, or that they never dealt with the issue at hand, they'll be back
at it, and the conflict will resurface. This is an example of a lose-lose conflict
resolution technique because neither side wins. Smoothing is also known as
accommodating.
Compromise/Reconcile Parties that compromise or reconcile each give up
something to reach a solution. Everyone involved decides what they will give on
and what they won't give on, and eventually through all the give and take, a
solution is reached. Neither side wins or loses in this situation. As a result,
neither side is gung ho about the decision that was reached. They will drag their
feet and reluctantly trudge along. If, however, both parties make firm
commitments to the resolution, then the solution becomes a permanent one.
Collaborate/Problem Solve The collaborate technique is also called problem
solve and is the best way to resolve conflict. One of the key actions you'll
perform with this technique is a fact-finding mission. The thinking here is that
one right solution to a problem exists and the facts will bear out the solution.
Once the facts are uncovered, they're presented to the parties and the decision
will be clear. Thus, the solution becomes a permanent one and the conflict
expires. This is a win-win solution. Multiple viewpoints are discussed and
shared using this technique, and team members have the opportunity to examine
all the perspectives of the issue. Collaborating will lead to true consensus where
team members commit to the decision. This is the conflict resolution approach
project managers use most often and is an example of a win-win conflict
resolution technique.
Withdraw/Avoid When parties withdraw or avoid, they never reach
resolution. The withdraw or avoid technique occurs when one of the parties gets
up and leaves and refuses to discuss the conflict. It is probably the worst of all
the techniques because nothing gets resolved. This is an example of a lose-lose
conflict resolution technique.

  Exam Spotlight
  Know each of the conflict resolution techniques for the exam. Also
  remember that these techniques will not necessarily yield long-term results.
  remember that these techniques will not necessarily yield long-term results.
  The smoothing and withdrawal techniques have temporary results and aren't
  always good techniques to use to resolve problems. Resolutions reached
  through forcing and compromise might not always be satisfying for all
  parties, but they tend to produce longer-lasting results. Collaborating
  techniques are often successful and produce commitment to the decision
  provided all parties believe they had the opportunity to provide their
  opinions and ideas.

During the Manage Project Team process, it's important to note that, as in any
situation, you'll want to deal with conflict as soon as it arises. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, when you have successfully resolved conflict, it will result in
increased productivity and better, more positive working relationships.
Most conflicts come about in the Manage Project Team process as a result of
schedule issues, availability of resources (usually the lack of availability), or
personal work styles. When project team members are having a conflict, address
them first in private with the person who has the issue. Work in a direct and
collaborative manner, but be prepared to escalate the issue into a more
formalized procedure (potentially even disciplinary action) if needed.
If conflicts exist between the team members, encourage resolution between them
without intervention on your part. The best conflict resolution will come about
when they can work out the issues between them. When that isn't possible, you'll
have to step in and help resolve the matter.
Remember that solid ground rules and established policies and procedures will
help mitigate conflict before it arises.

Interpersonal Skills
We talked about interpersonal skills in the Develop Project Team process, but
you should know for the exam that the PMBOK(R) Guide points out three types of
interpersonal skills used most often in this process: leadership, influencing, and
effective decision making. We've already covered leadership and influencing.
Effective decision making involves making decisions in a timely manner and
making decisions that reflect and support the goals of the project. Effective
decisions should bring about a good result for the project, the stakeholders, and
the team members. They also help you take advantage of opportunities and
minimize negative risks. As project managers and good leaders, we have a
responsibility to put the good of the project and the organization over our own
needs, so use sound judgment when making decisions.




  In the course of my career, I have seen many project managers drag their
  feet when it comes to making a decision or downright refuse to make a
  decision. No decision is a decision--in effect, you're choosing to do nothing.
  This can have disastrous consequences for your project. Sometimes, it's
  better to make a misguided decision than no decision at all. Be sure to
  examine all the information known at the time, consult your experts, and
  finally, make the decision.


Managing Project Team Outputs
The outputs of the Manage Project Team process are the result of the
conversations, performance appraisals, and conflict resolution I've talked about
previously. This process has five outputs:
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Enterprise environmental factors updates
   Organizational process assets updates
Remember that the elements of these outputs pertain to human resources. For
example, change requests might come about as a result of a change in staffing,
corrective actions might come about because of disciplinary actions or training
needs, and preventive actions might be needed to reduce the impact of potential
human resource issues. Any of these actions might cause changes to the staffing
management plan or the human resource management plan, which means you
should update the project management plan. The issue log, roles and
responsibilities descriptions, and/or project staff assignments are examples of
project document updates that might need to be changed.
The enterprise environmental factors updates has two components that may need
updating as a result of this process: input to organizational performance
appraisals and personnel skill updates. The input to organizational performance
appraisals comes from team members with significant interactions with the
appraisals comes from team members with significant interactions with the
project and each other.
The organizational process assets updates output has three components:
historical information/lessons learned documentation, templates, and
organizational standard processes.
Lessons learned encompasses everything you've learned about the human
resources aspect during this project, including documentation that can be used as
templates on future projects (such as org charts, position descriptions, and the
staffing management plan), techniques used to resolve conflict, the types of
conflict that came up during the project, ground rules, when and how virtual
teams were used on the project and the procedures associated with them, the
staffing management plan, special skills needed during the project that weren't
known about during the Planning processes, and the issue log.
In the next chapter, we'll wrap up the Executing process group and examine the
processes associated with conducting procurements: providing quality assurance,
distributing information, and managing the expectations of stakeholders.



         Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  You are in Dirk's office giving him some good news.
  "The lease is signed and the work of the project has started. Ricardo has
  several of his staff members assigned to perform tasks related to the
  information technology deliverables, as do Jill and Jake for their areas.
  "I held a kickoff meeting with all the key project team members. We started
  out with some team-building exercises, and I explained the five stages of
  team development. It's normal to have some conflict as we're starting out,
  and I let them all know my door is always open and if they have issues they
  can't resolve, they can come to me directly. I explained the goals of the
  project, laid some ground rules for team interaction, and talked with them
  about the conflict resolution techniques we'll use as we get further into the
  project."
  "I'm just glad to hear we're finally doing something," Dirk replies.
  "Even though Gomez Construction doesn't start until next week, they sent
"Even though Gomez Construction doesn't start until next week, they sent
their crew leader to the kickoff meeting. I was impressed with that."
Dirk asks, "Why isn't Gomez starting work now?"
"They aren't scheduled to start until September 20 and we need to get our
procurement documents signed. We have a week to finish up the signatures
before they get here, so we're in fine shape. But Ricardo's group has already
prepared their procurement documents to purchase the switches and other
equipment they need to start work. Bryan, Ricardo's team lead, finished his
other project sooner than anticipated, and since they have Ethernet cable on
hand, he started running cable today."
The key stakeholder from the marketing department peeks her head in Dirk's
door. "I saw you both in here and thought I'd ask you when someone from
the project team is going to work with me on the website announcement. I
haven't heard anything, and I don't want to cut this so close that we put
something subpar on the website. The 50th anniversary deserves a little
splash."
"Okay," you reply. "I'll set up a meeting with you to get more information,
and then I'll work with Ricardo to determine who the best fit is. I've noted
we need to assign someone to this activity in the issue log. The person he
thought he was going to assign to this task is out on family leave, and we
don't know when he's expected back."
"Thanks," the stakeholder replies. "I also heard you lost a valuable team
member last week. I was really sorry to see Madelyn go. What happened?
And will her loss impact the project?"
"I don't want to go into all the details, but she violated our Internet
acceptable use policy. She was placed on disciplinary action on this very
issue once before. This may impact the project schedule because her
activities were on the critical path. I've already interviewed two internal
candidates who've expressed interest in working on the project. I believe
either one would work out nicely. They have the skills we need and are very
interested. However, some ramp-up time is needed. I've added this to the risk
list because we could have an impact to the schedule if we don't get Madelyn
replaced by the end of this week. I've got a change request ready also, in
case there is a schedule impact. I won't know more until next week."
Dirk glances at his desk clock.
You stand and on your way to the door tell him, "Next week I'll hold a
formal status meeting with all the stakeholders and will begin distributing
  formal status meeting with all the stakeholders and will begin distributing
  written weekly status reports."
  Project Case Study Checklist
  The processes and concepts discussed in the case study are as follows:
     Direct and Manage Project Work
         Deliverables
         Work results
         Work performance data
     Develop Project Team
         Interpersonal skills
         Team-building
         Ground rules
         Team performance assessments
     Acquire Project Team
         Negotiation
         Acquisition
         Resource calendars
     Manage Project Team
         Observation and conversation
         Conflict management
         Change requests


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
The topics in this chapter are some of my favorites because this is where project
management shines--dynamic teams working under the direction of a capable,
responsible leader who can effectively balance the needs of the team with the
needs of the project (and ultimately the organization) and pull it all off
successfully. There aren't many things better in an organization than a high-
performing team working together to accomplish a well-understood goal. It
doesn't matter whether the team members are all in the same company,
department, or country. When they're working toward a common goal and
functioning at the performing level, there's almost nothing they can't accomplish.
The movies Ocean's Eleven, Ocean's Twelve, and Ocean's Thirteen are good
examples of strong leadership and dynamic teamwork at play. Although I'm
certainly not advocating you turn to a life of crime, you can pick up a few
pointers on how effective teams work from George Clooney and the gang.
So, how does this apply? As the project manager, it's your responsibility, and
dare I say duty, to acquire the best team members possible for your project. In
my experience, this doesn't always mean all my team members are highly
qualified. To me, team fit and team dynamics are as important as the team
members' skills. I know some will disagree with me on this next point, but I
believe it's easier to train someone on a new skill (given they have the aptitude)
than it is to take on a team member with an abrasive personality who is
eminently qualified but can't get along with anyone else on the team. Sometimes
you don't have much choice when it comes to picking team members, as
referenced in the sidebar "The Only Candidate" earlier in this chapter. When you
find yourself in this situation, I recommend you lay down clear ground rules for
communication, problem escalation, work assignments, and so on.
Make it a habit to read at least a couple of leadership books a quarter. You may
already be familiar with the topic and think there is nothing new to learn.
However, staying current on the topic will reinforce concepts that you already
know and will remind you of other points that you forgot about and haven't yet
developed but know you should. Occasionally, you will pick up a gold nugget of
information that is new and immediately applicable to your situation.
Leadership skills are invaluable, but communication skills are just as important.
In my opinion, it's difficult to be an effective leader without also being an
effective communicator. My guess is that if you take a close look at the leaders
you respect and admire, you'll discover they are also good communicators--and
communication is mostly listening, not talking. I make it a habit to practice
active listening. It's amazing what people will tell you when you smile politely
and ask an open-ended question or two.
Let me stress again that you cannot successfully manage a project team without
communicating with them on a regular basis. The last thing you want is for a
stakeholder to follow you into the elevator to inform you about a major problem
with the project that you weren't aware of. That will happen if you haven't
established a relationship with your team. If they don't believe you're trustworthy
or they don't know you well enough to know whether you'll stand by them, you'll
be one of the last people to find out what's happening. I know managers and
project managers who subscribe to the "don't get too close to your team" theory.
I subscribe to the "all things in moderation" theory. You do want to establish
relationships and prove your loyalty to the team, but you also have to know
where to draw the line. When it comes time to hold a team member accountable,
it can be difficult to do if you have become very close on a personal basis.
However, I advocate erring on the side of developing a relationship with the
team. My teams have to trust me to the point that they know they can come to
me--at any time, with all types of news, good or bad--and I'll help them resolve
the problem.

Summary
This chapter described four processes from the Executing process group: Direct
and Manage Project Work, Acquire Project Team, Develop Project Team, and
Manage Project Team.
In Direct and Manage Project Work, the project management plan comes to life;
activities are authorized to begin; and the product, result, or service of the
project is produced. Status review meetings are held to inform stakeholders of
project progress and updates.
Acquire Project Team involves negotiation with other functional managers,
project managers, and organizational personnel to obtain human resources to
complete the work of the project. The project manager might not have control
over who will be a part of the team. Availability, ability, experience, interests,
and costs are all enterprise environmental factors that should be considered when
you are able to choose team members.
Develop Project Team involves creating an open, inviting atmosphere where
project team members will become efficient and cooperative, increasing
productivity during the course of the project. It's the project manager's job to
bring the team together into a functioning, productive group.
According to the Tuckman-Jensen model, team development has five stages:
forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. All groups proceed
through these stages, and the introduction of a new team member will always
start the process over again.
Co-location, also known as tight matrix, is physically placing team members
together in the same location. This might also include a common meeting room
or gathering area, known as a war room, where team members can meet and
collaborate on the project.
Several motivational theories exist, including reward and recognition, Maslow's
hierarchy of needs, the Hygiene Theory, the Expectancy Theory, and the
Achievement Theory. These theories conjecture that motivation is driven by
several desires: physical, social, and psychological needs; anticipation of
expected outcomes; and needs for achievement, power, or affiliation. The
Hygiene Theory proposes that hygiene factors prevent dissatisfaction.
Leaders inspire vision and rally people around common goals. Theory X leaders
think most people are motivated only through punishment, money, or position.
Theory Y leaders think most people want to perform the best job they can. The
Contingency Theory says that people naturally want to achieve levels of
competency and will continue to be motivated by the desire for competency even
after competency is reached. The Tannenbaum-Schmidt Continuum
Management Theory involves seven levels of delegated freedom regarding
decision making and problem solving. The Blanchard version of the Situational
Leadership Theory describes four leadership styles to use depending on the
situation.
Leaders exhibit five types of power: reward, punishment, expert, legitimate, and
referent power.
Manage Project Teams involves tracking and reporting on project team member
performance. Performance appraisals are performed during this process, and
feedback is provided to the team members.

Exam Essentials
Be able to identify the distinguishing characteristics of Direct and Manage
Project Work. Direct and Manage Project Work is where the work of the
project is performed, and the majority of the project budget is spent during this
process.
Be able to name the five stages of group formation. The five stages of group
formation are forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.
Be able to define Maslow's highest level of motivation. Self-actualization
occurs when a person performs at their peak and all lower-level needs have been
met.
Know the five types of power. The five types of power are reward,
punishment, expert, legitimate, and referent.
Be able to identify the five styles of conflict resolution. The five styles of
conflict resolution are force/direct, smooth/accommodate,
compromise/reconcile, collaborate/problem solve, and withdraw/avoid.
Be familiar with the tools and techniques of the Manage Project Team
process. The tools and techniques of Manage Project Team are observation
and conversation, project performance appraisals, conflict management, and
interpersonal skills.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm business. It offers
   organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West
   Coast. It is in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farm businesses to
   get operations underway. You are in charge of the network operations part of
   this project. An important deadline that depends on the successful
   completion of the testing phase is approaching. You've detected some
   problems with your hardware in the testing phase and discover that the
   hardware is not compatible with other network equipment. You take
   corrective action and exchange the hardware for more compatible equipment.
   Which of the following statements is true?
   A. This is not a corrective action because corrective action involves human
      resources, not project resources.
   B. Corrective action is taken here to make sure the future project outcomes
      are aligned with the project management plan.
   C. Corrective action is not necessary in this case because the future project
      outcomes aren't affected.
   D. Corrective action serves as the change request to authorize exchanging
      the equipment.
2. You are a project manager for a growing dairy farm business. It offers
   organic dairy products regionally and is expanding its operations to the West
   Coast. It's in the process of purchasing and leasing dairy farm businesses to
   get operations under way. The subproject manager in charge of network
   operations has reported some hardware problems to you. You're also having
   problems coordinating and integrating other elements of the project. Which
   of the following statements is true?
   A. You are in the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
   B. Your project team doesn't appear to have the right skills and knowledge
      needed to perform this project.
   C. You are in the norming stage of team development.
   D. Your project team could benefit from some team-building exercises.
3. Which of the following process groups serve as inputs to each other?
   A. Executing, Monitoring and Controlling
   B. Executing, Closing
   C. Planning, Monitoring and Controlling
   D. Executing, Initiation
4. Your team members have just completed training on specialized equipment.
   This is one of the work results you've gathered and recorded. Which of the
   following outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process does this
   describe?
   A. Work performance data
   B. Deliverable
   C. Preventive action
   D. Project documents updates
5. You are reporting on project elements such as schedule status, deliverables
   completion, lessons learned, and resource utilization. Which of the following
   outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work does this describe?
   A. Project management plan updates
   B. Project documents updates
   C. Preventive action
   D. Work performance data
6. You are in the process of making project staff assignments. You have several
   candidates for a position on the project team that requires specific
   qualifications. All the candidates seem to meet the qualifications. You also
   consider prior experience, their interest in the project, cost rates, and
   availability of these potential candidates. Which of the following is true?
   A. You are considering the resource calendars input of the Develop Project
      Team process.
   B. You are considering the project staff assignments input of the Develop
      Project Team process.
   C. You are considering the enterprise environmental factors input of the
      Acquire Project Team process.
   D. You are considering the project management plan input of the Acquire
      Project Team process.
7. During a recent team meeting, you reached a resolution to a problem that's
   been troubling the team for several weeks. It turned out that there was a
   problem with one of the manufactured parts required for the project. Once
   this was corrected, the remaining production run went off without a hitch.
   You took responsibility for searching out the facts of this problem and
   implemented a change request to resolve the issue. Which of the following is
   true regarding this question?
   A. This is a defect repair, which is performed during the Direct and Manage
      Project Work process.
   B. This is a corrective action, which is performed during the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process.
   C. This is a preventive action, which is performed during the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process.
   D. This is an unapproved change request and must first go through the
      Perform Integrated Change Control process.
8. You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your team
   members are amiable with each other and are careful to make project
   decisions jointly. Which of the following statements is true?
   A. They are in the forming stage of team development.
   B. They are in the norming stage of team development.
    C. They are in the storming stage of team development.
    D. They are in the adjourning stage of team development.
 9. You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your project team
    is researching a new service offering. They have been working together for
    quite some time and are in the performing stage of team development. A new
    member has been introduced to the team. Which of the following statements
    is true?
    A. The team will start all over again with the storming stage.
    B. The team will continue in the performing stage.
    C. The team will start all over again with the forming stage.
    D. The team will start all over again at the storming stage but quickly
       progress to the performing stage.
10. You are the project manager for a cable service provider. Your project team
    is researching a new service offering. They have been working together for
    quite some time and have a good understanding of the task at hand. They
    will not likely need any direction from you to complete this task. According
    to Blanchard, what type of leadership style does this describe?
    A. Supporting
    B. Autocratic
    C. Laissez-faire
    D. Delegating
11. You've promised your team two days of paid time off plus a week's training
    in the latest technology of their choice if they complete their project ahead of
    schedule. This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Achievement Theory
    B. Expectancy Theory
    C. Maslow's Theory
    D. Contingency Theory
12. Your team is split between two buildings on either side of town. As a result,
    the team isn't very cohesive because the members don't know each other very
    well. The team is still in the storming stage because of the separation issues.
    Which of the following should you consider?
    A. Corrective action
    B. Co-location
    C. Training
    D. Conflict resolution
13. Which conflict resolution technique offers project managers the best option
    for resolution?
    A. Smooth/accommodate
    B. Collaborate/problem solve
    C. Compromise/reconcile
    D. Force/direct
14. You are a fabulous project manager, and your team thinks highly of you.
    You are well respected by the stakeholders, management team, and project
    team. When you make decisions, others follow your lead as a result of which
    of the following?
    A. Referent power
    B. Expert power
    C. Legitimate power
    D. Punishment power
15. Theory Y managers believe which of the following?
    A. People are motivated only by money, power, or position.
    B. People will perform their best if they're given proper motivation and
       expectations.
    C. People are motivated to achieve a high level of competency.
    D. People are motivated by expectation of good outcomes.
16. When working in a matrix environment, all of the following are true
    regarding the Manage Project Team process except for which one?
    A. Improving competencies, team interactions, and the team environment
       can help enhance project performance.
    B. Managing project teams in a matrix environment is often a critical
       success factor for the project.
    C. It's the project manager's responsibility to make certain this dual
       reporting relationship is managed effectively.
    D. Loyalty issues might arise when managing projects in a matrix
       environment.
17. You are preparing project performance appraisals and have decided you'd
    like each team member to receive feedback regarding their performance from
    several sources, including peers, superiors, and subordinates. Which of the
    following is true?
    A. This is called 360-degree feedback and is part of the input to the
       organizational project performance appraisals, which is part of the
       organizational process assets updates input of the Manage Project Team
       process.
    B. This is called 360-degree feedback and is considered part of the team
       performance assessment input of the Manage Project Team process.
    C. This is called 360-degree feedback and is considered part of the work
       performance data input of the Manage Project Team process.
    D. This is called 360-degree feedback and is part of the project performance
       appraisals tool and technique of the Manage Project Team process.
18. Specific team members were promised for your project as part of the project
    proposal. You speak with the functional managers to assure their availability.
    All of the following are true regarding this question except for which one?
    A. This is a preassignment, which is a tool and technique of the process to
       which this question refers.
    B. Team members promised as part of the project proposal should be noted
       in the project charter.
    C. The other tools and techniques of the process this question refers to are
       negotiation, virtual teams, and resource availability.
    D. Team members might be promised as part of a project that's put out for
       bid or consists of internal projects.
19. These two conflict resolution techniques are known as lose-lose techniques.
    A. Accommodating and forcing
    B. Smoothing and withdrawal
    C. Compromise and reconcile
    D. Avoidance and forcing
20. You are a project manager who believes people will have high productivity,
    morale, and satisfaction if offered a job for life. Which theory do you
    subscribe to?
    A. Theory X
    B. Hygiene Theory
    C. Theory Y
    D. Theory Z
CHAPTER 9
Conducting Procurements and Sharing
Information
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE EXECUTING
PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES
THE FOLLOWING:
   Task 2: Manage task execution based on the project management
  plan by leading and developing the project team in order to achieve
  project deliverables.
   Task 3: Implement the quality management plan using the
  appropriate tools and techniques in order to ensure that work is
  performed in accordance with required quality standards.
   Task 4: Implement approved changes and corrective actions by
  following the change management plan in order to meet project
  requirements.
   Task 5: Implement approved actions by following the risk
  management plan in order to minimize the impact of the risks and take
  advantage of opportunities on the project.
   Task 6: Manage the flow of information by following the
  communications plan in order to keep stakeholders engaged and
  informed.
   Task 7: Maintain stakeholder relationships by following the
  stakeholder management plan in order to receive continued support and
  manage expectations.
   Knowledge and Skills:
     Continuous improvement processes
     Contract management techniques
     Elements of a statement of work
     Interdependencies among project elements
     Project budgeting tools and techniques
       Quality standard tools
       Vendor management techniques
This chapter wraps up the Executing process group. We'll look at four processes
in this chapter: Conduct Procurements, Perform Quality Assurance, Manage
Communications, and Manage Stakeholder Engagement.
Most of these processes aren't related to each other, but all are necessary to
conduct the work of the project. They work in coordination with all the other
Executing processes and are extensions of the Planning processes that preceded
them (such as Plan Procurement Management, Plan Quality Management, and so
on). Conduct Procurements and Perform Quality Assurance, in particular, work
hand in hand with their Monitoring and Controlling processes (Control
Procurements and Control Quality) to implement, measure, and report services
and results.
The Conduct Procurements process is where sellers respond to the bids prepared
in the Plan Procurement Management process. Contract awards are made here
also. In Perform Quality Assurance, we'll look at several techniques to audit the
project's quality requirements against the quality results. Manage
Communications will cover more communication topics, including status
reports, and last but not least we'll talk about Managing Stakeholder
Engagement, which is critical during the Executing processes. Grab your
favorite beverage and let's get started.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Conducting Procurements
Many times project managers must purchase goods or services to complete some
or all of the work of the project. Sometimes the entire project is completed on
contract. The Conduct Procurements process is concerned with obtaining
responses to bids and proposals from potential vendors, selecting a vendor, and
awarding the contract.
This process has several inputs:
   Procurement management plan
   Procurement documents
   Source selection criteria
   Seller proposals
   Project documents
   Make-or-buy decisions
   Procurement statement of work
   Organizational process assets
We've talked about most of these inputs in previous chapters. The procurement
management plan is based on the project scope, budget, and schedule and
ensures that the resources you'll need throughout the project are available at the
right time so that you will meet the project requirements. Procurement
documents include requests for proposals (RFPs), requests for information
(RFIs), requests for quotations (RFQs), and so on. The responses to those
requests become inputs to this process. Source selection criteria were defined in
the Plan Procurement Management process that we talked about in Chapter 7,
"Planning Project Resources." In the tools and techniques section for the
Conduct Procurement process, we'll talk more about how seller proposals are
evaluated. Seller proposals are responses to your procurement requests. Most
organizations have a preferred format for seller responses so that the selection
committee has a little easier time comparing proposals.
One element of the organizational process assets input you might consider
during this process is a qualified sellers list. Qualified sellers lists are lists of
prospective sellers who have been preapproved or prequalified to provide
contract services (or provide supplies and materials) for the organization. For
example, your organization might require vendors to register and maintain
information regarding their experience, offerings, and current prices on a
qualified seller list. Usually, vendors must go through the procurement
department to be placed on the list. Project managers are then required to choose
their vendors from the qualified seller list published by the procurement
department. However, not all organizations have qualified seller lists. If a list
isn't available, you'll have to work with the project team to come up with your
own requirements for selecting vendors.




  The Conduct Procurements process is used only if you're obtaining goods or
  services from outside your own organization. If you have all the resources
  you need to perform the work of the project within the organization, you
  won't use this process.

In the following sections, you'll examine some new tools and techniques that
will help vendors give you a better idea of their responses, and then you'll move
on to the outputs of this process, two of which are the selected sellers and
agreements.

Conduct Procurements Tools and Techniques
Remember that the purpose of the Conduct Procurements process is to obtain
responses to your RFP (or similar procurement document), select the right
vendor for the job, and award the contract. The tools and techniques of this
process are designed to assist the vendors in getting their proposals to you and
include techniques for evaluating those proposals. The tools and techniques are
as follows:
   Bidder conferences
   Proposal evaluation techniques
   Independent estimates
   Expert judgment
   Advertising
   Analytical techniques
   Procurement negotiations
We'll look at each of these tools and techniques next with the exception of expert
judgment, which we've covered in previous chapters.

Bidder Conferences
Bidder conferences (also known as vendor conferences, prebid conferences, and
contractor conferences according to the PMBOK(R) Guide) are meetings with
prospective vendors or sellers that occur prior to the completion of their response
proposal. You or someone from your procurement department arranges the
bidder conference. The purpose is to allow all prospective vendors to meet with
the buyers to ask questions and clarify issues they have regarding the project and
the RFP. The facilitator of the meeting should ensure that the meeting is orderly
and that all questions and answers are restated in front of the entire group so all
potential vendors have an equal chance at the bid. The meeting is held once, and
all vendors attend at the same time. The bidder conference is held before the
vendors prepare their responses so that they are sure their RFP responses will
address the project requirements.

Proposal Evaluation Techniques
There are several techniques you might use to evaluate proposals. Simple
procurements may not need much more than a quick check against the statement
of work or a price comparison. Complex procurements may need several rounds
of evaluation to begin narrowing the list of sellers. This is where you might use
one or more of the following evaluation techniques to get to the final winner.
You can use source selection criteria as one method of rating and scoring
proposals. We discussed source selection criteria in Chapter 7. You may recall
that these criteria include several elements such as an understanding of the work,
costs, technical capability, risk, warranty, and so on. We'll get into more detail
on some of these criteria here. Keep in mind this is an input to the Conduct
Procurements process, not a tool and technique, even though you'll be using it as
you would a tool and technique.
The types of goods and services you're trying to procure will dictate how
detailed your evaluation criteria are. (Of course, if your organization has policies
in place for evaluating proposals, then you'll use the format or criteria already
established.) The selection of some goods and services might be price driven
only. In other words, the bidder with the lowest price will win the bid. This is
typical when the items you're buying are widely available.
When you're purchasing goods, you might request a sample from each vendor in
order to compare quality (or some other criteria) against your need. For example,
perhaps you need a special kind of paper stock for a project you're working on at
a bank. This stock must have a watermark; it must have security threads
embedded through the paper; and when the paper is used for printing, the ink
must not be erasable. You can request samples of stock with these qualities from
must not be erasable. You can request samples of stock with these qualities from
the vendors and then test them to see whether they'll work for your project.
It's always appropriate to ask the vendor for references, especially when you're
hiring contract services. It's difficult to assess the quality of services because it's
not a tangible product. References can tell you whether the vendor delivered on
time, whether the vendor had the technical capability to perform the work, and
whether the vendor's management approach was appropriate when problems
surfaced. Create a list of questions to ask the references before you call.
You can request financial records to assure you--the buyer--that the vendor has
the fiscal ability to perform the services they're proposing and that the vendor
can purchase whatever equipment is needed to perform the services. If you
examine the records of the company and find that it's two steps away from
bankruptcy, that company might not be a likely candidate for your project.
(Remember those general management skills? Here's another example where
they come into play.)
One of the most important criteria is the evaluation of the response itself to
determine whether the vendor has a clear understanding of what you're asking
them to do or provide. If they missed the mark (remember, they had an
opportunity at the bidder conferences to ask clarifying questions) and didn't
understand what you were asking them to provide, you'll probably want to rank
them very low.
Now you can compare each proposal against the criteria and rate or score each
proposal for its ability to meet or fulfill these criteria. This can serve as your first
step in eliminating vendors that don't match your criteria. Let's say you received
18 responses to an RFP. After evaluating each one, you discover that six of them
don't match all the evaluation criteria. You eliminate those six vendors in this
round. The next step is to apply the tools and techniques of this process to
further evaluate the remaining 12 potential vendors.

Weighting Systems
Weighting systems assign numerical weights to evaluation criteria and then
multiply them by the weights of each criterion factor to come up with total
scores for each vendor. This technique provides a way to quantify the data and
assist in keeping personal biases to a minimum. Weighting systems are useful
when you have multiple vendors to choose from because they allow you to rank
the proposals to determine the sequence of negotiations.
You'll find an example of a weighted scoring system in Chapter 2, "Creating the
You'll find an example of a weighted scoring system in Chapter 2, "Creating the
Project Charter." These systems are commonly used to evaluate vendor
proposals.

Screening Systems
Screening systems use predefined performance criteria or a set of defined
minimum requirements to screen out unsuitable vendors. Perhaps your project
requires board-certified engineers. One of the screening criteria would be that
vendors propose project team members who have this qualification. If they don't,
they're eliminated from the selection process.
Screening systems can be used together with some of the other tools and
techniques of this process, weighting systems, and independent estimates to rank
vendor proposals.

Seller Rating Systems
Seller rating systems use information about the sellers--such as past
performance, delivery, contract compliance, and quality ratings--to determine
seller performance. Your organization might have seller rating systems in place,
and you should check with your procurement department to see whether they
exist for the bidders on your project. Part of the Control Procurements process
(I'll talk about this in Chapter 10, "Measuring and Controlling Project
Performance") concerns gathering and recording this type of information. Don't
use seller rating systems as your sole criterion for evaluating vendors.




  Proposal evaluation techniques are a combination of all the techniques I've
  discussed in the Proposal Evaluation Techniques section. All techniques use
  some form of expert judgment and evaluation criteria--whether it's objective
  or subjective criteria. The evaluation criteria are usually weighted, much like
  a weighted scoring system, and those participating as reviewers provide their
  ratings (usually to the project manager) to compile into a weighted proposal
  to determine an overall score. Scoring differences are also resolved using
  this technique. Some or all of the evaluation techniques described here can
  be used in combination with the remaining tools and techniques of the
  Conduct Procurements process to evaluate seller responses.
Independent Estimates
Your procurement department might conduct independent estimates (also known
as should cost estimates) of the costs of the proposal and compare these to the
vendor prices. If there are large differences between the independent estimate
and the proposed vendor cost, one of two things is happening: Either the
statement of work (SOW) or the terms of the contract or both are not detailed
enough to allow the vendor to come up with an accurate cost or the vendor
simply failed to respond to all the requirements laid out in the contract or SOW.
Independent estimates can also be used to verify schedule estimates and other
project estimates.

Advertising
Advertising is letting potential vendors know that an RFP is available.
Advertising can be used as a way of expanding the pool of potential vendors, or
it may be a requirement, such as in the case of government projects. The
company's Internet site, professional journals, and newspapers are examples of
where advertising might appear. In reality, most organizations, including
government organizations, have replaced advertising in the newspaper with
advertising on their own websites.

Analytical Techniques
Analytical techniques are used to help research potential vendors' capabilities,
get an idea of cost, analyze past performance, forecast future performance, and
learn from others who have undergone similar projects. Internet searches are an
analytical technique that has several useful features. You can use Internet
searches to find vendors, perform research on their past performance, and
compare prices. You can also use the Internet to purchase items that are readily
available and are generally offered for a fixed price. Internet searches are
probably not useful when you're conducting high-risk or complex procurements,
but you could do some research on company performance and reputation to help
in choosing a vendor.

Procurement Negotiation
In procurement negotiation, both parties come to an agreement regarding the
contract terms. Negotiation skills are put into practice here as the details of the
contract are ironed out between the parties. At a minimum, contract language
should include price, responsibilities, regulations or laws that apply, and the
overall approach to the project.
The complexity of the contract will determine how extensive the contract
negotiations will be. Simple contracts may have predetermined nonnegotiable
elements that only require seller acceptance. Complex contracts may include any
number of elements, including financing options, overall schedule, proprietary
rights, service-level agreements, technical aspects, and more. In either case, once
agreement is reached and the negotiations are finished, the contract is signed by
both buyer and seller and then it is executed.
You might see the term fait accompli show up on the exam. Fait accompli tactics
are used during contract negotiation when one party tries to convince the other
party discussing a particular contract item that it is no longer an issue. It can be a
distraction technique, when the party practicing fait accompli tactics is purposely
trying to keep from negotiating an issue and claims the issue cannot be changed.
For example, during negotiations the vendor tells you that the key resource it's
assigning to your project must start immediately or you'll lose that resource and
the vendor will assign that resource work elsewhere. However, you don't know
--because the vendor didn't tell you--that the vendor can reserve this resource
for your project and hold it until the start date. In this instance, the vendor used
fait accompli tactics to push you into starting the project, or hiring this resource,
sooner than you would have otherwise.

  Exam Spotlight

  Procurement negotiations, according to the PMBOK(R) Guide, can be
  performed as a process itself with inputs and outputs.




         Real World Scenario

  Vendor Selection for Fitness Counts HR System
  Amanda Jacobson is the project manager for Fitness Counts, a nationwide
  chain of gyms containing all the latest and greatest fitness equipment,
  aerobics classes, swimming pools, and such. Fitness Counts is converting its
  human resources data management system. The RFP addressed several
human resources data management system. The RFP addressed several
requirements, including the following:
   The new system must run on a platform that's compatible with the
   company's current operating system.
   Hardware must be compatible with company standards.
   Data conversion of existing HR data must be included in the price of the
   bid.
   Fitness Counts wants to have the ability to add custom modules using
   internal programmers.
   Training for the Fitness Counts programmers must be included in the
   bid.
The project team is in the Conduct Procurements process and has received
bids based on the RFP published earlier this month. Fitness Counts is using a
combination of selection criteria and a weighted scoring model to choose a
vendor.
One of the evaluation criteria states that the vendor must have prior
experience with a project like this. Four vendors met that criteria and
proceeded to the weighted scoring selection process.
Amanda is one of the members of the selection committee. She and four
other members on the committee rated the four vendors who met the initial
selection criteria. They read all of the proposals and rated the criteria using
factors they had predetermined for each. For example, vendors who
proposed an SQL database as part of the "Platform" criteria (along with the
other predetermined factors) should receive a total weighted score of 5.
Table 9.1 shows their results.
Table 9.1 A weighted scoring model
               Platform Hardware Data       Custom           Totals
                                 Conversion Modules/Training
Weighting      5        4        5          4
factor *
Vendor A
Raw score      3          3           3             4
Weighted       15         12          15            16                    58
score
  score
  Vendor B
  Raw score         2          3       4            3
  Weighted          10         12      20           12                  54
  score
  Vendor C
  Raw score         4          4       4            3
  Weighted          20         16      20           12                  68
  score
  Vendor D
  Raw score         3          3       2            4
  Weighted          15         12      10           16                  53
  score
  *1-5, with 5 being highest

  Vendor C is the clear winner of this bid. Based on the weighted scoring
  model, its responses to the RFP came out ahead of the other bidders.
  Amanda calls Vendor with the good news and also calls the other vendors to
  thank them for participating in the bid. Vendor C is awarded the contract,
  and Amanda moves on to the Contract Administration process.


Conduct Procurements Outputs
The Conduct Procurements process has six outputs:
    Selected sellers
    Agreements
    Resource calendars
    Change requests
    Project management plan updates
    Project documents updates
The selected sellers output is obvious: You choose the seller (or sellers) to whom
you'll award the project and execute the contract. I'll talk more about the
agreements output next. I've discussed all the other outputs previously.
  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, a negotiated draft contract is one of the
  requirements of the selected sellers output. Also note that senior
  management signatures may be required on complex, high-risk, or high-
  dollar contracts. Be sure to check your organization's procurement policies
  regarding the authority level and amounts for which you are authorized to
  sign. In my organization, not only do our contracts require senior
  management signatures, they also require signatures from two other external
  departments. We have to account for the multiple reviews, signatures, and
  question-and-answer sessions required to get contract signature. This has a
  definite impact on the project schedule and must be accounted for in time
  estimates for these tasks.


Elements of a Procurement Agreement
Procurement agreements take different forms depending on what you are
procuring, who you are procuring it from, and the nature of the goods or services
themselves. You might use a purchase order, a contract, a work order against an
existing contract, or other forms. You might recall that a contract is a legally
binding agreement between two or more parties, typically used to acquire goods
or services. Contracts have several names, including agreements, memorandums
of understanding (MOUs), subcontracts, and purchase orders.
The type of contract you'll award will depend on the product or services you're
procuring and your organizational policies. I talked about the types of contracts
--fixed price, cost reimbursable, and so on--in Chapter 7. If you need a
refresher, you can refer back to it. If your project has multiple sellers, you'll
award contracts for each of them.
The contract or procurement agreement should clearly address the elements of
the SOW, time period of performance, pricing and payment plan, acceptance
criteria, warranty periods, dispute resolution procedures, status or performance
reporting procedures, limitations of liabilities, change request process, penalties
and incentives, and so on.
Because contracts are legally binding and obligate your organization to fulfill the
terms, they'll likely be subject to some intensive review, often by several
different people. Be certain you understand your organization's policies on
different people. Be certain you understand your organization's policies on
contract review and approval before proceeding.
Contracts, like projects, have a life cycle of their own. You might encounter
questions on the exam regarding the stages of the contract life cycles, so we'll
look at this topic next.

Contract Life Cycles
The contract life cycle consists of four stages:
   Requirement
   Requisition
   Solicitation
   Award
These stages are closely related to the following Project Procurement
Management Knowledge Area processes from the PMBOK(R) Guide:
   Plan Procurement Management
   Conduct Procurements
A description of each of the contract life cycles follows:
Requirement The requirement stage is the equivalent of the Plan Procurement
Management process I discussed in Chapter 7. You establish the project and
contract needs in this cycle, and you define the requirements of the project. The
SOW defines the work of the project, the objectives, and a high-level overview
of the deliverables. You develop a work breakdown structure (WBS), a make-or-
buy analysis takes place, and you determine cost estimates.
The buyer provides the SOW to describe the requirements of the project when
it's performed under contract. The product description can serve as the SOW.
Requisition In the requisition stage, the project objectives are refined and
confirmed. Solicitation materials such as the request for proposals (RFP), request
for information (RFI), and request for quotations (RFQ) are prepared during this
phase. Generally, the project manager is responsible for preparing the RFP, RFI,
and RFQ. A review of the potential qualified vendors takes place, including
checking references and reviewing other projects the vendors have worked on
that are similar to your proposed project. Requisition occurs during the Plan
Procurement Management process.
Solicitation The solicitation stage is where vendors are asked to compete for
the contract and respond to the RFP. You can use the tools and techniques of the
Conduct Procurements process during this contract stage. The resulting output is
the proposals. Solicitation occurs during the Conduct Procurements process.
Award Vendors are chosen and contracts are awarded and signed during the
award stage. The Conduct Procurements process is the equivalent of the award
phase.
The project manager--or the selection committee, depending on the
organizational policy--receives the bids and proposals during the award phase
and applies evaluation criteria to each in order to score or rank the responses.
After ranking each of the proposals, an award is made to the winning vendor,
and the contract is written.
Once you have a contract, someone has to administer it. In large organizations,
this responsibility will fall to the procurement department. The project manager
should still have a solid understanding of administering contracts because that
person will work with the procurement department to determine the satisfactory
fulfillment of the contract.
Now we're going to switch courses and discuss the quality assurance aspects of
the project. We discussed the Plan Quality Management process back in Chapter
7, which prepared you for the Perform Quality Assurance process that's
conducted during the Executing process group. We'll look at it next.

Laying Out Quality Assurance Procedures
The Plan Quality Management process laid out the quality standards for the
project and determined how those standards are to be satisfied. The Perform
Quality Assurance process involves performing systematic quality activities and
uses quality audits to determine which processes should be used to achieve the
project requirements and to ensure that they are performed efficiently and
effectively.
The project team members, the project manager, and the stakeholders are all
responsible for the quality assurance of the project. Continuous process
improvement can be achieved through this process, bringing about improved
process performance and eliminating unnecessary actions.
A quality assurance department or organization may be assigned to the project to
oversee these processes. In that case, quality assurance might be provided to
(rather than by) the project team. The project manager will have the greatest
(rather than by) the project team. The project manager will have the greatest
impact on the quality of the project during this process.
You'll review the inputs to this process next and then spend some time exploring
a few new tools and techniques for ensuring a quality product and project.

Inputs to Perform Quality Assurance
The inputs to Perform Quality Assurance are what you use to measure the
organizational project quality management processes against. The quality
management processes were defined during Quality Planning. The inputs to the
Perform Quality Assurance process are as follows:
   Quality management plan
   Process improvement plan
   Quality metrics
   Quality control measurements
   Project documents
You've heard about the inputs to Perform Quality Assurance before, so we'll
move right into the tools and techniques of this process. But wait! One reminder
for you before we move on. The quality management plan is used to ensure that
the project work is performed according to the quality standards laid out in the
plan.

  Exam Spotlight
  The most important point to remember about Perform Quality Assurance is
  that quality management processes are what you use to verify that the project
  satisfies the quality standards laid out in the project management plan.


Perform Quality Assurance Tools and Techniques
The Perform Quality Assurance process has three tools and techniques: quality
management and control tools, quality audits, and process analysis.
Quality management and control tools consist of the tools and techniques from
both the Plan Quality Management and Control Quality processes. We will look
at the Control Quality tools and techniques in Chapter 11, "Controlling Work
Results." In addition to all of the tools mentioned in those processes, the
PMBOK(R) Guide notes that the following tools are included within this tool and
technique:
Affinity Diagrams Affinity diagrams, also known as KJ methods, are used to
group and organize thoughts and facts and can be used in conjunction with
brainstorming. After you've gathered all ideas possible with brainstorming, you
group similar ideas together on an affinity diagram. You may be familiar with
mind-mapping techniques where the primary concept is captured in the middle
of the diagram and related ideas are branched off the middle into their own
segments. This is an example of an affinity diagram. This technique is useful
when decomposing the scope of the project. Put a brief scope statement in the
middle circle or bubble, and then identify all of the deliverables that make up the
scope on independent branches (and bubbles). You could use this technique to
decompose each deliverable as well.
Process Decision Program Charts (PDPCs) PDPCs are constructed like
organizational charts. The project or primary idea is in the top box, and related
ideas are branched off from the main box, with more boxes branching off from
them. This technique may be used for contingency planning to help identify all
the possible results that could impact the project.
Interrelationship Digraphs Interrelationship digraphs are problem-solving
tools used for complex situations. They involve relating up to 50 factors,
processes, or areas of focus. Each factor is interconnected to many other factors,
making it easier to identify those elements that have the biggest impact on the
project. The idea behind this tool is to start by writing down the main issue and
drawing a circle or square around it. From there, identify all of the elements
involved and connect them to the main issue and to each other where a
relationship exists. It can look a bit like a misshaped spider web when you are
finished. The factors with the most connecting lines are the ones you'll want to
pay particular attention to because they likely have the biggest impact on the
project.
Tree Diagrams Examples of tree diagrams include work breakdown
structures, risk breakdown structures, and objectives breakdown structures. The
common theme with these diagrams is that they depict hierarchies and parent-
child relationships. If you flip back to Chapter 3, "Developing the Project Scope
Statement," and look at the WBS for Billy Bob's Bassoon, you'll see there are
nested branches that all lead to a single point (ultimately the project itself). For
example, "Requirements definition" requires both "Game Requirements" and
"Software Requirements" to be completed before this deliverable is complete.
And both of these deliverables have work packages that must be completed.
Uncomplicated structures such as this allow you to easily determine expected
values for any level on the structure. (We talked about expected values in
Chapter 4, "Creating the Project Schedule.") Tree diagrams are also known as
systematic diagrams.
Prioritization Matrices We've talked quite a bit about prioritization matrices,
including probability and impact matrix and weighted scoring systems.
Prioritization matrices are also applicable to the Perform Quality Assurance
process.
Activity Network Diagrams We talked about network diagrams in Chapter 4.
They include both activity on nodes and activity on arrow diagrams and are used
to help construct the project schedule.
Matrix Diagrams In Chapter 7, we talked about RAMs and RACI charts.
These are examples of matrix diagrams. The PMBOK(R) Guide points out two
types of matrix diagrams you should be aware of for the exam: two-dimensional
diagrams that consist of L-Type, T-Type, and X-Type, and three-dimensional
diagrams such as C-Type.
We'll look at the remaining tools and techniques in the following sections.

Quality Audits
Quality audits are independent reviews performed by trained auditors or third-
party reviewers. The purpose of a quality audit is the same as the purpose of the
Perform Quality Assurance process--to identify ineffective and inefficient
activities or processes used on the project. These audits might examine and
uncover inefficient processes and procedures as well as processes that are not in
compliance with organizational practices.
You can perform quality audits on a regular schedule or at random, depending
on the organizational policies. Quality audits performed correctly will provide
the following benefits:
   The product of the project is fit for use and meets safety standards.
   Applicable laws and standards are followed.
   Corrective action is recommended and implemented where necessary.
   The quality plan for the project is followed.
   Quality improvements are identified.
   The implementation of approved change requests, corrective actions,
   preventive actions, and defect repairs are confirmed.
   Gaps or shortcomings in the process are identified.
   Good and best practices are implemented and shared within the organization
   or industry.
Quality improvements come about as a result of the quality audits. During the
course of the audit, you might discover ways of improving the efficiency or
effectiveness of the project, thereby increasing the value of the project and more
than likely exceeding stakeholder expectations.
Quality improvements are implemented by submitting change requests and/or
taking corrective action. Quality improvements interface with the Monitoring
and Controlling processes because of the need to submit change requests. You'll
look at change requests and change request procedures in Chapter 10.

  Exam Spotlight
  Remember in Chapter 6 that we talked about the risk management plan.
  While there isn't a risk process within the Executing process group, you
  should review the risk management plan when implementing approved
  corrective actions in order to take advantage of opportunities and/or
  minimize risk impacts.

Experienced specialists generally perform quality audits. The specialist's job is
to produce an independent evaluation of the quality process. Some organizations
are large enough to have their own quality assurance departments or quality
assurance teams; others might have to hire contract personnel to perform this
function. Internal quality assurance teams report results to the project team and
management team of the organization. External quality assurance teams report
results to the customer.

Process Analysis
Process analysis looks at process improvement from an organizational and
technical perspective. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, process analysis
follows the steps in the process improvement plan and examines the following:
   Problems experienced while conducting the project
   Constraints experienced while conducting the work of the project
   Inefficient and ineffective activities identified during process operation
One of the techniques of process analysis includes performing root cause
analysis. (I talked about root cause analysis in the Identify Risks process in
Chapter 6, "Risk Planning.") While you're examining problems and constraints,
for example, you should look for what's causing the underlying issue. The result
of this exercise will allow you to understand what caused the problem and
develop preventive actions for problems that are similar to the one you're
examining or that have similar root causes.

Perform Quality Assurance Outputs
The Perform Quality Assurance process has four outputs:
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
These aren't new, but there is one new idea embedded in the change requests
output. During this process, any recommended corrective actions, whether they
are a result of a quality audit or process analysis, should be acted on immediately
and processed through the change control process, which is governed by the
change management plan. Let's say you're manufacturing parts for one of the
deliverables of your project. Obviously, the moment you discover that the parts
are not correct, you'd correct the process by calibrating the machine perhaps, or
by using different raw materials, to make certain the parts are produced
accurately.

  Quality Improvements
  Although it isn't stated as an output, one of the overarching goals of the
  Perform Quality Assurance process is to provide a foundation for continuous
  process improvements. As the name implies, continuous improvements are
  iterative. This process of continuous improvements sets the stage, so to
  speak, for improving the quality of all the project processes. This can mean
  project management processes, but it also means the processes and activities
  project management processes, but it also means the processes and activities
  involved in accomplishing the work of the project.
  The advantage of continuous process improvement is that it reduces the time
  the project team spends on ineffective or inefficient processes. If the
  activities don't help you meet the goals of the project or, worse yet, they
  hinder your progress, it's time to look at ways to improve them.

Once again we're going to shift gears and talk about a new process. We'll look at
best practices regarding sharing and distributing information next.

Managing Project Information
The Manage Communications process is concerned with gathering, creating,
storing, distributing, retrieving, and disposing of project communications. One
of the primary functions of this process is distributing information about the
project to the stakeholders in a timely manner. This can come about in several
ways: status reports, project meetings, review meetings, and so on. Status reports
inform stakeholders about where the project is today in regard to project
schedule and budget, for example. They also describe what the project team has
accomplished to date. This might include milestones completed to date, the
percentage of schedule completion, and what remains to be completed. The
Manage Communications process describes how this report and other
information are distributed and to whom.
In the Manage Communications process, the communications management plan
that was defined during the Plan Communications Management process is put
into action. This plan will define how you manage the flow of information to the
stakeholders and will also help keep them informed and engaged. Remember
that this plan is a subsidiary of the project management plan, which is an input to
this process. The other inputs include work performance reports, enterprise
environmental factors, and organizational process assets. Plan Communications
Management and Manage Communications work together to report the progress
of the project team.




  There is a subtle difference between the communications management plan
  and the stakeholder management plan in the Executing process group. The
  communications management plan is used to manage the flow of
  communications management plan is used to manage the flow of
  information to the stakeholders in order to keep them engaged and informed.
  The stakeholder management plan helps maintain relationships with the
  stakeholders, helps to ensure their support, and manages stakeholder
  expectations.

Manage Communications has some new tools and techniques, which we'll look
at next.

Tools and Techniques of Manage Communications
The tools and techniques of this process are as follows:
   Communication technology
   Communication models
   Communication methods
   Information management systems
   Performance reporting
We talked about communication technology, models, and methods in Chapter 5,
"Developing the Project Budget and Communicating the Plan." We'll explore
communication models in a little more depth in the next section.
Communication skills are probably the single most important skill in your
project management toolbox. You can't employ communication methods or use
communication models effectively without some sound communication skills, so
let's take a look at this topic next.

Developing Great Communication Skills
Every aspect of your job as a project manager will involve communications. It
has been estimated that project managers spend as much as 90 percent of their
time communicating in one form or another. Therefore, communication skills are
arguably among the most important skills a project manager can have. They are
even more important than technical skills. Good communication skills foster an
open, trusting environment, and excellent communication skills are a project
manager's best asset.
Throughout this book I've emphasized how important good communication
skills are. Now I'll discuss the act of communication, listening behaviors, and
conflict resolution. You'll employ each of these techniques with your project
team, stakeholders, customers, and management team.

Information Exchange
Communication is the process of exchanging information. All communication
includes three elements:
Sender The sender is the person responsible for putting the information
together in a clear and concise manner. The information should be complete and
presented in a way that the receiver will be able to correctly understand it. Make
your messages relevant to the receiver. Junk mail is annoying, and information
that doesn't pertain in any way whatsoever to the receiver is nothing more than
that.
Message The message is the information being sent and received. It might be
written, verbal, nonverbal, formal, informal, internal, external, horizontal, or
vertical. Horizontal communications are messages sent and received to peers.
Vertical communications are messages sent and received down to subordinates
and up to executive management.




  Make your messages as simple as you can to get your point across. Don't
  complicate messages with unnecessary detail and technical jargon that others
  might not understand. A simple trick that helps clarify your messages,
  especially verbal messages, is to repeat the key information periodically.
  Public speakers are taught that the best way to organize a speech is to first
  tell the audience what you're going to tell them; second, tell them; and third,
  tell them what you just told them.

Receiver The receiver is the person for whom the message is intended. They
are responsible for understanding the information correctly and making sure
they've received all the information.
Keep in mind that receivers filter the information they receive through their
knowledge of the subject, cultural influences, language, emotions, attitudes, and
geographic locations. The sender should take these filters into consideration
when sending messages so that the receiver will clearly understand the message
that was sent.
  This book is an example of the sender-message-receiver model. I'm the
  sender of the information. The message concerns topics you need to know to
  pass the PMP(R) exam (and, if I've done my job correctly, is written in a clear
  and easily understood format). You, the reader, are the receiver.


Elements of a Communication Model
Senders, receivers, and messages are the elements of communication. The way
the sender packages or encodes the information and transmits it and the way the
receiver unpacks or decodes the message are the models of communication
exchange.
Senders encode messages. Encoding is a method of putting the information into
a format the receiver will understand. Language, pictures, and symbols are used
to encode messages. Encoding formats the message for transmitting.
Transmitting is the way the information gets from the sender to the receiver.
Spoken words, written documentation, memos, email, and voicemail are all
transmitting methods.
Decoding is what the receiver does with the information when they get it. They
convert it into an understandable format. Usually, this means they read the
memo, listen to the speaker, read the book, and so on.
Acknowledging involves the receiver informing the sender they have received
the message. This is not, however, an indication of agreement or that the receiver
understands the message. It serves only to let the sender know the message has
been received.
Feedback/response implies the message was not only received and decoded but
the message from the sender was understood. In response, the receiver crafts a
message and sends it back to the sender, starting the cycle all over again.

Forms of Communication
Communication occurs primarily in written or verbal form. Granted, you can
point to something or indicate what you need with motions, but usually you use
the spoken or written word to get your message across.
Verbal communication is easier and less complicated than written
Verbal communication is easier and less complicated than written
communication, and it's usually a fast method of communication. Written
communication, on the other hand, is an excellent way to get across complex,
detailed messages. Detailed instructions are better provided in written form
because it gives the reader the ability to go back over information about which
they're not quite sure.
Both verbal and written communication might take a formal or an informal
approach. Speeches and lectures are examples of formal verbal communication.
Most project status meetings take more of a formal approach, as do most written
project status reports. Generally speaking, the project manager should take an
informal approach when communicating with stakeholders and project team
members outside of the status meetings. This makes you appear more open and
friendly and easier to approach with questions and issues.
Formal and informal approaches may also include techniques such as fact
finding, asking questions, motivating team members, providing performance
feedback to team members, and setting and managing stakeholder (and team)
expectations.

Effective Listening Skills
What did you say? Often we think we're listening when we really aren't. In all
fairness, we can take in only so much information at one time. However, it is
important to perform active listening when someone else is speaking. As a
project manager, you will spend the majority of your time communicating with
team members, stakeholders, customers, vendors, and others. This means you
should be as good a listener as you are a communicator.
You can use several techniques to improve your listening skills. Many books are
devoted to this topic, so I'll try to highlight some of the most common techniques
here:
   Appear interested in what the speaker is saying. This will make the speaker
   feel at ease and will benefit you as well. By acting interested, you become
   interested and thereby retain more of the information being presented.
   Making eye contact with the speaker is another effective listening tool. This
   lets the speaker know you are paying attention to what they're saying and are
   interested.
   Put your speaker at ease by letting them know beforehand that you're
   interested in what they're going to talk about and that you're looking forward
   to hearing what they have to say. While they're speaking, nod your head,
   smile, or make comments when and if appropriate to let the speaker know
   you understand the message. If you don't understand something and are in
   the proper setting, ask clarifying questions.
   Another great trick that works well in lots of situations is to recap what the
   speaker said in your own words and tell it back to them. Start with something
   like this, "Let me make sure I understand you correctly; you're saying ...,"
   and ask the speaker to confirm that you did understand them correctly.
   Just as your mother always said, it's impolite to interrupt. Interrupting is a
   way of telling the speaker that you aren't really listening and you're more
   interested in telling them what you have to say than listening to them.
   Interrupting gets the other person off track, they might forget their point, and
   it might even make them angry.
Not to disagree with Mom, but there probably are some occasions where
interrupting is appropriate. For example, if you're in a project status meeting and
someone wants to take the meeting off course, sometimes the only way to get the
meeting back on track is to interrupt them. You can do this politely. Start first by
saying the person's name to get their attention. Then let them know that you'd be
happy to talk with them about their topic outside of the meeting or add it to the
agenda for the next status meeting if it's something everyone needs to hear.
Sorry, Mom.

Resolving Conflicts
We discussed conflict resolution techniques in Chapter 8, "Developing the
Project Team." They are also a form of communication skills. You may recall
the conflict resolution techniques:
   Force/direct
   Smooth/accommodate
   Compromise/reconcile
   Collaborate/problem solve
   Withdraw/avoid
Keep in mind that group size makes a difference when you're trying to resolve
conflicts or make decisions. Remember the channels of communication you
learned about in Chapter 5? The larger the group, the more lines of
communication and the more difficult it will be to reach a decision. Groups of 5
communication and the more difficult it will be to reach a decision. Groups of 5
to 11 people have a manageable number of participants and have been shown to
make the most accurate decisions.
Use communication, listening, and conflict resolution skills wisely. As a project
manager, you'll find that your day-to-day activities encompass these three areas
the majority of the time. Project managers with excellent communication skills
can work wonders.Communication won't take the place of proper planning and
management techniques, but a project manager who communicates well with
their team and the stakeholders can make up for a lack of technical skills any
day, hands down. If your team and your stakeholders trust you and you can
communicate the vision and the project goals and report on project status
accurately and honestly, the world is your oyster.

Information Management Systems
Information management systems are ways of getting the project information to
the project team or stakeholders. As the name implies, these are ways to
distribute the information, including email, hard copy, voicemail,
videoconferencing, websites, project management software, collaborative work
management tools, and so on. You can also use electronic project management
tools such as schedules and meeting software to maintain project records.

Performance Reporting
This tool and technique involves collecting and distributing the project
information, which can include status reports, measurements regarding the
progress of the project, and forecasts concerning future performance. I'm certain
you're all familiar with status reports. These can take many forms, but most
project status reports include the progress of the project to date, the expected
activities for the next period, schedule and budget updates, risk and issues
updates, and change requests. Most project management software systems can
produce dashboards with information about the project schedule, budget, quality,
and other criteria the management team might like to see. The dashboards
typically grade the health of these areas of the project with numeric scores or
colors such as red, yellow, and green to indicate whether an area is in trouble, is
headed into trouble and should be watched, or is in good shape.

Output of Manage Communications
The Manage Communications process has four outputs, including project
communications, project management plan updates, project documents updates,
and organizational process assets updates.
and organizational process assets updates.
The project communications output involves all of the work required for
gathering, creating, storing, distributing, retrieving, and disposing of project
communications. A few key elements you should consider regarding this output
are the urgency of the message, the impact the message may have on the receiver
(and perhaps the project as well), the delivery method you'll use for the message,
and whether the message is sensitive or confidential and how to ensure that the
message goes only to the intended receivers. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide,
project communications typically consists of performance reports, deliverables
status, schedule progress, and cost incurred.
The project management plan updates may include updating the project
baselines (scope, schedule, and/or cost), the communications management plan,
and the stakeholder management plan. It's important to keep the stakeholder
management plan up-to-date because this will help keep the stakeholders
engaged and supporting the team, and it helps you as the project manager
manage their expectations. Remember that together, the approved scope,
schedule, and cost baselines are known as the performance measurement
baseline. It's essential that you as the project manager update the project sponsor
and key stakeholders of any changes to the performance management baseline.
There are six elements of the organizational process assets updates you should
know:
Stakeholder Notifications Remember that the focus of this process is
distributing information. Stakeholder notifications involve notifying
stakeholders when you have implemented solutions and approved changes, have
updated project status, have resolved issues, and so on.
Project Reports Project reports include the project status reports and minutes
from project meetings, lessons learned, closure reports, and other documents
from all the process outputs throughout the project. If you're keeping an issue
log, the issues should be included with the project reports as well.
Project Presentations Project presentations involve presenting project
information to the stakeholders and other appropriate parties when necessary.
The presentations might be formal or informal and depend on the audience and
the information being communicated.
Project Records As you might guess, project records include memos,
correspondence, and other documents concerning the project. The best place to
keep information like this is in a project notebook or in a set of project
notebooks, depending on the size of the project. The project notebooks are
ordinary three-ring binders where project information gets filed. They are
maintained by the project manager or project office and contain all information
regarding the project. You could also keep the information on a project website,
the company intranet, or CDs. If you're keeping the information electronically,
make certain it's backed up regularly. Individual team members might keep their
own project records in notebooks or electronically as well. These records serve
as historical information once the project is closed.
Feedback from Stakeholders Feedback you receive from the stakeholders
that can improve future performance on this project or performance on future
projects should be captured and documented. If the information has an impact on
the current project, distribute it to the appropriate team members so that future
project performance can be modified to improve results.
Lessons Learned Documentation Lessons learned include information that
you gather and document throughout the course of the project that can be used to
benefit the current project, future projects, or other projects currently being
performed by the organization. Lessons learned might include positive as well as
negative lessons.
During the Manage Communications process, you'll begin conducting lessons
learned meetings focusing on many different areas, depending on the nature of
your project. These areas might include project management processes, product
development, technical processes, project team performance, stakeholder
involvement, and so on.
Lessons learned meetings should always be conducted at the end of project
phases and at the end of the project at minimum. Team members, stakeholders,
vendors, and others involved with the project should participate in these
meetings. It's important to understand, and to make your team members
understand, that this is not a finger-pointing meeting. The purpose of lessons
learned is to understand what went well and why--so you can repeat it on future
projects--and what didn't go so well and why--so you can perform differently
on future projects. These meetings can make good team-building sessions
because you're creating an atmosphere of trust and sharing and you're building
on each other's strengths to improve performance.
You should document the reasons or causes for the issues, the corrective action
taken and why, and any other information from which future projects might
benefit.
  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, it's a project manager's professional
  obligation to hold lessons learned meetings. Understanding lessons learned
  enables continuous improvement on the current and future projects.

We're making one last switch of focus in this chapter and will examine how to
Manage Stakeholder Engagement process next.

Managing Stakeholder Engagement
The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process is about satisfying the needs of
the stakeholders by managing communications with them, resolving issues,
engaging them on the project, managing their expectations, improving project
performance by implementing requested changes, and managing concerns in
anticipation of potential problems.




  If you need a refresher on the definition and role of stakeholders, please see
  Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?"

In my experience, managing stakeholder expectations is much more difficult
than managing project team members. Stakeholders are often managers or
directors in the organization who might be higher in the food chain than the
project manager and aren't afraid to let you know it. Having said that, you can
manage stakeholder expectations, and you do so using communication.
Stakeholders need lots of communication in every form you can provide. If you
are actively engaged with your stakeholders and interacting with them, providing
project status, and resolving issues, your chances of a successful project are
much greater than if you don't do these things.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, it's the project manager's responsibility to
  manage stakeholder expectations. Doing so will decrease the potential for
  project failure. Managing the expectations of your stakeholders will also
  increase the chance of meeting the project goals because issues are resolved
  in a timely manner and disruptions during the project are limited.


Manage Stakeholder Engagement Inputs
The inputs of Manage Stakeholder Engagement include the following:
   Stakeholder management plan
   Communications management plan
   Change log
   Organizational process assets
We have discussed each of these inputs previously with the exception of the
change log. We'll look more closely at change logs in the next chapter, but for
purposes of this process, understand that this is a log that documents all the
changes made during the course of the project. In terms of stakeholder
expectations, you'll want to keep stakeholders updated on changes and their
impacts on the project.

Tools and Techniques for Manage Stakeholder
Engagement
The tools and techniques of this process include communication methods,
interpersonal skills, and management skills. It's been a while since we talked
about management skills, but for purposes of this process, they refer primarily to
maintaining consensus regarding the project objectives, influencing others to
support the project, negotiating, and helping to shape organizational behavior to
accept the project outcomes. Other management skills you may need to polish
are presenting, writing, and public speaking skills. Keep in mind that face-to-
face communications are the most effective with stakeholders.

Manage Stakeholder Engagement Outputs
The outputs of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process are the issue log,
change requests, project management plan updates, project documents updates,
and organizational process assets updates.
One thing to note about the issue log in this process is that it acts more like an
action item log where you record the actions needed to resolve stakeholder
concerns and project issues they raise. Issues should be ranked according to their
urgency and potential impact on the project. As with the issue log in the Manage
Project Team process, you'll assign a responsible party and a due date for
resolution.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the issue log (or action item log) can be
  used to promote communication with stakeholders and to ensure that
  stakeholders and the project team have the same understanding of the issues.

Organizational process assets updates in this process include some of the same
updates we talked about in the Manage Communications process: stakeholder
notifications, project reports, project presentations, project records, feedback
from stakeholders, and lessons learned documentation.
You've successfully completed the Executing process group. Remember that the
Executing processes and Monitoring and Controlling processes serve as inputs to
each other and that Executing and Monitoring and Controlling are both iterative
process groups. As your project progresses and it becomes evident that you need
to exercise controls to get the project back on track, you'll come back through
the Executing process group and then proceed through the Monitoring and
Controlling processes again. You'll move on to the Monitoring and Controlling
process group now and find out what it's all about.



         Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  Dirk Perrier logs on and finds the following status report addressed to all the
  stakeholders and project team members from you:
  Project Progress Report
  Project Name Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  Project Number 081501-1910
Prepared By Project manager
Date October 8
Section 1: Action Items
   Action Item 1: Call cable vendor. Responsible party: Ricardo. Resolution
   date: 9/14
   Action Item 2: Check T1 connection status. Responsible party: Ricardo.
   Resolution date: Pending
   Action Item 3: Build-out begins. Responsible party: Jake. Resolution
   date: Pending
Section 2: Scheduled and Actual Completion Dates
   Sign lease: Scheduled: 8/21. Completed: 8/21
   Gomez contract signed: Scheduled: 9/12. Completed: 9/12
   Ethernet cable run: Scheduled: 9/18. Completed: 9/19
   Build-out started: Scheduled: 9/20. Completed: In progress
Section 3: Activity That Occurred in the Project This Week
The Ethernet cable run was completed without a problem.
Section 4: Progress Expected This Reporting Period Not
Completed
None. Project is on track to date.
Section 5: Progress Expected Next Reporting Period
Build-out will continue. Jake reports that Gomez expects to have electrical
lines run and drywall started prior to the end of the next reporting period.
Ricardo should have a T1 update. There's a slim possibility that the T1
connection will have occurred by next reporting period.
Section 6: Issues
We had to start the build-out on the last day of the cable run (this is called
fast tracking) to keep the project on schedule. Jake and Ricardo reported
only minor problems with this arrangement in that the contractors got into
each other's way a time or two. This did not impact the completion of the
cable run because most of day two this team was in the back room and
Gomez's crew was in the storefront area.
A key member of the Gomez construction crew was out last week because of
a family emergency. Gomez assures us that it will not impact the build-out
schedule. They replaced the team member with someone from another
project, so it appears so far that the build-out is on schedule.
Ricardo is somewhat concerned about the T1 connection because the phone
company won't return his calls inquiring about status. We're still ahead of the
curve on this one because hardware isn't scheduled to begin testing until
January 21. Hardware testing depends on the T1 connection. This is a heads-
up at this point, and we'll carry this as an issue in the status report going
forward until it's resolved.
One of the gourmet food item suppliers Jill uses regularly went out of
business. She is in the process of tracking down a new supplier to pick up
the slack for the existing stores and supply the gourmet food products for the
new store.
Status Meeting in Early December
"Thank you all for coming," you begin. You note those stakeholders who are
present and pass out the agendas. "First, we have a contract update. Jake,
would you give us the update, please?"
"Gomez Construction has submitted a seller payment request for the work
completed through November 30. Shelly in our contract management office
manages the payment system and handles all payment requests. She'll get a
check cut and out to Gomez by the end of this month. They are doing an
outstanding job as always. As you know, I've also hired an independent
inspector, aside from the city and county types, so that we make sure we're
up to code before the city types get there. I don't want to get caught in that
trap and end up delaying the project because we can't get the city inspector
back out to reinspect quickly enough."
"Thank you, Jake. Any problems with those inspections so far?"
Jake clears his throat. "It turned out to be a good move because the
contractor did find some things that we were able to correct before bringing
out the official inspectors."
"Ricardo, do you have a contract update for us today?"
"Yes. The contract management office used a fixed-price contract on the
hardware and IT supplies order. That contract is just now making its way
hardware and IT supplies order. That contract is just now making its way
through the sign-off processes. My group will manage the quality control
and testing once all this equipment arrives."
"Jill, can you give us the update on the store?" you ask.
"I've ordered all the retail products, have ordered the cookware line, and
have lined up the chef demos. The costs for the new gourmet supplier we're
using are higher than our original vendor. This impacts ongoing operations,
but the hit to the project budget is minimal. I should also mention that a
change request was submitted."
You point everyone's attention to the issues list. "In the last meeting I
reported that Gomez had an important crew member out on a family
emergency. Gomez was able to replace the team member with no impact to
the schedule. The next issue was the T1 connection--I reported that Ricardo
was not receiving return phone calls. Good news--that issue has been
cleared, the date has been set, and we can close this issue. Are there any new
issues to be added this week?"
No additional issues were reported.
"What's the forecast?" Dirk asks. "Are we on track for meeting the grand
opening date given all these issues?"
"I'll have performance figures for you at the next status meeting, and I have
some ideas on how we can make up this time in other ways so that we still
meet the date."
You thank everyone for coming and remind them of the next meeting time.
Project Case Study Checklist
   Conduct Procurements
       Procurement negotiations
       Agreements
   Perform Quality Assurance
       Quality audits
       Making certain the project will meet and satisfy the quality standards
       of the project
   Manage Communications
         Project information is delivered to stakeholders in a timely manner.
         The Manage Communications method is status reports via email and
         project meetings.
         The status report is part of the project reports filed in the project
         notebook or filed for future reference as historical information.
     Manage Stakeholder Engagement
         Communications methods
         Issue log
         Resolved issues


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
This chapter is jammed with information you need to know for the exam as well
as on the job. Depending on the size of your organization, many of the processes
I discussed in the Executing process group might actually be handled by another
department in your organization. I've worked in small companies (fewer than
100 people) as well as very large companies and have always had either a person
or a department that was responsible for the vendor selection, contract
negotiation, and contract administration. In all these situations and in my current
role as project manager, I have significant input to these processes, but the
person or department responsible for procurement has the ultimate control. For
example, we use RFPs (and occasionally RFIs) to solicit vendors. We typically
use a weighted scoring model in combination with a screening and rating system
to choose a vendor. For small projects, we have a list of prequalified vendors
from which to choose.
Someone who is skilled at writing contracts can best handle the contracts, which
ideally should be reviewed by the legal team. The legal team should also review
changes proposed by the vendor before someone signs on the dotted line. Clear,
concise, and specific contracts, in my experience, are critical success factors for
any project. I've too often seen contract issues bring a project to a sudden halt.
Another classic contract faux pas allows the vendor to think the work is
complete while the buyer believes the vendor is weeks or months away from
meeting the requirements. These types of disputes can almost always be traced
back to an unclear, imprecise contract. It's important to be specific in your
statement of work. Make sure that the project requirements are clear and broken
down far enough to be measurable and that deliverables are defined with criteria
that allow you to inspect for contract compliance prior to final acceptance.
I'll emphasize one last time the importance of communication, good
communication skills, and getting that information into the appropriate hands at
the right time. Enough said.
Engaging your stakeholders on the project and managing their expectations is as
important as managing the project team. Stakeholders need plenty of
communication, and issues need to be discussed and resolutions agreed on.
Remember the old adage that most people need to hear the same information six
times before it registers with them. Stakeholders, understandably, are notorious
for hearing what they want to hear. Here's an example: If I asked you to picture
an elephant, you would likely picture an elephant in your mind. It might be live
or the stuffed variety and it could be gray, brown, or pink, but you'd clearly
understand the concept. Elephant is a word that's pretty hard to misinterpret. But
what if I asked you to picture a three-bedroom house? There's lots of room for
interpretation there. When I said three-bedroom house, I meant ranch style with
the master on one end of the house and the other two bedrooms at the other end
of the house. What did you picture? Make certain you're using language your
stakeholders understand, and repeat it often until you're certain they get it.

Summary
This chapter finished up the Executing process group. We looked at Conduct
Procurements, Perform Quality Assurance, Manage Communications, and
Manage Stakeholder Engagement.
Conduct Procurements involves obtaining responses to bids and proposals from
potential vendors, selecting a vendor, and awarding the contract. In this process,
the selection committee will use proposal evaluation techniques to prioritize the
bids and proposals, and the outcome is that a seller (or sellers) is selected and
contracts awarded.
Contracts have cycles of their own, much like projects. Phases of the contracting
life cycle include requirement, requisition, solicitation, and award. Changes to
the contract are managed with change requests.
Changes that cannot be agreed on are contested changes. These take the form of
disputes, claims, or appeals. They might be settled among the parties directly,
disputes, claims, or appeals. They might be settled among the parties directly,
through a court of law, or through arbitration.
During the Perform Quality Assurance process, quality audits are performed to
ensure that the project will meet and satisfy the project's quality standards set out
in the quality management plan.
The Manage Communications process is concerned with making sure project
information is available to stakeholders at the right time and in the appropriate
format. This process is performed throughout the life of the project.
The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process involves making certain
communication needs and expectations of the stakeholders are met, managing
any issues stakeholders might raise that could become future issues, and
resolving previously identified issues.


Exam Essentials
Be able to describe the purpose of the Conduct Procurements process.
Conduct Procurements involves obtaining bids and proposals from vendors,
selecting a vendor, and awarding a contract.
Be able to name the tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements
process. The tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements process are
bidder conferences, proposal evaluation techniques, independent estimates,
expert judgment, advertising, analytical techniques, and procurement
negotiations.
Be able to name the contracting life cycle stages. Contracting life cycles
include requirement, requisition, solicitation, and award stages.
Be able to describe the purpose of the Perform Quality Assurance
process. The Perform Quality Assurance process is concerned with making
certain the project will meet and satisfy the quality standards of the project.
Be able to differentiate between senders and receivers of information.
Senders are responsible for clear, concise, complete messages, whereas receivers
are responsible for understanding the message correctly.
Be able to describe the purpose of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
process. Manage Stakeholder Engagement involves satisfying the needs of the
stakeholders and successfully meeting the goals of the project by managing
communications with stakeholders, resolving issues, engaging them on the
project, managing their expectations, improving project performance by
implementing requested changes, and managing concerns in anticipation of
potential problems.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You have been hired as a contract project manager for Grapevine Vineyards.
   Grapevine wants you to design an Internet wine club for its customers.
   Customers must register before being allowed to order wine over the Internet
   so that legal age can be established. You know that the module to verify
   registration must be written and tested using data from Grapevine's existing
   database. This new module cannot be tested until the data from the existing
   system is loaded. You are going to hire a vendor to perform the
   programming and testing tasks for this module to help speed up the project
   schedule. You decide to use an IFB and include a detailed SOW. This is an
   example of which of the following?
   A. Source selection criteria
   B. Seller proposals
   C. Advertising
   D. Procurement documents
2. Receivers in the communication model filter their information through all of
   the following, except which one?
   A. Culture
   B. Knowledge of subject
   C. Habits
   D. Language
3. You have accumulated project information throughout the project and need
   to distribute some important information you just received. Which of the
   following is not an information distribution tool?
   A. Project reports
   B. Electronic databases
   C. Electronic mail
   D. Manual filing system
4. You know that the next status meeting will require some discussion and a
   decision for a problem that has surfaced on the project. To make the most
   accurate decision, you know that the number of participants in the meeting
   should be limited to how many?
   A. 1 to 5
   B. 5 to 11
   C. 7 to 16
   D. 10 to 18
5. You are holding end-of-phase meetings with your team members and key
   stakeholders to learn what has hindered and helped the project team's
   performance of the work. All of the following are true regarding this
   situation except for which one?
   A. These meetings are called lessons learned meetings. Lessons learned
      documentation is part of the organizational process assets output of the
      Manage Communications process. These meetings are also a good team-
      building activity.
   B. The information learned from these meetings concerns processes and
      activities that have already occurred, so it will be most useful to
      document the lessons learned and use it for future projects.
   C. The project-reports component of the organizational process assets
      updates output includes status meetings and lessons learned.
   D. These meetings should be documented and should always include the
      cause of the issue, the reasons for corrective actions, and other
      appropriate information about the issues.
6. You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're
   working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order
   catalogs. The company is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the
   amounts of first-time orders, and similar information. As a potential bidder
   for this project, you worked on the RFP response and submitted the proposal.
   When the selection committee received the RFP responses from all the
   vendors bidding on this project, they used a weighted system to make a
   selection. This is a part of which tool and technique?
   A. A proposal evaluation technique in the Conduct Procurements process
   B. A seller proposal technique in the Conduct Procurements process
   C. A make-or-buy decision technique in the Conduct Procurements process
   D. A procurement negotiations technique in the Conduct Procurements
      process
7. You have been asked to submit a proposal for a project that has been put out
   for bid. First you attend the bidder conference to ask questions of the buyers
   and to hear the questions some of the other bidders will ask. Which of the
   following statements is not true?
   A. Bidder conferences are also known as contractor conferences.
   B. Bidder conferences also known as vendor conferences.
   C. Bidder conferences are also known as prebid conferences.
   D. Bidder conferences are also known as procurement conferences.
8. You have been asked to submit a proposal for a project that has been put out
   for bid. Prior to submitting the proposal, your company must register so that
   its firm is on the qualified seller list. Which of the following statements is
   true?
   A. The qualified seller list provides information about the sellers and is a
      tool and technique of the Conduct Procurements process.
   B. The qualified seller list provides information about the project and the
      company that wrote the RFP and is an output of the Conduct
      Procurements process.
   C. The qualified seller list provides information about the project and the
      company that wrote the RFP and is a component of the procurement
      documents input of the Conduct Procurements process.
   D. The qualified seller list provides information about the sellers and is a
      component of the organizational assets input to Conduct Procurements.
9. Which of the following tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements
   process is used to check and compare proposed pricing to the benchmark?
   A. Expert judgment
   B. Seller rating systems
    C. Independent estimates
    D. Proposal evaluation technique
10. During the opening rounds of contract negotiation, the other party uses a fait
    accompli tactic. Which of the following statements is true about fait
    accompli tactics?
    A. One party agrees to accept the offer of the other party but secretly knows
       they will bring the issue back up at a later time.
    B. One party claims the issue was documented and accepted in the issue log
       but they're willing to reopen it for discussion.
    C. One party claims the issue under discussion has already been decided and
       can't be changed.
    D. One party claims to accept the offer of the other party, provided a
       contract change request is submitted describing the offer in detail.
11. The tools and techniques of the Conduct Procurements process include all of
    the following except which one?
    A. Bidder conferences
    B. Market research
    C. Advertising
    D. Analytical techniques
12. The purpose of a quality audit includes all of the following except which
    one?
    A. To determine which project processes or activities are inefficient or
       ineffective
    B. To examine the work of the project, or the results of a process, and
       accept the work results
    C. To improve processes and reduce the cost of quality
    D. To improve processes and increase the percentage of product or service
       acceptance
13. You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution
    company. Your project involves developing a website for the company to
    allow retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a
    separate link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed
    to the consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves
    coordinating the parent company, growers, and distributors. You've
    discovered a problem with one of the technical processes needed to perform
    this project. You decide to perform root cause analysis to determine the
    cause of this problem and recommended preventive actions. Which of the
    following is true?
    A. You are using the process analysis technique.
    B. You are using the quality audit technique.
    C. You are using the root cause identification technique.
    D. You are using a design of experiments tool and technique.
14. You are using the Quality Management and Control Tools tool and technique
    of the Perform Quality Assurance process that will help you establish
    expected values for the dependent relationships in the hierarchy. Which tool
    within this tool and technique are you using?
    A. Affinity diagrams
    B. PDPC
    C. Tree diagrams
    D. Interrelationship digraphs
15. You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users
    responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has
    written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything
    to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she had
    performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project
    team. All project team members and stakeholders are co-located. Because
    your team also needs her to participate in an upcoming test, you decide to do
    which of the following?
    A. You decide to record the issue in the issue log and bring it up at the next
       status meeting. Everyone can benefit from understanding the importance
       of stakeholders fulfilling their roles and responsibilities on the project.
    B. You decide to record the issue in the issue log and then phone the
       stakeholder to explain what happened. You know speaking with the
       stakeholder directly is the most effective means for resolving issues.
    C. You decide to have a face-to-face meeting with the stakeholder because
       this is the most effective means for resolving issues with them.
    D. You decide to email the stakeholder and explain what happened in a
       professional manner so you can incorporate their response in the next
       status report.
16. Your project is progressing as planned. The project team has come up with a
    demo that the sales team will use when making presentations to prospective
    clients. You will do which of the following at your next stakeholder project
    status meeting?
    A. Preview the demo for stakeholders, and obtain their approval and sign-
       off.
    B. Report on the progress of the demo, and note that it's a completed task.
    C. Review the technical documentation of the demo, and obtain approval
       and sign-off.
    D. Report that the demo has been noted as a completed task in the project
       information system.
17. Negotiated draft contracts that will be used to create the final contract are a
    requirement of which of the following outputs of the Conduct Procurements
    process?
    A. Agreements
    B. Project document updates
    C. Procurement statement of work
    D. Selected sellers
18. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, this party is responsible for managing
    stakeholder expectations.
    A. Project manager, because actively managing stakeholder expectations
       will reduce project risk and help unresolved issues get resolved quickly.
    B. Project sponsor, because the overall success or failure of the project rests
       on this individual.
    C. All stakeholders have the responsibility to make sure their expectations
       are managed and they receive the proper information at the right time.
    D. Project manager and the project team members together have the
        responsibility because the project manager alone cannot manage all the
        stakeholders on a large, complex project.
19. This activity can become its own process with inputs and outputs on large or
    complex projects.
    A. Independent estimates
    B. Procurement negotiations
    C. Procurement agreements
    D. Proposal evaluations
20. Which of the following statements is false regarding contract life cycles?
    A. The requirement phase is the first contract life cycle phase and is
       performed during the Plan Procurement Management process. The buyer
       prepares the SOW during this phase.
    B. The award phase is the fourth contract life cycle phase and is performed
       during the Conduct Procurements process. The buyer awards the contract
       in this phase.
    C. The solicitation phase is the third contract life cycle phase and is
       performed during the Conduct Procurements process. This phase receives
       the bids and proposals and applies evaluation criteria to each in order to
       score or rank the responses.
    D. The requisition phase is the second contract life cycle phase and is
       performed during the Plan Procurement Management process. The buyer
       prepares the RFP during this phase.
CHAPTER 10
Measuring and Controlling Project Performance
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE EXECUTING AND THE
MONITORING AND CONTROLLING PERFORMANCE DOMAINS
COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING:
    Task 1: Measure project performance using appropriate tools and
   techniques in order to identify and quantify any variances and
   corrective actions
    Task 2: Manage changes to the project by following the change
   management plan in order to ensure that project goals remain aligned
   with business needs.
    Task 6: Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned, using lessons
   learned management techniques in order to enable continuous
   improvement.
    Task 7: Monitor procurement activities according to the procurement
   plan in order to verify compliance with project objectives.
    Knowledge and Skills:
       Performance measurement and tracking techniques (e.g., EV, CPM,
       PERT, Trend Analysis)
       Process analysis techniques (e.g., LEAN, Kanban, Six Sigma)
       Project control limits (e.g., thresholds, tolerance)
       Project monitoring tools and techniques
       Quality validation and verification techniques
This chapter introduces the Monitoring and Controlling process group. The
Monitoring and Controlling process group involves taking measurements and
performing inspections to find out whether there are variances in the plan. If you
discover variances, you need to take corrective action to get the project back on
track and repeat the affected project Planning processes to make adjustments to
the plan as a result of resolving the variances.
We'll start with the Monitor and Control Project Work process. This process
involves tracking, reviewing, adjusting, and controlling progress to meet the
involves tracking, reviewing, adjusting, and controlling progress to meet the
project performance objectives. We'll also look at Control Procurements, Control
Communications, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Control Stakeholder
Engagement.
Control Procurements is where contract performance is monitored, procurement
relationships are managed, and corrections or changes are implemented where
needed.
Work performance information is an output of the Control Communications
process and this output is used and maintained during the Monitoring and
Controlling processes, along with tools and techniques, to monitor and control
project communication throughout the life of the project. This information
allows the project manager to take corrective action during the Monitoring and
Controlling processes and to remedy wayward project results and realign future
project results with the project management plan.
Perform Integrated Change Control lays the foundation for all the control
processes--such as Control Risks, Control Costs, and Control Schedule--that
we'll talk about in Chapter 11, "Controlling Work Results." During this
discussion, I'll take time to explain how change control and configuration
management works. When you read these sections, remember that the
information from the Perform Integrated Change Control process applies to all
the control processes we'll talk about in Chapter 11.
Control Stakeholder Engagement is about continuing your relationship with the
stakeholders and maintaining their engagement on the project. Stakeholders
sometimes lose interest once you get into the later stages of the project, and you
don't want that to happen. You've learned a lot about project management by this
point and have just a few more topics to add to your study list. Keep up the good
work. You're getting closer to exam day.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).
Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
The processes in the Monitoring and Controlling process group concentrate on
monitoring and measuring project performance at regular intervals to identify
and quantify variances from the project management plan and get it back on
track using corrective actions.
The Monitor and Control Project Work process is concerned with monitoring all
the processes in the Initiating, Planning, Executing, and Closing process groups.
Collecting data, measuring results, comparing results to what was planned, and
reporting on performance information are some of the activities you'll perform
during this process. Many key outputs from other Monitoring and Controlling
processes are inputs to this process.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the Monitor and Control Project Work
process involves the following:
   Reporting and comparing actual project results against the project
   management plan
   Analyzing performance data and determining whether corrective or
   preventive action should be recommended
   Monitoring the project for risks to make certain they're identified and
   reported, their status is documented, and the appropriate risk response plans
   have been put into action
   Documenting all appropriate product information throughout the life of the
   project
   Gathering, recording, and documenting project information that provides
   project status, measurements of progress, and forecasting to update cost and
   schedule information that is reported to stakeholders, project team members,
   management, and others
   Monitoring approved change requests
   Providing reports on the project processes and program management status
   when the project is part of an overall program
  Keep in mind that the PMBOK(R) Guide presents information according to
  Knowledge Areas. In this chapter, for example, the Monitor and Control
  Project Work process is presented first because it is the first process in the
  Project Integration Management Knowledge Area that is a Monitoring and
  Controlling process. Monitor and Control Project Work is a process that
  encompasses all aspects of monitoring and controlling the work of the
  project. Unfortunately, we can't cover every process that this process refers
  to in the same chapter. (For example, outputs from the Control Costs process
  are inputs to this process.) I have attempted to arrange these processes in the
  most logical format possible so an all-encompassing process will be
  presented first, followed by other processes within this group. Rest assured
  we will cover everything this process touches in either this chapter or
  Chapter 11.


Monitor and Control Project Work Inputs
The inputs of this process include the project management plan, schedule
forecasts, cost forecasts, validated changes, work performance information,
enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets. We will look
at each of these next.

Project Management Plan
The Monitor and Control Project Work process is broad reaching and is
concerned with all of the work of the project rather than a specific area like
schedule or cost or human resources. To monitor and control the work, you'll
need the project management plan, which includes all of the subsidiary plans
we've talked about so far, so that you know what was planned and can take
action where needed to get the project back in line with the plan. As a reminder,
some of those subsidiary plans include the scope management plan, the cost
management plan, the human resource plan, the communications plan, and more.
And don't forget the important baselines: scope, schedule, and cost.

Schedule Forecasts
Schedule forecasts are an output of the Control Schedule process. Schedule
forecasts help determine the progress of the project schedule as it compares to
the schedule baseline. This can involve a series of formulas to determine
elements such as when a milestone was scheduled to be completed versus when
it was actually completed. We will look at all of the formulas in the next chapter
it was actually completed. We will look at all of the formulas in the next chapter
when we talk about controlling the project schedule.

Cost Forecasts
Cost forecasts are an output of the Control Costs process. Much like the schedule
forecasts, cost forecasts help us determine project progress as far as costs are
concerned. This includes formulas to determine factors such as what we
anticipated spending at this point in time versus what was actually spent. These
formulas are known as earned value management formulas, and we will look at
them as well as the cost forecasts formulas in the next chapter when we talk
about controlling project costs.




  Forecasting involves examining the project performance data to date and
  making predictions about future project performance based on this data.
  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, cost forecasts are determined using
  earned value management formulas such as estimate to complete and
  estimate at completion. Forecasting can also include methods such as time
  series, scenario building, and simulation. These forecasting methods fall into
  four different categories, and each category has several types of forecasting
  methods. We'll look at a brief description of each of the categories next, but
  it is beyond the scope of this book to go into detail on each one. Keep in
  mind these are not discussed in the PMBOK(R) Guide but they are methods
  you should know as you may see them in practice.

Time Series Methods These forecasting methods use historical data to predict
future performance. Earned value, moving average, extrapolation, trend
estimation, linear prediction, and growth curve are some of the methods that fall
into this category. We'll cover earned value in Chapter 11.
Causal/Econometric Methods Causal methods are based on the ability to
identify variables that may cause or influence the forecast. A drop in interest
rates, for example, may spur an increase in home sales. The methods included in
this category are regression analysis, autoregressive moving average (ARMA),
and econometrics.
Judgmental Methods If your mom is anything like mine, you were taught not
to be judgmental. This category of forecasting does just that, only it doesn't
judge people. It uses opinions, intuitive judgments, and probability estimates to
determine possible future results. Methods within this category include
composite forecasts, the Delphi method, surveys, technology forecasting,
scenario building, and forecast by analogy.
Other Methods Other types of forecasting methods include simulation (like
Monte Carlo analysis), probabilistic forecasting, and ensemble forecasting.

Validated Changes
Validated changes are an output of the Control Quality process. Validated
changes are those changes that have been inspected and determined to be
correct.

Work Performance Information
Work performance information concerns gathering and analyzing the
performance data, or work results, from the Monitoring and Controlling
processes. This might include performance information such as the status of
deliverables, schedule forecast data, cost forecast data, the status of change
requests, costs incurred to date, and more. Work performance information is
reported to the stakeholders according to the requirements laid out in the
communications management plan and the stakeholder management plan.

Enterprise Environmental Factors
Some of the enterprise environmental factors to consider in this process include
the project management information system, government or industry standards,
the risk tolerance levels of your stakeholders, and work authorization systems.
A work authorization system is a subsystem of the project management system.
This is a formal, documented procedure that describes how to authorize work
and how to begin that work in the correct sequence and at the right time. This
system describes the steps needed to issue a work authorization, the documents
needed, the method or system you'll use to record and track the authorization
information, and the approval levels required to authorize the work. You should
understand the complexity of the project and balance the cost of instituting a
work authorization system against the benefit you'll receive from it. This might
be overkill on small projects, and verbal instructions might work just as well.
For purposes of the exam, understand that project work is assigned and
committed via a work authorization system.
Work is usually authorized using a form that describes the task, the responsible
party, anticipated start and end dates, special instructions, and whatever else is
particular to the activity or project. Depending on the organizational structure,
the work is generally assigned and authorized by either the project manager or
the functional manager. Remember that the system includes documentation on
who has the authority to issue work authorization orders.




  The PMBOK(R) Guide glossary lists work authorization systems as a
  subsystem of the overall project management system, but it's noted as part of
  the enterprise environmental factors input in the Monitor and Control Project
  Work process. For the exam, I recommend that you understand what a work
  authorization system is and how you use it. For the record, you'll use these
  systems during the Executing processes.


Organizational Process Assets
The organizational process assets for which the PMBOK(R) Guide notes should be
considered during this process include financial controls, the communication
needs for the organization, change control processes, issue management, process
measurements, risk control processes, and lessons learned.
We talked about lessons learned in Chapter 9. Remember that lessons learned
should be performed throughout the life of the project. Capturing and analyzing
lessons learned will help you continually improve project management processes
and will ultimately improve your project success rates.
There are four tools and techniques of this process: expert judgment, analytical
techniques, project management information system, and meetings, all of which
we've covered previously, so we'll move right to the outputs next.

Monitor and Control Project Work Outputs
The outputs of the Monitor and Control Project Work process will also look
familiar. They are as follows:
   Change requests
   Work performance reports
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates

Change Requests
Remember from Chapter 9, "Conducting Procurements and Sharing
Information," that change requests may take the form of corrective actions,
preventive actions, or defect repairs. Corrective actions bring the work of the
project into alignment with expected future performance. Preventive actions are
implemented to help reduce the probability of negative project risks. Defect
repairs either correct or replace components that are substandard or
malfunctioning.

Work Performance Reports
Work performance reports are the primary output of this process. It's here that
the work performance data and work performance information gathered and
analyzed throughout the Monitoring and Controlling processes are documented
and reported to the stakeholders as outlined in the communications management
plan. Work performance reports might take many forms, including status reports,
issues or action item logs, project documents, and so on. They may be
represented in hardcopy form or electronic form or both.
Work performance reports may range from simply stated status reports to highly
detailed reports. Dashboards are an example of a simple report that may use
indicators like red-yellow-green to show the status of each area of the project at
a glance. Red means the item being reported is in trouble or behind schedule,
yellow means it's in danger of falling behind schedule and corrective action
should be taken, and green means all is well.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the work performance reports produced
  as a result of this process are used by the project management team and
  stakeholders to create awareness of issues, make decisions about those
  issues, and determine actions to take to resolve the issues. They are a subset
  of project documents.

More detailed reports may include the following elements according to the
PMBOK(R) Guide:
   Analysis of project performance for previous periods
   Risk and issue status
   Work completed in the current reporting period
   Work expected to be completed during the next reporting period
   Changes approved in the current reporting period (or a summary if there are
   numerous changes)
   Results of variance analysis
   Time completion forecasts and cost forecasts
   Other information stakeholders want or need to know
The information contained in these reports is used at status meetings or in
meetings with the project sponsor to generate action, to make decisions, or to
inform. This information should be in written format (such as a status report or
memo) and stored electronically with other project documents. Work
performance reports are considered a subset of project documents and should be
shared and distributed according to your communications plan.

Project Management Plan and Document Updates
Project management plan updates may include updates to one or more of the
management plans, including schedule, cost, or quality, and updates to the
baselines, including scope, schedule, and cost, may be required.
Project documents updates may include updates to forecasts, performance
reports, and the issue log.

Controlling Procurements
We'll now take another look at the procurement arena. You learned about
Conduct Procurements in Chapter 9. Now that the contract has been awarded,
you need to administer it.
The Control Procurements process involves monitoring the vendor's
performance and ensuring that all the requirements of the procurement
agreement (this is usually a contract) are met. When multiple vendors are
providing goods and services to the project, Control Procurements entails
coordinating the interfaces among all the vendors as well as administering each
of the contracts or procurement agreements. If vendor A has a due date that will
impact whether vendor B can perform their service, the management and
coordination of the two vendors become important. Vendor A's contract and due
dates must be monitored closely because failure to perform could affect another
vendor's ability to perform, not to mention the project schedule. You can see
how this situation could multiply quickly when you have six or seven or more
vendors involved.




  It's imperative that the project manager and project team are aware of any
  contract agreements that might impact the project so the team does not
  inadvertently take action that violates the terms of the contract.

Depending on the size of the organization, administering the contract or other
procurement agreement might fall to someone in the procurement department.
This doesn't mean you're off the hook as the project manager. It's still your
responsibility to oversee the process and make sure the project objectives are
being met, regardless of whether a vendor is performing the activities or your
project team members are performing the activities. You'll be the one monitoring
the performance of the vendor and informing them when and if performance is
lacking. You'll also monitor the procurement agreement's financial conditions.
For example, the seller should be paid in a timely manner when they've
satisfactorily met the conditions of the agreement, and it will be up to you to let
the procurement department know it's okay to pay the vendor. If administering
the contract or procurement agreement is your responsibility, you might have to
terminate the contract when the vendor violates the terms or doesn't meet the
agreed-on deliverables. If the procurement department has this responsibility,
you'll have to document the situation and provide this to the procurement
department so that they can enforce or terminate the contract.
Control Procurements involves monitoring procurement activities to verify that
you are meeting the project objectives, and it is closely linked with other project
management processes. You'll manage vendor relationships, monitor the
progress of the contract, execute plans, track costs, measure outputs, approve
changes, take corrective action, and report on status, just as you do for the
project itself. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, you must integrate and
coordinate the Direct and Manage Project Work, Control Quality, Perform
Integrated Change Control, and Control Risks processes during the Control
Procurements process. I would personally add another one to this list: Control
Communications.

  Exam Spotlight
  Buyers and sellers are equally responsible for monitoring the contract. Each
  has a vested interest in ensuring that the other party is living up to their
  contractual obligations and that their own legal rights are protected.


Controlling Procurements Inputs
Control Procurements has six inputs:
   Project management plan
   Procurement documents
   Agreements
   Approved change requests
   Work performance reports
   Work performance data
The project management plan, procurement documents, agreements, approved
change requests, work performance reports, and work performance data are
outputs from other processes. We'll look at approved change requests and some
additional content for work performance reports as it pertains to this process
next.

Approved Change Requests
Sometimes as you get into the work of the project, you'll discover that changes
need to be made. This could entail changes to the contract as well. Approved
change requests are used to process the project or contract changes and might
include things such as modifications to deliverables, changes to the product or
service of the project, changes in contract terms, or termination for poor
performance.
Generally speaking, contracts end for three reasons: cause, convenience, or
default. When a contract ends for cause, it's because one of the parties has
default. When a contract ends for cause, it's because one of the parties has
violated the terms of the contract. A contract ends for convenience when one of
the parties determines they no longer wish to participate in the contract. And
contracts that end by default are those where one of the parties has failed to
perform according to the terms of the contract.
Contracts can be amended at any time prior to contract completion, provided the
changes are agreed to by all parties and conform to the change control processes
outlined in the contract.

  Exam Spotlight
  Work performance data is an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work
  process. The results you gather in the Control Procurements process are
  actually collected as part of the Direct and Manage Project Work process
  output.


Work Performance Reports
Work performance reports include technical documentation that is developed by
the seller according to the terms of the contract as well as work performance
information as it relates to the seller (or vendor).
Work performance information in the Control Procurements process concerns
monitoring vendor work results and examining the vendor's deliverables. This
includes monitoring their work results against the contract statement of work and
making sure activities are performed correctly and in sequence. You'll need to
determine which deliverables are complete and which ones have not been
completed to date. You'll also need to consider the quality of the deliverables
and the costs that have been incurred to date.
Vendors request payment for the goods or services delivered in the form of seller
invoices. Seller invoices should describe the work that was completed or the
materials that were delivered and should include any supporting documentation
necessary to describe what was delivered. The contract should state what type of
supporting documentation is needed with the invoice.

Control Procurements Tools and Techniques
The Control Procurements process has several tools and techniques:
   Contract change control system
   Procurement performance reviews
   Inspections and audits
   Performance reporting
   Payment systems
   Claims administration
   Records management system
You will look at each of these in the following sections.

Contract Change Control System
Much like the management plans found in the Planning processes, the contract
change control system describes the processes needed to make contract changes.
Because the contract is a legal document, changes to it require the agreement of
all parties. A formal process must be established to process and authorize (or
deny) changes. (Authorization levels are defined in the organizational policies.)
The purpose of the contract change control system is to establish a formal
process for submitting change requests. It documents how to submit changes,
establishes the approval process, and outlines authorization levels. It includes a
tracking system to number the change requests and record their status. The
procedures for dispute resolution are spelled out in the contract change control
system as well.
The change control system, along with all the management plan outputs,
becomes part of the Perform Integrated Change Control process that I'll discuss
later in this chapter.

Procurement Performance Reviews
Procurement performance reviews examine the seller's performance on the
contract to date. These reviews can be conducted at the end of the contract or at
intervals during the contract period. Procurement reviews examine the contract
terms and seller performance for elements such as these:
   Meeting project scope
   Meeting project quality
   Staying within project budgets
   Meeting the project schedule
The performance reviews themselves might take the form of quality audits or
inspections of documents as well as the work of the product itself, or they may
be part of a status review. The point of the review is to determine where the
seller is succeeding at meeting scope, quality, cost, and schedule issues, for
example, or where they're not measuring up. If the seller is not in compliance,
action must be taken to either get them back into compliance or terminate the
contract. The yardstick you're using to measure their performance against is the
contract SOW and the terms of the contract. When the RFP is included as part of
the contract, you might also use it to determine contract compliance.

Inspections and Audits
I talked about quality audits as part of the Perform Quality Assurance process.
The idea is the same here. The buyer, or some designated third party, will
physically inspect the work of the seller and perform audits to determine whether
there are any deficiencies in the seller's product or service.

Performance Reporting
Performance reporting is a large part of project management. This tool and
technique entails providing your managers and stakeholders with information
about the vendor's progress in meeting the contract objectives.

Payment Systems
Vendors submit seller invoices as an input to this process, and the payment
systems tool and technique is used to issue payments. The organization might
have a dedicated department, such as accounts payable, that handles vendor
payments, or it might fall to the project manager. In either case, follow the
policies and procedures the organization has established regarding vendor
payments and make sure the payments themselves adhere to the contract terms.

Claims Administration
Claims administration involves documenting, monitoring, and managing
contested changes to the contract. Changes that cannot be agreed on are called
contested changes. Contested changes usually involve a disagreement about the
compensation to the vendor for implementing the change. You might believe the
change is not significant enough to justify additional compensation, whereas the
vendor believes they'll lose money by implementing the change free of charge.
Contested changes are also known as disputes, claims, or appeals. These can be
settled directly between the parties themselves, through the court system, or by a
process called arbitration. Arbitration involves bringing all parties to the table
with a third, disinterested party who is not a participant in the contract to try to
reach an agreement. The purpose of arbitration is to reach an agreement without
having to go to court. Arbitration is a form of Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR) and could be a named tool in the contract for resolving disputes.

Records Management System
It has been a while since I've talked about documentation, but discussing the
records management system reminds me of the importance of having an
organized system for contract documentation. A records management system
involves not just documentation but policies, control functions, and automated
tools. These can all be considered part of the project management information
system you use to manage project documents and should include your contract
documents. Records management systems typically index documents for easy
filing and retrieval.

Managing Control Procurements Outputs
The outputs of the Control Procurements process are as follows:
   Work performance information
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
These outputs relate to the tools and techniques just talked about and, in practice,
work hand in hand with them. I've talked about work performance information
and project management plan updates before, and I don't have anything new to
add here. The remaining outputs have some additional information you need to
know.

Change Requests
Requested contract changes are coordinated with the Direct and Manage Project
Work and Perform Integrated Change Control processes so that any changes
impacting the project are communicated to the project team and appropriate
actions are put into place to realign the objectives. This might also mean you'll
actions are put into place to realign the objectives. This might also mean you'll
have to change the project management plan, the cost baseline, and/or the
schedule baseline. That requires you to jump back to the Planning process group
to bring the project management plan, or other documents, up-to-date. Once the
plan is updated, the Direct and Manage Project Work process might require
changes as well to get the work of the project in line with the new plan.
Remember that project management is an iterative process, and it's not unusual
to revisit the Planning or Executing processes, particularly as changes are made
or corrective actions are put into place.
Contract changes will not always impact the project management plan, however.
For example, late delivery of key equipment probably would impact the project
management plan, but changes in the vendor payment schedule probably would
not. It's important that you are kept abreast of any changes to the contract so that
you can evaluate whether the project management plan needs adjusting.

Project Documents Updates
Here's your favorite topic again. This output includes (but isn't limited to)
updating all of the following:
   Contract or other procurement documents
   Performance information
   Warranties
   Financial information (such as invoices and payment records)
   Inspection and audit results
   Supporting schedules
   Approved and unapproved changes
The records management system I talked about earlier is the perfect place to
keep all these documents.

Organizational Process Assets Updates
Organizational process assets updates consist of organizational policies,
procedures, and so on. Three elements of this output relate to contracts:
Correspondence Correspondence is information that needs to be
communicated in writing to either the seller or the buyer. Examples include
changes to the contract, clarification of contract terms, results of buyer audits
and inspections, and notification of performance issues. You'll use
correspondence to inform the vendor if their performance is unsatisfactory. If
they don't correct it, you'll use correspondence again to notify a vendor that
you're terminating the contract because performance is below expectations and is
not satisfying the requirements of the contract.
Payment Schedules and Requests Many times, contracts are written such that
payment is made based on a predefined performance schedule. For example,
perhaps the first payment is made after 25 percent of the product or service is
completed, or maybe the payment schedule is based on milestone completion. In
any case, as the project manager, you will verify that the vendor's work (or
delivery) meets expectations before the payment is authorized. It's almost always
your responsibility as the project manager to verify that the terms of the contract
to date have or have not been satisfied. Depending on your organizational
policies, someone from the accounting or procurement department might request
written notification from you that the vendor has completed a milestone or made
a delivery. Monitoring the work of the vendor is as important as monitoring the
work of your team members.
If the procurement department is responsible for paying the contractor, then that
department manages the payment schedule (which is one of the terms of the
contract). The seller submits a payment request, an inspection or review of their
performance is conducted to make certain the terms of the contract were
fulfilled, and the payment is made.
Seller Performance Evaluation Seller performance evaluation is a written
record of the seller's performance on the contract and is prepared by the buyer. It
should include information about whether the seller successfully met contract
dates, whether the seller fulfilled the requirements of the contract and/or contract
statement of work, whether the work was satisfactory, and so on. Seller
performance evaluations can be used as a basis for terminating the existing
contract if performance is not satisfactory. They can also be used to determine
penalty fees in the case of unsatisfactory performance or incentives that are due
according to the terms of the contract. They should also indicate whether the
vendor should be allowed to bid on future work. Seller performance evaluations
can also be included as part of the qualified sellers lists.

  Exam Spotlight
  I recommend remembering the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of
  the contracting processes, including Plan Procurement Management,
  the contracting processes, including Plan Procurement Management,
  Conduct Procurements, and Control Procurements. Be certain you
  understand the purposes of these processes and don't simply memorize their
  components. Here's a brief recap:
     Plan Procurement Management: Preparing the SOW and procurement
     documents and determining source selection criteria
     Conduct Procurements: Obtaining bids and proposals from potential
     vendors, evaluating proposals against predetermined evaluation criteria,
     selecting vendors, and awarding the contract
     Control Procurements: Monitoring vendor performance to ensure that
     contract requirements are met


Controlling Communications
As mentioned, the Monitoring and Controlling process group concentrates on
monitoring and measuring project performance to identify variances from the
project plan. Control Communications is the process that monitors and controls
communications throughout the life of the project. Control Communications is
part of the Project Communications Management Knowledge Area. You will
recall that this Knowledge Area is concerned with collecting, distributing,
storing, archiving, and organizing project communications. Therefore, it plays a
key role in collecting information regarding project progress and project
accomplishments and reporting it to the stakeholders. This information might
also be reported to project team members, the management team, and other
interested parties through the Monitor and Control Project Work process.
Reporting might include information concerning project quality, costs, scope,
project schedules, procurement, and risk, and it can be presented in the form of
status reports, progress measurements, or forecasts. As with other processes in
the Monitoring and Controlling process group, Control Communications may
produce changes that will require a trip back through the Plan Communications
Management process and/or the Manage Communications process.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the Control Communications process is
  concerned with evaluating and controlling the impact messages may carry
  and delivering the right message to the right people at the right time.


Control Communications Inputs
You've examined most of the inputs to the Control Communications process
previously, but we'll reexamine all of them briefly with the exception of work
performance data, which we've covered in previous chapters. They are as
follows:
   Project management plan
   Project communications
   Issue log
   Work performance data
   Organizational process assets
Project Management Plan The project management plan contains the project
management baseline data (typically cost, schedule, and scope factors), which
you'll use to monitor and compare results. Deviations from this data are reported
to management.
Project Communications Project communications include information such
as status, progress on performance, cost and budget information, schedule
progress, and more. This information is used to make project decisions and take
action where needed.
Issue Log The issue log documents issues, assigns owners, tracks due dates,
and more. The issue log is useful in status meetings and in the Control
Communications process as a way to determine what issues remain that are
potentially blocking progress and what's been resolved. I have found that
reviewing issue logs at every status meeting helps to maintain stakeholder
expectations and also holds them accountable for actions they are required to
take to resolve the issue.
Organizational Process Assets Several organizational process assets come
into play in this process, including reporting templates, communication policies
or standards, communication technologies, security issues surrounding data,
communicating methods and mediums, and records retention policies.

Control Communications Tools and Techniques
The following are tools and techniques of this process:
The following are tools and techniques of this process:
   Information management systems
   Expert judgment
   Meetings
Let's look at each of these next.

Information Management Systems
Information management systems are used to record, store, and distribute
information about the project, including cost, schedule progress, and
performance information. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, spreadsheet
analysis, presentations, table reporting, and graphic capabilities are types of
distribution formats.

Expert Judgment
In this process, experts from all areas--including the project team, consultants,
stakeholders, industry groups, the PMO, and others as appropriate--are
consulted to help interpret the information gathered during the Monitoring and
Controlling processes and make decisions and take action where needed to align
the work of the project with the project management plan. One of the obvious
reasons you want to keep the work results on track with the plan is so that
stakeholder expectations are realized.

Meetings
Meetings in this process include meetings involving the project team, vendors,
functional managers, stakeholders, and others you will be working with on the
project. Meetings may be formal, informal, in person, or online. The important
point here is that you are meeting with all those involved in your project and
exchanging information. Meetings with the project team are concerned with
updating project performance information and communicating those updates to
the appropriate parties and working with stakeholders to provide them with
requested project information.
One of the important meetings you will conduct throughout the life of the project
is the status review meeting. Status meetings are a type of interactive
communication and are important functions during the course of the project. The
purpose of the status meeting is to provide updated information regarding the
progress of the project. These are not show-and-tell meetings. If you have a
prototype to demo, set up a different time to do that. Status meetings are meant
to exchange information and provide project updates. They are a way to formally
exchange project information. It's not unusual for projects to have three or four
status meetings conducted for different audiences. They can occur between the
project team and project manager, between the project manager and
stakeholders, between the project manager and users or customers, between the
project manager and the management team, and so on.
Notice that the project manager is always included in status review meetings.
Take care that you don't overburden yourself with meetings that aren't necessary
or meetings that could be combined with other meetings. Having any more than
three or four status meetings per month is unwieldy.




  Regular, timely status meetings prevent surprises down the road because you
  are keeping stakeholders and customers informed of what's happening. Team
  status meetings alert the project manager to potential risk events and provide
  the opportunity to discover and manage problems before they get to the
  uncontrollable stage.

The project manager is usually the expediter of the status meeting. As such, it's
your job to use status meetings wisely. Don't waste your team's time or the
stakeholders' time either. Notify attendees in writing of the meeting time and
place. Publish an agenda prior to the meeting, and stick to the agenda during the
meeting. Every so often, summarize what has been discussed during the meeting.
Don't let side discussions lead you down rabbit trails, and keep irrelevant
conversations to a minimum. It's also good to publish status meeting notes at the
conclusion of the meeting, especially if any action items resulted from the
meeting. This will give you a document trail and serve as a reminder to the
meeting participants of what actions need to be resolved and who is responsible
for each action item.
It's important that project team members are honest with the project manager and
that the project manager is in turn honest about what they report. A few years
ago, a department in my agency took on a project of gargantuan proportions and
unfortunately didn't employ good project management techniques. One of the
biggest problems with this project was that the project manager did not listen to
the highly skilled project team members. The team members warned of problems
and setbacks, but the project manager didn't want to hear about it. The project
manager took their reports to be of the "Chicken Little" ilk and refused to
believe the sky was falling. Unfortunately, the sky was falling! Because the
project manager didn't believe the reports, she refused to report the true status of
the project to the stakeholders and oversight committees. Millions of dollars
were wasted on a project that was doomed for failure while the project manager
continued to report that the project was on time and activities were completed
when in fact they were not.
There are hundreds of project stories like this, and I'll bet you've got one or two
from your experiences as well. Don't let your project become the next bad
example. Above all, be honest in your reporting. No one likes bad news, but bad
news delivered too late along with millions of dollars wasted is a guaranteed
career limiting move.

Control Communications Outputs
The Control Communications process has several outputs:
   Work performance information
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
We'll look briefly at work performance information and change requests.
Work performance information includes information you've gathered and
analyzed about the progress of the project to date. This information is typically
documented in the work performance reports (an output of the Monitor and
Control Project Work process we discussed earlier in this chapter) and is
distributed to the stakeholders. Change requests come about as a result of actions
taken to correct issues; actions taken to modify scope, schedule, or budget; or
actions taken to address other items. These actions and decisions are made as a
result of reviewing work performance information. Change requests are
generated from this process (and others) but are processed through the Integrated
Change Control process that we'll discuss in the next section of this chapter. As
you'll see shortly, change requests may require updates to the project
management plan, project documents, project baselines, and more.
Exam Spotlight
For the exam, remember that one of the purposes of the Monitoring and
Controlling process group is to gather performance metrics, including work
efforts, costs (both expended and remaining forecasted costs), milestone
measures, and other work performance measures to determine project
progress. The Control Communications process brings much of this
information together into one format.




Exam Spotlight
Work performance data, work performance information, and work
performance reports are all either inputs or outputs of various processes in
the Executing and Monitoring and Controlling process groups. They are
similar but do have differences. I recommend you understand the differences
for the exam. Here is a recap of each for your study time. According to the
PMBOK(R) Guide, the definitions are as follows:
Work Performance Data This is the process of measuring and observing
project activities. This may include data such as reports on the percent of
work complete, status of deliverables, technical performance measurements,
the actual start and finish dates of schedule activities (schedule progress to
date), the number of change requests or defects, costs incurred to date, and
so on. Work performance data is an input of the following processes:
   Validate Scope
   Control Scope
   Control Schedule
   Control Costs
   Control Quality
   Control Communications
   Control Risks
   Control Procurements
   Control Stakeholder Engagement
   Work performance data is an output of the following process:
   Direct and Manage Project Work
Work Performance Information Work performance information is used
in the Monitoring and Controlling processes to analyze information such as
the status of deliverables, the status of change requests, and forecasts such as
estimate to complete (i.e., the work performance data).
Work performance information is an input of the following process:
Monitor and Control Project Work
Work performance information is an output of the following processes:
   Validate Scope
   Control Scope
   Control Schedule
   Control Costs
   Control Quality
   Control Communications
   Control Risks
   Control Procurements
   Control Stakeholder Engagement
Work Performance Reports Work performance reports are the physical
manifestation of the work performance information you've gathered and
analyzed using variance analysis, earned value calculations, or forecasts.
Work performance reports may include status reports, memos, updates, and
more. Work performance reports are intended to aid decision making and
action plans.
Work performance reports are an input of the following processes:
   Manage Project Team
   Manage Communications
   Perform Integrated Change Control
   Control Risks
     Control Procurements
  Work performance reports are an output of the following process:
     Monitor and Control Project Work


Managing Perform Integrated Change Control
The Perform Integrated Change Control process serves as an overseer, so to
speak, of the Monitoring and Controlling processes. This is where you
implement the project's change control process in accordance with the change
management plan. Changes, which encompass corrective actions, preventive
actions, and defect repair, are common outputs across all the Monitoring and
Controlling processes. (Don't forget that change requests are also an output of
the Direct and Manage Project Work process, which is an Executing process.)
These processes can generate the change requests that are managed through the
Perform Integrated Change Control process.
You're likely to see exam questions on several topics that involve change and the
Perform Integrated Change Control process. Configuration management, for
example, isn't listed as a tool and technique of this process, but you really can't
perform the Perform Integrated Change Control process without it. I'll discuss
this shortly. First, though, you'll look at change, what it is, and how it comes
about.
Changes come about on projects for many reasons. It's the project manager's
responsibility to manage these changes and see to it that organizational policies
regarding changes are implemented. Changes don't necessarily mean negative
consequences. Changes can produce positive results as well. It's important that
you manage this process carefully, because too many changes--even one
significant change--will impact cost, schedule, scope, and/or quality. Once a
change request has been submitted, you have some decisions to make. Ask
yourself questions such as these:
   Should the change be implemented?
   If so, what's the cost to the project in terms of project constraints: cost, time,
   scope, and quality?
   Will the benefits gained by making the change increase or decrease the
   chances of project completion?
Just because a change is requested doesn't mean you have to implement it. You'll
Just because a change is requested doesn't mean you have to implement it. You'll
always want to discover the reasons for the change to determine whether they're
justifiable and aligned with business needs, and you'll want to know the cost of
the change. Remember that cost can take the form of increased time. Let's say
the change you're considering will result in a later schedule completion date.
That means you'll need human resources longer than expected. If you've leased
equipment or project resources for the team members to use during the course of
the project, a later completion date means your team needs the leased equipment
for a longer period of time. All this translates to increased costs. Time equals
money, as the saying goes, so manage time changes wisely, and dig deep to find
the impacts that time changes might make on the budget.

How Change Occurs
As the project progresses, the stakeholders or customers might request a change
directly. Team members might also recommend changes as the project
progresses. For example, once the project is under way, they might discover
more efficient ways of performing tasks or producing the product of the project
and recommend changes to accommodate the new efficiencies. Changes might
also come about as a result of mistakes that were made earlier in the project in
the Planning or Executing processes. (However, I hope you've applied all the
great practices and techniques I've talked about to date and you didn't experience
many of these.)
Changes to the project might occur indirectly as a result of contingency plans,
other changes, or team members performing favors for the stakeholders by
making that one little change without telling anyone about it. Many times, the
project manager is the last to know about changes such as these. There's a fine
line here because you don't want to discourage good working relationships
between team members and stakeholders, yet at the same time, you want to
ensure that all changes come through the change control process. If a dozen little
changes slip through like this, your project scope suddenly exits stage left.

Change Control Concerns
Perform Integrated Change Control, according to the PMBOK(R) Guide, is
primarily concerned with the following:
   Influencing the factors that cause change control processes to be
   circumvented
   Promptly reviewing and analyzing change requests
   Managing approved changes
   Maintaining the integrity of the project baselines (including scope, quality,
   schedule, cost, and performance measurement baselines) and incorporating
   approved changes into the project management plan and other project
   documents
   Promptly reviewing and analyzing corrective and preventive actions
   Coordinating and managing changes across the project
   Documenting requested changes and their impacts
Factors that might cause change include project constraints, stakeholder
requests, team member recommendations, vendor issues, and many others.
You'll want to understand the factors that are influencing or bringing about
change and how a proposed change might impact the project if implemented.
Performance measures and corrective actions might dictate that a project change
is needed as well.




 Modifications to the project are submitted in the form of change requests and
 managed through the change control process. Obviously, you'll want to
 implement those changes that are most beneficial to the project. I'll talk more
 about change requests later in this chapter.

Managing changes might involve making changes to the project scope, schedule,
or cost baseline, also known as the performance measurement baseline. This
baseline might also involve quality or technical elements. The performance
measurement baseline is the approved project management plan that describes
the work of the project. This is used through Executing and Monitoring and
Controlling to measure project performance and determine deviations from the
plan. It's your responsibility to maintain the reliability of the performance
measurement baselines. Changes that impact an existing or completed project
management process will require updates to those processes, which might mean
additional passes through the appropriate Planning and Executing processes.
The management plans created during the Planning process group should reflect
the changes as well, which might require updates to the project management
plan or the project scope statement. This requires a close eye on coordination
among all the processes that are impacted. For example, changes might require
updates to risk response alternatives, schedule, cost, resource requirements, or
other elements. Changes that affect product scope always require an update to
the project scope.

  Exam Spotlight
  Managing changes involves maintaining accurate and reliable performance
  measurement baselines; coordinating all processes impacted as a result of the
  change, including revisiting Planning and Executing processes where
  needed; and updating project scope to reflect any changes in product scope.

I caution you to not change baselines at the drop of a hat. Examine the changes,
their justification, and their impacts thoroughly before making changes to the
baselines. Make certain your project sponsor approves baseline changes and that
the project sponsor understands why the change occurred and how it will impact
the project. Be sure to keep a copy of the original baseline for comparison
purposes and for lessons learned.

Configuration Control
Configuration control is concerned with changes to the specifications of the
deliverables or project management processes. Configuration control is managed
through the configuration management system. The configuration management
system is a subsystem of the project management information system. It
documents the procedures and authorized approval levels for managing and
controlling changes to the physical characteristics of the deliverables.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, change control involves changes to the
  deliverables, project baselines, and/or project documents. Configuration
  control, which is managed through the configuration management system, is
  concerned with changes to the specifications of the deliverables and/or the
  project management processes.
The following items are what the PMBOK(R) Guide notes as activities associated
with configuration control in the Perform Integrated Change Control process:
Configuration Identification Configuration identification describes the
characteristics of the product, service, or result of the project. This description is
the basis that's used to verify when changes are made and how they're managed.
Configuration identification is also used to label products or documents, manage
changes, and verify changes.
Configuration Status Accounting This activity doesn't have to do with
financials as you might guess from its title. It's about accounting for the status of
the changes by documenting and storing the configuration information needed to
effectively manage the product information. This includes the approved
configuration identification, the status of proposed changes, and the status of
changes currently being implemented.
Configuration Verification and Auditing Verification and audits are
performed to determine whether the configuration item is accurate and correct
and to make sure the performance requirements have been met. It ensures that
changes are registered in the configuration management system and that they are
assessed, approved, tracked, and implemented correctly.

Change Control System
If you were to allow changes to occur to the project whenever requested, you
would probably never complete the project. Stakeholders, the customer, and end
users would continually change the project requirements if given the opportunity
to do so. That's why careful planning and scope definition are important in the
beginning of the project. It's your job as project manager to drive out all the
compelling needs and requirements of the project during the Planning process so
that important requirements aren't suddenly "remembered" halfway through the
project. However, we're all human, and sometimes things are not known, weren't
thought about, or simply weren't discovered until a certain point during the
project. Stakeholders will probably start thinking in a direction they weren't
considering during the Planning process, and new requirements will come to
light. This is where the change control system comes into play.

  Exam Spotlight
  Understand for the exam that configuration management involves
  identifying the physical characteristics of the product, service, or result of
  identifying the physical characteristics of the product, service, or result of
  the project (or its individual components); controlling changes to those
  characteristics; and documenting changes to verify that requirements are
  met. It also includes the change management system and documents the
  process for requesting, tracking, and determining whether change requests
  should be approved or denied.


The Purpose of the Change Control System
Change control systems are documented procedures that describe how the
deliverables of the project and associated project documentation are controlled,
changed, and approved. They also often describe how to submit change requests
and how to manage change requests. They may include preprinted change
request forms that provide a place to record general project information such as
the name and project number, the date, and the details regarding the change
request. Change control systems are usually subsystems of the configuration
management system.
The change control system also tracks the status of change requests, including
their approval status. Not all change requests will receive approval. Those
changes that are not approved are also tracked, communicated to the appropriate
stakeholders, and filed in the change control log for future reference.
The change control system might define the level of authority needed to approve
changes, if it wasn't previously defined in the configuration management system.
Some change requests could receive approval based on the project manager's
decision; others might need to be reviewed and formally approved by the project
sponsor, executive management, and so on.




  The change control system is a subset of the project management system. It
  includes the processes for identifying the characteristics of the product,
  service, or result and includes the process for documenting, tracking, and
  approving changes.

Procedures that detail how emergency changes are approved should be defined
as well. For example, you and your team might be putting in some weekend
hours and be close to the completion of a deliverable when you discover that
thing 1 will not talk to thing 2 no matter what you do. The team brainstorms and
comes up with a brilliant solution that requires a change request. Do you stop
work right then and wait until the change control board or committee can meet
sometime next week and make a decision, or do you--the project manager--
make the decision to go forward with this solution and explain the change to the
appropriate parties later? That answer depends on the change procedures you
have in place to handle situations like this and on the authority you have to make
emergency changes as outlined in the change control system.
Many organizations have formal change control or change request systems in
place. If that's the case, you can easily adopt those procedures and use the
existing system to manage project change. But if no procedures exist, you'll have
to define them.
There are three objectives you should know about for implementing and using
configuration management systems and change control processes:
   Establish a method to consistently identify changes, request changes to
   project baselines, and analyze and determine the value and effectiveness of
   the changes.
   Continuously authenticate and improve project performance by evaluating
   the impact of each change.
   Communicate all change requests--whether approved, rejected, or delayed
   --to all the stakeholders.



         Real World Scenario

  But I Thought You Said...
  Marcus was working on a web redesign project for a division of the
  marketing department in his organization. The project started out as a simple
  redesign of the look and feel of the site. Marcus made the mistake of not
  defining change control procedures for the project from the beginning
  because he reasoned that the project was small, the design changes were well
  understood by all, and the project could be finished in a matter of weeks.
  After the work of the project started, Marcus's team showed the initial design
  results to the business lead, Kendra. Kendra asked for a few modifications
  that seemed minor, and Marcus was happy to accommodate. When his team
  that seemed minor, and Marcus was happy to accommodate. When his team
  finished the work and turned the site over for initial testing, Kendra created a
  list of changes that extended beyond the initial scope of the project. Marcus
  thought everyone had agreed that the project involved only an update to the
  look and feel of the site, but Kendra was requesting changes to the
  applications people used to order products from the website. Marcus knew
  that application changes need their own set of requirements and testing.
  Changing the look of the site was a lot different from changing the way an
  application worked and the results it produced. Kendra and Marcus were in
  disagreement over what the changes entailed. Kendra thought she had carte
  blanche to make changes until she was satisfied with the project. Marcus
  knew that the projects waiting in the queue were going to suffer because of
  the never-ending stream of changes to Kendra's project. The additional time
  her project was taking already had pushed the deliverable of the next project
  on their list by two weeks.
  To resolve the dilemma, Marcus had to negotiate with Kendra on the list of
  changes she had requested. He agreed to all changes that required less than
  four hours to complete, and the remaining changes were moved to a new
  project request. Marcus also vowed to implement change control procedures
  for all projects from this point forward, no matter what the size or
  complexity of the project.


Requirements for Change
At the beginning of all projects, you should require two things regarding change.
First, require that all change requests be submitted in writing. This is to clarify
the change and make sure there's no confusion about what's requested. It also
allows the project team to accurately estimate the time it will take to incorporate
the change.
Second, require that all change requests must go through the formal change
control system. Make sure no one is allowed to go directly to team members and
request changes without the project manager knowing about them. Also make
certain your stakeholders understand that going around the project manager can
cause schedule delays, cost overruns, and sacrifices to quality and that it isn't
good change management practice. From the beginning of the project, encourage
the stakeholders to use the formal procedures laid out in the change control
system to request changes.
  It's good practice to require all change requests in writing. This should be a
  documented procedure outlined in your change control system. Beware!
  Stakeholders are notorious for asking for changes verbally even when there
  is a detailed process in place. If they don't want to follow the process,
  someone on the project team should have responsibility for documenting and
  logging the change requests for future reference.


Change Control Board
In some organizations, a change control board (CCB) is established to review all
change requests. The board is officially chartered and given the authority to
approve or deny change requests as defined by the organization. It's important
that its authority is clearly defined and that separate procedures exist for
emergency changes. The CCB might meet only once a week, once every other
week, or even once a month, depending on the project. When emergencies arise,
the established procedures allow the project manager to implement the change
on the spot. This always requires follow-up with the CCB and completion of a
formal change request, even though it's after the fact.
CCB members might include stakeholders, managers, project team members,
and others who might not have any connection to the project at hand. Some
organizations have permanent CCBs that are staffed by full-time employees
dedicated to managing change for the entire organization, not just project
change. You might want to consider establishing a CCB for your project if the
organization does not have one.

  Exam Spotlight

  For purposes of the exam, note that the PMBOK(R) Guide states that the CCB
  is made up of a group of stakeholders who review and then approve, delay,
  or reject change requests.

Some organizations use other types of review boards that have the same
responsibilities as the CCB. Some other names you might see are technical
assessment board (TAB), technical review board (TRB), engineering review
board (ERB), and configuration control board (CCB).
board (ERB), and configuration control board (CCB).

Perform Integrated Change Control Inputs, Tools and
Techniques, and Outputs
The inputs for the Perform Integrated Change Control process are as follows:
   Project management plan
   Work performance reports
   Change requests
   Enterprise environmental factors
   Organizational process assets
Remember that the project management plan includes all the documents that
make up that plan. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the documents in the
project management plan include at least the following:
   Scope management plan
   Requirements management plan
   Schedule management plan
   Cost management plan
   Quality management plan
   Process improvement plan
   Human resource management plan
   Communications management plan
   Risk management plan
   Procurement management plan
   Stakeholder management plan
As a reminder, the project baselines include at least the following:
   Schedule baseline
   Cost baseline
   Scope baseline
Pop Quiz: Do you remember what documents comprise the scope baseline? Turn
Pop Quiz: Do you remember what documents comprise the scope baseline? Turn
back to Chapter 3 if you need a refresher.
Other documents (such as the issue log, quality checklists, statement of work,
and many more) are considered project documents.
The tools and techniques for Perform Integrated Change Control include:
   Expert judgment
   Change control meetings
   Change control tools
Change control tools may include manual processes or software systems that
assist in managing this process. They will track and record the change requests,
record the decisions by the change control board, and help manage the
distribution of the change request decisions and more.
The outputs of the Perform Integrated Change Control process are as follows:
   Approved change requests
   Change log
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
Approved change requests are implemented during the Direct and Manage
Project Work process. They are documented in the change log along with other
items such as costs, risks associated with the changes, the timing of the change
requests, and more. Project management plan updates are typically required as a
result of an approved change or corrective action, especially those changes that
impact a project baseline. It may sound obvious, but I'll tell you anyway:
Changes made to baselines should reflect changes from the current point in time
forward. You cannot change past performance. These changes are noted in the
change control system or the configuration management system, and
stakeholders are informed at the status meetings of the changes that have
occurred, their impacts, and where the description of the changes can be found.
You should document all the actions taken in the Perform Integrated Change
Control process (whether implemented or not) as part of the project documents
updates output. You should also record the reason for the change request. In
other words, how did this particular change request come about? How did it
change the original project management plan? Is this something you could or
should have known about in the Planning processes? You should also note the
corrective action taken and the justification for choosing that particular
corrective action taken and the justification for choosing that particular
corrective action as part of lessons learned. You can use the information you
capture here in your configuration management system as lessons learned for
future projects. When you take on a new project, it's a good idea to review the
lessons learned from similar projects so that you can plan appropriately and
avoid, where possible, the variances that occurred in those projects.

  Exam Spotlight
  Remember that approved change requests are an output of the Perform
  Integrated Change Control process but they are implemented in the Direct
  and Manage Project Work process (an Executing process).

In the next chapter, you'll explore the individual change control processes (like
Control Costs and Control Schedule) and the measurement tools you'll use to
provide the variance measurements that are gathered and reported to the
stakeholder via the Control Communications process that we discussed earlier in
this chapter.

Controlling Stakeholder Engagement
The purpose of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process is to monitor your
stakeholder relationships and ensure the stakeholders' continued engagement in
the project. It's easy for stakeholders to become distracted on long projects. As
more time goes by, the current project fades in importance and other issues can
take their place. Keeping stakeholders engaged will help overall project success,
it will help you efficiently manage the processes as the project progresses, and it
will help your stakeholders stay up-to-date on issues and status as the project
evolves so they can make informed decisions.
You have seen all of the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs of this process
before. For your reference they are listed next.
The inputs to the Control Stakeholder Engagement process are as follows:
   Project management plan
   Issue log
   Work performance data
   Project documents
This process has the following tools and techniques:
   Information management systems
   Expert judgment
   Meetings
The outputs of this process are as follows:
   Work performance information
   Change requests
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates



         Real World Scenario

  Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
  Your regularly scheduled status meeting is in progress. Let's see how it's
  progressing.
  Your next agenda item is an update on change requests. Ricardo submitted a
  change request regarding the hardware installation at the new store site. A
  new, much anticipated operating system was just released, and Ricardo has
  plans to upgrade the entire company to the new operating system. Since he
  must purchase new equipment for this store anyway, he contends that it
  makes sense to go ahead and purchase the hardware with the newest
  operating system already loaded. His staff won't have to upgrade this store as
  part of the upgrade project because the store will already have the new
  operating system.
  Ricardo's change request was submitted in writing through the change
  control system. A CCB was set up during the Planning stages of this project
  to handle change requests. At the CCB meeting, the following questions
  come up regarding Ricardo's request: Has the new operating system been
  tested with the existing system? Are there compatibility problems? If so,
  what risks are associated with getting the problems resolved and the
  equipment installed by opening day? Is the vendor ready to ship the new
  operating system?
operating system?
The CCB defers their decision for this request until Ricardo answers these
questions.
During the next CCB meeting, the board reviews a change request from Jill.
The gourmet food supplier she used went out of business, and Jill contracted
with a new vendor. She received a sample shipment from the new vendor
and was very unhappy with the results. Upon inspecting the products, she
found broken containers and damaged packaging. Meanwhile, Jill found
another vendor, who has sent her a sample shipment. She is very pleased
with the new vendor's products and service. However, this vendor's prices
are even higher than the first replacement vendor with whom she contracted.
Jill submitted a cost change request to the CCB because of the increased cost
of the gourmet food product shipment. The change in cost does not have a
significant impact on the budget.
Jake reported that payments have been made to the vendor supplying the
store's display cases and shelving and also gave an update on the vendor
supplying the lighting for the store. Both vendors met or exceeded
performance requirements and he's happy with their service.
You hold a seat on the CCB and are aware of the change requests and their
impacts on the project. Ricardo satisfactorily answered all the questions the
CCB had, so his request and Jill's request were both approved during the
meeting.
You inform the group that you will be setting up some one-on-one meetings
with each of the key stakeholders to check in with them on how the project
is progressing from their viewpoint and to listen to their input and/or any
issues they may have.
"Now I'd like to give a brief update on the project forecast," you tell the
group. "Based on the preliminary data I've gathered, we are somewhat
behind schedule but budget appears to be on track. I will have some forecast
numbers for you at the next meeting."
Project Case Study Checklist
   Control Procurements
       Monitor vendor performance
       Document vendor performance
         Monitor payments to seller
     Perform Integrated Change Control
         Review and approve changes
         Document changes in change log
     Configuration management systems
         Configuration identification
         Configuration status accounting
         Configuration verification and auditing
         Change control system
     Control Communications
         Work performance information (status reports and meetings)
         Forecasts
     Control Stakeholder Engagement
         Meetings
         Work performance information


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
I've learned from experience the value of having a change control process in
place for all projects. I've never managed a project that didn't encounter change
--and there are hundreds of reasons that bring about change. One of the ways to
help reduce the amount of change you might experience is to make certain
you've documented the requirements of the project accurately and have obtained
sign-off from the stakeholders. Beware! Just because the stakeholders have
agreed to the requirements doesn't mean they won't want change. As you
elaborate the deliverables and requirements, the product or end result becomes
clearer, and that means some elements not previously known or at least not
known in their entirety early in the planning process will require change.
If you don't already have a change control process in place, I recommend setting
one up before you begin your next project. Document the procedures for
requesting, tracking, and approving or denying changes. Make change control
requesting, tracking, and approving or denying changes. Make change control
procedures one of the agenda items for discussion at your project kickoff
meeting. It's easier to enforce change procedures (and deny changes that are out
of scope) if the process is discussed with the stakeholders early in the project.
You will likely want to include important stakeholders on the change control
board, and that will give you another great opportunity to discuss and reinforce
the process.
Administering contracts and procurements, as I mentioned earlier, may be
managed by someone in your procurement department. In my experience, there
is always someone from this department involved from the request process
through contract administration. However, it will likely be up to you to monitor
vendor performance, make sure deliverable dates are met, and verify time cards
against the submitted invoice.
Keeping your stakeholders engaged throughout the entire project is key to its
success. Don't let stakeholder interests drift. Make an effort to reach out to them
and meet with them on a regular basis. Your enthusiasm for the project is
contagious and will keep the stakeholders engaged.

Summary
This chapter examined several change control processes, starting with the
Monitor and Control Project Work process. This process is responsible for
reviewing, tracking, and controlling project progress. It ensures that the
performance objectives outlined in the project management plan are met.
The Control Procurements process is concerned with managing vendor
relationships, monitoring performance, and implementing changes or corrections
when necessary. Both buyer and seller are responsible for administering the
contract (or other procurement vehicle) to ensure that contractual obligations are
being met.
Perform Integrated Change Control is an important part of the project process.
It's your responsibility as project manager to manage change and implement
corrective action where needed to keep the project on track with the plan.
Perform Integrated Change Control concerns influencing the things that cause
change and managing the change once it has occurred. One or more of the
project baselines may be affected when change occurs. Managing change might
involve changes to the project plan, the project schedule, the project budget,
project scope, and so on. Changes that impact processes you've already
completed require updates to those processes. Corrective action is often a result
completed require updates to those processes. Corrective action is often a result
of a change and ensures that the future performance of the project lines up with
the project management plan.
Configuration management systems typically include change control systems
that document the procedures to manage change and how change requests are
implemented. Change requests might come in written or verbal forms, but
ideally you should ask for all your change requests in writing. Change requests
are processed through a formal change control system, and configuration control
boards have the authority to approve or deny change requests.
Control Stakeholder Engagement concerns monitoring your relationships with
the stakeholders and keeping them engaged throughout the project.

Exam Essentials
Name the outputs of the Monitor and Control Project Work process. The
outputs are change requests (which include corrective action, preventive action,
and defect repair), work performance reports, project management plan updates,
and project documents updates.
Name the processes that integrate with the Control Procurements
process. Direct and Manage Project Work, Control Communications, Control
Quality, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Control Risks.
Describe the purpose of the Control Communications process. Control
Communications concerns monitoring and controlling communications
throughout the life of the project.
Name the purpose of the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
Perform Integrated Change Control is performed throughout the life of the
project and involves reviewing all the project change requests, establishing a
configuration management and change control process, and approving or
denying changes.
Be able to define the purpose of a configuration management system.
Configuration management systems are documented procedures that describe the
process for submitting change requests, the processes for tracking changes and
their disposition, and the processes for defining the approval levels for approving
and denying changes. The configuration management system also includes a
process for authorizing the changes. Change control systems are generally a
subset of the configuration management system. Configuration management also
describes the characteristics of the product of the project and ensures accuracy
and completeness of the description.
Be able to describe a CCB. The change control board (CCB) has the authority
to approve or deny change requests. Their authority is defined and outlined by
the organization. A CCB is made up of stakeholders.
Be able to describe the purpose for the Control Stakeholder Engagement
process. The purpose is to monitor stakeholder relationships and ensure their
continued engagement in the project.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are a project manager for an international marketing firm. You are ready
   to assign resources to your new project using a work authorization system.
   Which of the following statements is not true?
   A. Work authorization systems clarify and initiate the work for each work
      package.
   B. Work authorization systems are written procedures defined by the
      organization.
   C. Work authorization systems are used throughout the project Executing
      processes.
   D. Work authorization systems are a tool and technique of the Monitor and
      Control Project Work process.
2. You are working on a project and discover that one of the business users
   responsible for testing the product never completed this activity. She has
   written an email requesting that one of your team members drop everything
   to assist her with a problem that could have been avoided if she had
   performed the test. This employee reports to a stakeholder, not to the project
   team. You estimate that the project might not be completed on time as a
   result of this missed activity. All of the following are true except for which
   one?
   A. You should recommend a corrective action to bring the expected future
      project performance back into line with the project management plan
      because of this employee's failure to perform this activity.
   B. You should recommend a preventive action to reduce the possibility of
      future project performance veering off track because of this employee's
      failure to perform this activity.
   C. You should recommend a change request, which is an output of the
      Monitor and Control Project Work process, to get the project
      performance back in alignment with the project management plan.
   D. You might have to request a change to the project schedule as a result of
      this missed activity.
3. Which one of the following is the most preferred method of settling claims
   and disputes according to the PMBOK(R) Guide?
   A. Arbitration
   B. Collaboration
   C. ADR
   D. Negotiation
4. Which option includes all of the tools and techniques of the Control
   Procurements process?
   A. Contract change control system, expert judgment, inspection and audits,
      performance reporting, payment systems, claims administration, and
      records management system.
   B. Contract change control system, procurement performance reviews,
      inspection and audits, performance reporting, payment systems, claims
      administration, configuration management system, and records
      management system.
   C. Contract change control system, expert judgment, inspection and audits,
      performance reporting, payment systems, claims administration,
      configuration management system, and records management system.
   D. Contract change control system, procurement performance reviews,
      inspection and audits, performance reporting, payment systems, claims
      administration, and records management system.
5. You are a project manager for an engineering company. Your company won
   the bid to add ramp-metering lights to several on-ramps along a stretch of
   highway at the south end of the city. You subcontracted a portion of the
   project to another company. The subcontractor's work involves digging the
   holes and setting the lamp poles in concrete. The subcontractor's
   performance to date does not meet the contract requirements. Which of the
   following is not a valid option?
   A. You document the poor performance in written form and send the
      correspondence to the subcontractor.
   B. You terminate the contract for cause and submit a change request
      through Control Procurements.
   C. You submit a change request through Control Procurements demanding
      that the subcontractor comply with the terms of the contract.
   D. You agree to meet with the subcontractor to see whether a satisfactory
      solution can be reached.
6. The Control Procurements process is closely integrated with all of the
   following processes except for which one?
   A. Direct and Manage Project Work
   B. Control Communications
   C. Perform Integrated Change Control
   D. Control Risks
7. You are holding a regularly scheduled status meeting for your project. You
   know all of the following are true regarding status meetings except which
   one?
   A. Status meetings are a type of communication method, which is a tool and
      technique of the Control Communications process.
   B. Status meetings are a type of interactive communication.
   C. Status meetings are a way to formally exchange information and update
      the stakeholders regarding project status.
   D. Status meetings should be held throughout the project and at regularly
      scheduled intervals.
8. You are performing actions such as collecting and reporting information
   regarding the progress of the project and ensuring that the right information
   is delivered to the right people at the right time. Which process are you
   performing?
   A. Control Communications
    B. Perform Integrated Change Control
    C. Monitor and Control Project Work
    D. Control Procurements
 9. All of the following are tools and techniques of the Control Communications
    process except which one?
    A. Records management system
    B. Information management systems
    C. Expert judgment
    D. Meetings
10. The Delphi method, technology forecasting, and forecast by analogy are
    examples of what category of forecasting methods?
    A. Time series
    B. Judgmental
    C. Causal
    D. Econometric
11. Your project is progressing as planned. You are conducting a status meeting
    and are reviewing items that need resolution. You have asked the owners of
    these items to report their progress and are tracking the due dates for their
    resolution. Which input of the Control Communications process does this
    describe?
    A. Information management systems
    B. Issue log
    C. Meetings
    D. Work performance data
12. You are in the Conduct Procurements process. You and your vendor are in
    the midst of contested changes and cannot reach a resolution. Which of the
    following methods should be your first course of action to resolve this issue?
    A. Meet with the vendor until you resolve this on your own.
    B. Use ADR techniques.
    C. Take the vendor to court.
    D. Terminate the contract.
13. You are a project manager for Bluebird Technologies. Bluebird writes
    custom billing applications for several industries. A schedule change has
    been requested. From the perspective of the Perform Integrated Change
    Control, change is concerned with all of the following except which one?
    A. Influencing factors that circumvent the change control process
    B. Issuing change requests
    C. Reviewing change
    D. Maintaining the integrity of baselines
14. You are a project manager for Bluebird Technologies. Bluebird writes
    custom billing applications for several industries. One of your users verbally
    requests changes to one of the screen displays. You explain to her that the
    change needs to go through the change control system, which is a subset of
    the configuration management system. You explain that a change control
    system does all of the following except for which one?
    A. Documents procedures for change requests
    B. Tracks the status of change requests
    C. Describes the management impacts of change
    D. Determines whether changes are approved or denied
15. You are a project manager for Star Light Strings. Star Light manufactures
    strings of lights for outdoor displays. Its products range from simple light
    strings to elaborate lights with animal designs, bug designs, memorabilia,
    and so on. Your newest project requires a change. You have documented the
    characteristics of the product and its functionality using which of the
    following tools and techniques?
    A. Change control system
    B. Corrective action
    C. Configuration management
    D. Updates to the project management plan
16. You are a project manager for Star Light Strings. Star Light manufactures
    strings of lights for outdoor display. Its products range from simple light
    strings to elaborate lights with animal designs, bug designs, memorabilia,
    and so on. Your newest project requires a change. One of the business unit
    managers submitted a change through the change control system, which
    utilizes a CCB. Which of the following is true regarding the CCB?
    A. The CCB describes how change requests are managed.
    B. The CCB requires all change requests in writing.
    C. The CCB approves or denies change requests.
    D. The CCB requires updates to the appropriate management plan.
17. All of the following are activities of the configuration management system
    except for which one?
    A. Variance analysis
    B. Identification
    C. Status accounting
    D. Verification and auditing
18. According the PMBOK(R) Guide, which system centrally manages approved
    changes to the specifications of the deliverables or the project management
    processes?
    A. Records management system
    B. Change control system
    C. Work authorization system
    D. Configuration management system
19. You are performing the following activities: comparing actual performance
    against the project plan, assessing performance to determine if a corrective
    action is necessary, identifying new risks, providing forecasts to update
    current cost and schedule data, and monitoring implementation of approved
    changes. Which process are you in?
    A. Perform Integrated Change Control
    B. Control Communications
    C. Monitor and Control Project Work
    D. Control Stakeholder Engagement
20. All of the following are acronyms for other boards that fulfill the same
    responsibilities as a change control board except for which one?
    A. TAB
    B. TRB
    C. ARB
    D. ERB
CHAPTER 11
Controlling Work Results
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE MONITORING AND
CONTROLLING PERFORMANCE DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS
CHAPTER INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING:
   Task 3: Verify that project deliverables conform to the quality
  standards established in the quality management plan by using
  appropriate tools and techniques to meet project requirements and
  business needs.
   Task 4: Monitor and assess risk by determining whether exposure has
  changed and evaluating the effectiveness of response strategies in order
  to manage the impact of risks and opportunities on the project.
   Task 5: Review the issue log, update if necessary, and determine
  corrective actions by using appropriate tools and techniques in order to
  minimize the impact on the project.
   Task 6: Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned using lessons
  learned management techniques in order to enable continuous
  improvement.
   Knowledge and Skills
     Performance measurement and tracking techniques (e.g., EV, CPM,
     PERT, Trend Analysis)
     Project control limits (e.g., thresholds, tolerance)
     Project finance principles
     Project monitoring tools and techniques
     Project quality best practices and standards (e.g., ISO, BS, CMMI, IEEE)
     Quality measurement tools (e.g., statistical sampling, control charts, flow
     charting, inspection, assessment)
     Risk identification and analysis techniques
     Risk response techniques
You've almost made it to the homestretch. This chapter covers the last group of
project processes in the Monitoring and Controlling group. A significant amount
of information is packed into this chapter, and I recommend you memorize all
the formulas presented here for the exam.
I'll cover the Control Risks, Control Costs, Control Schedule, Control Quality,
Validate Scope, and Control Scope processes in this chapter.
The Control Risks process monitors the project for risks and monitors the risk
response plans that have been or might need to be put into action. The Control
Costs and Control Schedule processes are similar to Perform Integrated Change
Control, which we discussed in the previous chapter. When you're reading these
sections, remember that the information from the Perform Integrated Change
Control process applies to these areas as well.
The Control Quality process involves several new tools and techniques that
might show up on the exam. Take some time to understand these tools and
techniques and know how to differentiate them from the tools and techniques
associated with the Plan Quality Management and Perform Quality Assurance
processes.
The Validate Scope process involves validating and accepting work results.
Control Scope is like the change control processes I discussed in Chapter 10,
"Measuring and Controlling Project Performance," and is concerned with
controlling changes to project scope.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Monitoring and Controlling Risk
The Control Risks process involves implementing response plans, tracking and
monitoring identified risks, and identifying and responding to new risks as they
occur. You will examine performance information and use the tools and
techniques of this process to analyze and implement other functions of this
process, including the following:
   Evaluating risk response plans that are put into action as a result of risk
   events
   Monitoring the project for risk triggers
   Reexamining existing risks to determine if they have changed or should be
   closed out
   Monitoring residual risks
   Reassessing project assumptions and determining validity
   Ensuring that policies and procedures are followed
   Ensuring that risk response plans and contingency plans are put into action
   appropriately and are effective
   Ensuring that contingency reserves (for schedule and cost) are updated
   according to the updated risk assessment
   Evaluating the overall effectiveness of the risk processes
Control Risks is a busy process. During the course of the project, risk responses,
which were developed during the Planning process group, have been
implemented and have reduced or averted the impact of risk events (or you hope
they did).




  According to the PMI(R) Project Management Professional (PMP)(R)
  Examination Content Outline, you will monitor and assess risks, determine
  whether conditions have changed that may affect risks, and evaluate the
  effectiveness of the response plans in order to properly manage the impact
  and/or opportunities of the risks.


Control Risks Inputs
This process has four inputs:
   Project management plan
   Risk register
   Work performance data
   Work performance reports
You'll recall that the risk register tracks and ranks individual risks, identifies the
risk owner, describes risk triggers and residual risks, and lists the response plans
and strategies you should implement if an actual risk event occurs. Keep in mind
that some risk events identified in risk planning will happen and some will not.
You will have to stay alert for risk event occurrences and be prepared to respond
to them when they do occur. This means you should monitor the risk register
regularly. Work performance data includes information that may help you
determine that a new risk event is about to occur, or it may assist you in
monitoring previously identified risks. Remember that this entails elements such
as the status of deliverables, costs to date, cost changes, schedule progress to
date, schedule changes, and scope changes. Work performance reports (often in
the form of a status report) is where you take this information and use variance
analysis, forecasting, and earned value analysis to produce results (that are
reported in the status report) that help aid in decision making, implementing risk
responses, and taking corrective actions. This information should also be
examined from the perspective of risks that might need close monitoring or
response plans that might need changes to coincide with the data in the work
performance reports.
Additional risk response planning might be needed to deal with the new risks or
with expected risks whose impact might be greater than expected. This might
require repeating the Plan Risk Responses process to create new contingency
plans or alternative plans to deal with the risk, or it might require modification to
existing plans.

Control Risks Tools and Techniques
The tools and techniques of Control Risks are used to monitor risks throughout
the life of the project. You should perform periodic reviews, audits, and new
earned value analyses to check the pulse of risk activity and to make certain risk
management is enacted effectively.
The tools and techniques of this process are as follows:
   Risk reassessment
   Risk audits
   Variance and trend analysis
   Technical performance measurement
   Reserve analysis
   Meetings
You'll look at risk reassessment, risk audits, variance and trend analysis, and
technical performance measurements next. You've examined the other tools and
techniques of this process in discussions of previous processes.

Risk Reassessment
Periodic, scheduled reviews of identified risks, risk responses, and risk priorities
should occur during the project. The idea here is to monitor risks and their status
and determine whether their consequences still have the same impact on the
project objectives as when they were originally planned. If the risk is no longer
viable, it should be closed. Every status meeting should have a time set aside to
discuss and review risks and response plans.
Risk identification and monitoring is an ongoing process throughout the life of
the project. Risks can change, and previously identified risks might have greater
impacts than originally thought as more facts are discovered. Reassessment of
risks should be a regular activity performed by everyone involved on the project.
Monitor the risk register (including those risks that have low scores) and risk
triggers. You should also monitor the risk responses that have been implemented
for their effectiveness in dealing with risk. You might have to revisit the Perform
Qualitative and Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis processes when new risk
consequences are discovered or risk impacts are found to be greater than what
was originally planned.

Risk Audits
Risk audits are carried out during the entire life of the project by risk auditors.
Risk auditors are not typically project team members and are expertly trained in
audit techniques and risk assessment. Risk audits are specifically interested in
examining the implementation of response plans and their effectiveness at
dealing with risks and their root causes. Risk audits may also examine the risk
management process.

Variance and Trend Analysis
Variance analysis includes reviewing actual results and comparing them to what
was planned to determine if there is a difference between the two. Variance
analysis involves using performance information and earned value analysis to
analysis involves using performance information and earned value analysis to
review overall project performance. If variance is detected, there is a potential
for risks and therefore a potential for positive or negative consequences. Trend
analysis involves observing trends as the project is performed and taking
corrective action where needed or reassessing risk response strategies to take
advantage of opportunities or lessen negative impacts.

Technical Performance Measurements
The technical performance measurements tool and technique compares the
technical accomplishments of project milestones completed during the Executing
processes to the technical milestones defined in the project Planning processes.
Variances might indicate that a project risk is looming, and you'll want to
analyze and prepare a response to it if appropriate. For example, a technical
milestone for a new computer software project might require that the forms
printed from a particular module include a barcode at the bottom of the page. If
the barcode functionality does not work once the module is coded, a technical
deviation exists, which means you should reexamine project risks. In this
particular example, project scope is likely at risk.

Control Risks Outputs
Control Risks should occur throughout the life of the project. Identified risks are
monitored and plans are reexamined to determine whether they will adequately
resolve the risk as it approaches during this process. Several outputs might come
about as a result of monitoring risks:
   Work performance information
   Change requests (recommended corrective and preventive actions)
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
I've discussed these outputs before, so I'll just bring to your attention the new
points you need to know here about change requests and project documents
updates.

Change Requests
Change requests must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change
Control process. You might find that change requests take the form of corrective
actions or preventive actions and that implementing a contingency plan or a
workaround may bring about the need for a change request. A workaround is an
unplanned response to a negative risk event. It attempts to deal with the risk in a
productive, efficient manner. If no risk response plan exists (this might be the
case when you accept a risk event during the Planning processes) or an
unplanned risk occurs, workarounds are implemented to deal with the
consequences of the risk.

Project Documents Updates
Some of the project documents that may require updating include the results of a
risk audit or risk assessment, the outcomes or results of the project risks and risk
responses, and updates to the risk register. The risk register is updated when a
risk audit or risk reassessment concludes that some element of the original risk
information has changed--for example, the impact or probability scores are
updated to reflect new conditions, the priority of the risk has changed, the owner
of the risk has changed, or the response plan has been updated. The risk register
should also be updated when the risk is closed or when a risk event occurs.
You'll want to note the results of the risk response. And don't forget that when
new risks are identified throughout the project, they should be added to the risk
register.

Managing Cost Changes
The Control Costs process monitors the project budget and manages changes to
the cost baseline. It's concerned with monitoring project costs to prevent
unauthorized or incorrect costs from being included in the cost baseline. This
means you'll also use Control Costs to ensure that the project budget isn't
exceeded (resulting in cost overruns). If a change is implemented, you'll have to
make certain the budget for the changed item stays within acceptable limits. All
budget changes should be agreed to and approved by the project sponsor where
applicable (the criteria for approvals should be outlined in the change control
system documentation). Increases to the authorized budget should be submitted
as change requests and approved through the Perform Integrated Change Control
process. Stakeholders should be made aware of all budget changes.
The following list includes some of the activities you'll be involved in during
this process:
   Monitoring changes to costs or the cost baseline and understanding variances
   from the baseline
   Monitoring change requests that affect cost and resolving them in a timely
   manner
   Informing stakeholders of approved changes and their costs
   Ensuring that the project budget does not exceed acceptable limits by taking
   action when overruns are imminent
   Ensuring that the project budget does not exceed the total funding authorized
   for the project or for the project phase

Control Costs Inputs
The Control Costs process includes the following inputs:
   Project management plan
   Project funding requirements
   Work performance data
   Organizational process assets
These inputs are examined using the tools and techniques of this process to
determine whether revised cost estimates or budget updates are required. One
thing you should note regarding the project management plan input is that it
includes the cost baseline and the cost management plan. You'll use the cost
baseline to compare actual expenditures to date on the project to the baseline.
The cost management plan details how costs should be monitored and controlled
throughout the life of the project. I've covered each of these inputs in previous
chapters.

Control Costs Tools and Techniques
The tools and techniques of the Control Costs process are as follows:
   Earned value management (EVM)
   Forecasting
   To-complete performance index (TCPI)
   Performance reviews
   Project management software
   Reserve analysis
We'll look at each of these next, with the exception of project management
software. This tool and technique has been discussed previously, but you should
know that in this process it can help automate and calculate the formulas we're
going to examine next. It can also display the results in graphical form for status
reporting purposes.

Earned Value Management
You can accomplish performance measurement analysis using a technique called
earned value management (EVM). Simply stated, EVM compares what you've
received or produced to what you've spent.
The EVM continuously monitors the planned value, earned value, and actual
costs expended to produce the work of the project (I'll cover the definition of
these terms shortly). When variances that result in cost changes are discovered
(including schedule variances and cost variances), those changes are managed
using the project change control system. The primary function of this analysis
technique is to determine and document the cause of the variance, to determine
the impact of the variance, and to determine whether a corrective action should
be implemented as a result. We'll walk through various examples that illustrate
how to determine these variances later in this chapter.
EVM looks at schedule, cost, scope, and resource measurements together and
compares them to the actual work completed to date. You may recall that the
schedule, cost, and scope baselines together make up the performance
measurement baseline (PMB). The performance measurement baseline is
determined using EVM and will be used throughout the project to measure the
progress and performance of the project. Remember that it does not include
management reserves but it does include contingencies.
EVM is the most often used performance measurement method. EVM is
performed on the work packages and the control accounts of the WBS. To
perform the EVM calculations, you need to first gather the three measurements
mentioned earlier: the planned value (PV), actual cost (AC), and earned value
(EV).




  If you do any research on your own regarding these values, you might come
  If you do any research on your own regarding these values, you might come
  across acronyms that are different from what you see here. I've included
  their alternative names and acronyms at the end of each description. I
  recommend you memorize planned value (PV), actual cost (AC), and earned
  value (EV) and make certain you understand the meaning of each before you
  continue.

Let's take a look at some definitions of these key measurements before diving
into the actual calculations:
Planned Value The planned value (PV) is the cost of work that has been
authorized and budgeted for a schedule activity or WBS component during a
given time period or phase. These budgets are established during the Planning
processes. For any given day, PV equals the planned cost of work that is
scheduled to be completed on that day, whether or not the work is actually
completed. PV is also called budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS).

  Exam Spotlight
  Remember to read exam questions carefully. PV might mean present value
  (as I talked about in Chapter 2, "Creating the Project Charter") or planned
  value, as defined here.

Actual Cost Actual cost (AC) is the actual cost of completing the work
component in a given time period. Actual costs might include direct and indirect
costs but must correspond to what was budgeted for the activity. If the budgeted
amount did not include indirect costs, do not include them here. Later you'll see
how to compare this to PV to come up with variance calculation results. Actual
costs include whatever is spent to complete the work regardless of what was
budgeted. AC is also called actual cost of work performed (ACWP).
Earned Value Earned value (EV) is the value of the work completed to date
as it compares to the authorized budgeted amount assigned to the work
component. EV is typically expressed as a percentage of the work completed
compared to the budget. For example, if our budgeted amount is $1,000 and we
have completed 30 percent of the work so far, our EV is $300. Therefore, EV
cannot exceed the PV budget for the activity. EV is also called budgeted cost of
work performed (BCWP).

  Exam Spotlight
  Exam Spotlight
  PV, AC, and EV are easy to mix up. In their simplest forms, here's what
  each means:
     PV--The approved budget assigned to work to be completed during a
     given time period
     AC--Money that's actually been expended during a given time period for
     completed work
     EV--The value of the work completed to date compared to the budget

According to the earlier definition, EV is the sum of the cumulative budgeted
costs for completed work for all activities that have been accomplished as of the
measurement date. For example, if your total budget is $1,000 and 50 percent of
the work has been completed as of the measurement date, your EV would equal
$500. You can plot all the PV, AC, and EV measurements graphically to show
the variances between them. If there are no variances in the measurements, all
the lines on the graph remain the same, which means the project is progressing
as planned. Figure 11.1 shows an example that plots these three measurements.




Figure 11.1 Earned value
All of these measurements include a cost component. Costs are displayed in an S
curve because spending is minimal in the beginning of the project, picks up
steam toward the middle, and then tapers off at the end of the project. This
means your earned value measurements will also take on the S curve shape.
Now you can calculate whether the project is progressing as planned or if
variances exist in the approved baseline by using a variety of formulas discussed
in the following sections. Use Figure 11.1 as your example for the formulas that
follow. The Figure 11.1 totals are as follows:

                         PV = 400, EV = 375, AC = 325

Cost Variance
Cost variance is one of the most popular variances that project managers use. It's
the difference between EV (where you are at this point) and AC (what you've
spent). In other words, it tells you whether your actual costs are higher than
expected (with a resulting negative number) or lower than expected (with a
resulting positive number) at a certain point in time. It measures the actual
performance to date (or during the period) against what's been spent.
The cost variance (CV) is calculated as follows:

                                 CV = EV - AC
Let's calculate the CV using the numbers from Figure 11.1:

                                 375 - 325 = 50
The CV is positive, which means you're spending less than what you planned for
the work that you have completed as of July 1 (which Figure 11.1 shows because
AC is less than EV).
If you come up with a negative number as the answer to this formula, it means
that costs are higher than what you had planned for the work that was completed
as of July 1 and these costs are usually not recoverable.

Schedule Variance
Schedule variance, another popular variance, tells you whether the schedule is
ahead of or behind what was planned for this period. It's the difference between
where you are at this point (EV) and what was planned for this point (PV). This
formula is most helpful when you've used the critical path methodology to build
the project schedule. The schedule variance (SV) is calculated as follows:

                                  SV = EV - PV
Let's plug in the numbers:

                                  375 - 400 = -25
The resulting schedule variance is negative, which means you are behind
schedule, or behind where you planned to be as of July 1.
Together, the CV and SV can be converted to efficiency indicators for the
project and can be used to compare performance of all the projects in a portfolio.

Performance Indexes
Cost and schedule performance indexes are primarily used to calculate
performance efficiencies, and they're often used to help predict future project
performance.
The cost performance index (CPI) measures the cost efficiency of the work
completed against actual cost. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, it is the most
critical of all the EVM measurements because it tells you the cost efficiency for
the work completed to date, or at the completion of the project. If CPI is greater
than 1, you're spending less than anticipated to date. If CPI is less than 1, you are
spending more than anticipated for the work completed and have a cost overrun
on your hands.
The cost performance index (CPI) is calculated this way:

                                  CPI = EV / AC
Let's plug in the numbers and see where you stand:

                                 375 / 325 = 1.15
This means cost performance is better than expected. You get an A+ on this
assignment!
The schedule performance index (SPI) measures the efficiency of the project
team to date in completing work tasks against the progress that was planned.
This formula should be used in conjunction with an analysis of the critical path
activities to determine if the project will finish ahead of or behind schedule. If
SPI is greater than 1, you are ahead of schedule and have completed more work
than was planned. If SPI is less than 1, you are behind schedule and have not
completed as much work as you planned to complete by the measurement date.
The schedule performance index (SPI) is calculated this way:

                                  SPI = EV / PV
Again, let's see where you stand with this example:

                                 375 / 400 = 0.94
Uh-oh, not so good. Schedule performance is not what you expected. Let's not
grade this one.
There are two more indexes associated with cost and schedule that you should
understand for the exam: cumulative CPI and cumulative SPI.
Cumulative CPI is a commonly used calculation to predict project costs at the
completion of the project. It also represents the cumulative CPI of the project at
the point the measurement is taken. First, you need to sum the earned value
calculations taken to date, or cumulative EV, and the actual costs to date, or
cumulative AC. The formula looks just like the CPI formula except that it uses
the cumulative sums as follows:

               Cumulative CPI = cumulative EV / cumulative AC
The difference between this and the CPI formula earlier is that the CPI formula
is used for a single work period whereas the cumulative CPI is calculated using
the sum of all the costs of every work component for the project. Additionally,
you might also use cumulative CPI to calculate the total cost of a work
component such as a deliverable, for example. Let's say you have a deliverable
that has five work packages. You would total the EV and AC at the
measurement date for all five work packages to determine the cost performance
index for the deliverable.
Cumulative SPI predicts schedule performance at the completion of the project.
Like cumulative CPI, it also represents the cumulative SPI of the project at the
point the measurement is taken. The formula is as follows:

               Cumulative SPI = cumulative EV / cumulative PV
Forecasting
Forecasting uses the information you've gathered to date and estimates the future
conditions or future performance of the project based on what you know when
the calculation is performed. Forecasts are based on work performance data (an
output from the Executing process group) and your predictions of future
performance.
The forecasting formulas you'll see later in this section are used to determine an
estimate at completion (EAC) and an estimate to complete (ETC). The EAC
estimates (or forecasts) the expected total cost of a work component, a schedule
activity, or the project at its completion by calculating the actual costs to date
and then adding an estimate of what the remaining work will cost. The ETC is
the anticipated cost estimate to finish the work of the project.
EAC is most often calculated by using actual costs incurred to date plus a
bottom-up ETC estimate. The formula for the most typical EAC looks like this:

                           EAC = AC + bottom-up ETC
The bottom-up ETC estimate is usually provided by the members of the project
team who are actually working on the project activities. They provide the project
manager with an estimate of the amount of effort remaining (and, therefore, the
cost of the effort) based on the activities they have completed to date and what
they believe will occur in the future. Their estimates are summed to come up
with a total ETC, also known as a bottom-up ETC.
There are three other EAC forecasting formulas outlined in the PMBOK(R) Guide
that we'll look at next. A new term you'll need to know before we look at these
formulas is budget at completion (BAC). BAC is the total amount of PV
(approved budgeted costs) for all of the work of a work component or all the
work of the project. It is the sum of all the budgets established for all the work in
the work package, control account, schedule activity, or project.




  You may find that the EAC (estimate at completion) differs from the BAC
  (budget at completion). This could be due to changes in performance, risks,
  project changes, or any number of reasons. That means the BAC may no
  longer be a reasonable estimate given the changes in performance. When
  that occurs, use the EAC to project the cost of the project at completion.
  that occurs, use the EAC to project the cost of the project at completion.

The first EAC formula is called "EAC forecast for ETC work performed at the
budgeted rate." I know that's a mouthful. Here's what you should know. This
formula calculates EAC based on the actual costs to date and the assumption that
ETC work will be completed at the budgeted rate. The formula looks like this:

                            EAC = AC + (BAC - EV)
Let's assume your AC to date is $800, BAC is $1,200, and EV is $600. EAC,
assuming ETC work will be completed at the budgeted rate, is as follows:

                        $800 + ($1,200 - $600) = $1,400
In English, you'll spend $1,400 to complete this work component, assuming the
remaining work is performed at the budgeted rate. That is $200 more than what
you have budgeted because your EV is less than the actual cost to date. I would
recommend examining the quality of the work to date. You aren't getting what
you're paying for.
The next EAC formula is called "EAC forecast for ETC work performed at the
present CPI." (I didn't make up these titles!) Here's what you need to know. This
forecast assumes that future performance will be just like the past performance
for the project. The formula looks like this:

                                EAC = BAC / CPI
For this example, let's assume that BAC is $2,200 and CPI is 1.2. The formula
looks like this:

                            $2,200 / 1.2 = $1,833.33
This result predicts you will spend less than the originally budgeted amount for
the project. In this case, you are getting more work or goods for the dollars
you're spending. Good for you.
The last formula is called "EAC forecast for ETC work considering both SPI and
CPI factors." This formula assumes two things: there is a negative cost
performance to date and the project schedule dates must be met. The formula
looks like this:

                    EAC = AC + [(BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)]
Let's assume AC is $1,000, BAC is $1,500, EV is $900, CPI is 0.97, and SPI is
1.05. Here's the resulting EAC:

             $1,000 + [($1,500 - $900) / (0.97 x 1.05)] = $1,589.10
Based on the assumption that cost performance to date is negative (AC is higher
than EV) and we must meet the project schedule date, EAC is $1,589.10. We
will have a slight cost overrun at the end of the project in order to meet the
schedule date.

  Exam Spotlight
  For study purposes, the EAC formula and the three EAC calculations are
  shown here. Remember that if you monitor EAC regularly, you'll know if
  the project is within acceptable tolerances. The formulas are as follows:

  The EAC formula
     EAC = AC + bottom-up ETC using actual costs to date and assuming
     ETC uses budgeted rate:
        EAC = AC + (BAC - EV)
     EAC assuming future performance will behave like past performance:
        EAC = BAC / CPI
     EAC when cost performance is negative and schedule dates must be met:
        EAC = AC + [(BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)]

In addition to the bottom-up ETC provided by the project team, there are four
other formulas for calculating ETC that you should be aware of for the exam.
They are discussed next.
When you believe that the work will continue to proceed as planned, use this
formula to calculate ETC:

                               ETC = EAC - AC
When you anticipate significant changes in the work and believe it will not
continue as planned, you need to reestimate ETC from the bottom up. The
formula, oddly enough, looks like this:
formula, oddly enough, looks like this:

                                ETC = reestimate
When you believe that future cost variances will be similar to the types of
variances you've seen to date, you'll use this formula to calculate ETC:

                            ETC = (BAC - EV) / CPI
Assuming your earned value is 725, CPI is 1.12, and BAC is 1,000, plug in the
numbers:

                          (1,000 - 725) / 1.12 = 245.54
Therefore, at the measurement date, you need $245.54 to complete all the
remaining work of this work component (or project if you're using project
totals), assuming variances in the future will be the same as they have been to
date. That's a little less than the BAC, so this is good news.
When you believe that future cost variances will not be similar to the types of
variances you've seen to date, you'll use this formula to calculate ETC:

                         ETC = (BAC - cumulative EV)
Now calculate your value:

                               (1,000 - 725) = 275
In this case, you need $275 to complete all the remaining work of this work
component, assuming variances in the future are different than they have been to
date. In this case, your project is on track and won't need any measure to correct
performance.

  Exam Spotlight
  For study purposes, the ETC formulas are shown here.
  Bottom-up ETC
  Manual summation of the costs of the remaining work based on estimates
  from the project team members working on these activities.
     ETC when work is anticipated to proceed as planned:
         ETC = EAC - AC
         ETC = EAC - AC
      ETC when work is not anticipated to proceed as planned:
         ETC = Reestimate
      ETC when future cost variances will be similar to past variances:
         ETC = (BAC - EV) / CPI
      ETC when future cost variances are expected to be atypical:
         ETC = (BAC - cumulative EV)


To-Complete Performance Index
To-complete performance index (TCPI) is the projected cost performance the
remaining work of the project must achieve in order to meet the BAC or EAC.
It's calculated by dividing the work that's remaining by the funds that are
remaining.
The formula for TCPI when using the BAC is as follows:

                       TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)
Assume for this example that BAC is $1,000, EV is $700, and AC is $800.

                     ($1,000 - $700) / ($1,000 - $800) = 1.5
This means you'll need to reach a CPI rate that's 1.5 times what you've
experienced to date in order to meet the BAC goal. You will have to improve the
level of performance in this scenario in order to bring costs back into alignment
with the authorized budget. This may or may not be possible given other project
factors such as risk, schedule, and other performance factors. If the result is less
than 1, future work does not have to be performed as efficiently as past
performance.
When the BAC is no longer attainable, the project manager should calculate a
new EAC. This new estimate becomes the goal you'll work toward once it's
approved by management. The TCPI formula when EAC is the goal you're
aiming for is as follows:

                       TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC)
We'll use the same assumptions we used in the formula earlier and note that
We'll use the same assumptions we used in the formula earlier and note that
EAC is $1,200. The formula looks like this:

                    ($1,000 - $700) / ($1,200 - $800) = 0.75
This result means that in order to complete the work within the EAC target, the
project team needs to continue performing at an efficiency of 0.75. However,
also remember that you revised the original BAC and are now using EAC as
your estimate to complete, so additional costs were incurred.
There is one last thing to note regarding these formulas: If cumulative CPI falls
below 1, all future project work must be performed at the TCPI in order to stay
within your authorized project budget (BAC). That may or may not be possible
given the risks, resources, schedule, and other considerations. If it is not
possible, you as the project manager should calculate a new EAC and use this as
the new goal.

Performance Reviews
Performance reviews compare cost performance over time and the estimates of
funds needed to complete the remaining work. Three types of analyses are
associated with performance reviews: variance analysis, trend analysis, and
earned value performance. We looked at earned value performance in the last
section so let's move on to variance analysis and trend analysis next.

Variance Analysis
Variance analysis in the Control Costs process examines the difference between
the baseline cost or baseline schedule as they compare to actual performance,
and/or the variance at completion of the project. Variances in this process are
usually due to cost or schedule impacts, making cost and schedule the most
commonly analyzed variances.
Cost variances are determined by subtracting AC from EV:

                                 CV = EV - AC
If the cost variance is positive, your costs are under what was planned and you
are doing better than expected. If they are negative, you are over what was
planned.
Schedule variances are determined by subtracting PV from EV:

                                 SV = EV - PV
                                  SV = EV - PV
If the schedule variance is positive, you are ahead of schedule; if it is negative,
you are behind schedule.
Variance at completion (VAC) calculates the difference between the budget at
completion and the estimate at completion. It looks like this:

                               VAC = BAC - EAC
If the result is a negative number, it means you're not doing as well with costs as
you anticipated and that variance exists. If the result is positive, your costs are
better than you planned. Assuming your project performance is improving,
variances will become smaller as the project progresses.




  You'll be given some scratch paper when you go into the exam. I
  recommend that you write these formulas down on a piece of your scratch
  paper either during the 15-minute tutorial time or right after you start the test
  but before you start answering questions. Keep your list handy. That way,
  the formulas are off your mind and you've got them in front of you to
  reference when you get to the portion of the exam where these questions
  appear. You might want to use this tip for other items you've memorized as
  well. If you write them down before you begin, you don't have to jog your
  memory on every question. If you forget something, leave a blank space
  where it goes and as soon as you remember it or see a question that reminds
  you what it is, fill in the blank.


Trend Analysis
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, trend analysis determines whether project
performance is improving or worsening over time by periodically analyzing
project results. These results are measured with mathematical formulas that
attempt to forecast project outcomes based on historical information and results.
You can use several formulas to predict project trends, but it's outside the scope
of this book to go into them. For the exam, you're expected to understand the
concept behind trend analysis, not the formulas used to calculate it. You'll want
to remember that you can use the results you've analyzed using trend analysis
formulas to predict future project behavior or trends.
Reserve Analysis
Reserve analysis is used to monitor the project's contingency reserves and
management reserves and determine if and when they are needed, how they will
be applied, and if there is a change in the reserve amounts. Additional reserves
may be needed in the case of risk events, risk mitigation, or other unforeseen
events. If the reserves are no longer needed, you can give them up to be used on
other projects.

Control Costs Outputs
The Control Costs process has six outputs:
   Work performance information
   Cost forecasts
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
I've discussed all of these outputs before. Keep in mind that the project
management plan may need to be updated to reflect changes to the cost baseline
or cost management plan and the project documents updates might include cost
estimates or the basis of estimates.



        Real World Scenario

  Recap of Formulas
  You have a lot of formulas to memorize. Keep in mind that you'll be given a
  calculator when you take the exam, so you don't have to do the math
  manually. Remember that variance and trend analysis are part of the project
  performance reviews tool and technique. Here are the formulas I've covered
  in this chapter:
  Performance indexes
  Cost performance index: CPI = EV / AC
     Results > 1 are under planned cost.
     Results < 1 are over planned cost.
  Cumulative cost performance index: cumulative CPI = cumulative EV /
  cumulative AC
     Results > 1 are under planned cost.
     Results < 1 are over planned cost.
  Schedule performance index: SPI = EV / PV
     Results > 1 are ahead of schedule.
     Results < 1 are behind schedule.
  Cumulative schedule performance index: cumulative SPI = cumulative
  EV / cumulative PV
     Results > 1 are ahead of schedule.
     Results < 1 are behind schedule.
Forecasting
  EAC formula: EAC = AC + bottom-up ETC
  EAC using actual costs to date and assuming ETC uses budgeted rate:
     EAC = AC + (BAC - EV)
  EAC assuming future performance will behave like past performance:
     EAC = BAC / CPI
  EAC when cost performance is negative and schedule dates must be met:
     EAC = AC + [(BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)]
  Bottom-up ETC: Summation of the costs of the remaining work based on
  estimates from the project team members working on these activities
  ETC when work is anticipated to proceed as planned: ETC = EAC - AC
  ETC when work is not anticipated to proceed as planned: ETC =
  reestimate
  ETC when future cost variances will be similar to past variances: ETC =
     (BAC - EV) / CPI
     ETC when future cost variances are expected to be atypical: ETC =
     (BAC - EV)
 To complete performance index
     TCPI using BAC: TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)
         Results > 1 are more difficult to complete.
         Results < 1 are easier to complete.
     TCPI using EAC: TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC)
         Results > 1 are more difficult to complete.
         Results < 1 are easier to complete.
 Variance analysis
     Cost variance: CV = EV - AC
         Positive results mean the costs are under what was planned.
             Negative results mean the costs are over what was planned.
     Schedule variance: SV = EV - PV
         Positive results mean the schedule is ahead of what was planned.
         Negative results mean the schedule is behind what was planned.
     Variance at completion: VAC = BAC - EAC




 Problems with costs come about for many reasons, including incorrect
 estimating techniques, predetermined or fixed budgets with no flexibility,
 schedule overruns, inadequate WBS development, and so on. Good project
 management planning techniques during the Planning processes might
 prevent cost problems later in the project. At a minimum, proper planning
 will reduce the impact of these problems if they do occur.

Always inform appropriate stakeholders of revised budget or cost estimates and
Always inform appropriate stakeholders of revised budget or cost estimates and
any changes of significant impact to the project. Keep them updated on changes,
status, and risk conditions during regularly scheduled project meetings.



        Real World Scenario

 New Accounting System for Mustang Enterprises
 You are a stakeholder of the New Accounting System project for Mustang
 Enterprises. The existing accounting system resides on a mainframe, and
 some of the programs used to process data are more than 15 years old. Your
 company decided to hire a contract software services firm to write a thin-
 client, browser-based version of the accounting system so that the
 mainframe programs could be retired. You've also assigned a senior
 programmer to act as the project manager on behalf of your organization.
 The project is in the Monitoring and Controlling process group, and the
 project manager keeps reporting that everything is okay and on schedule.
 When you asked him detailed questions and requested performance data, the
 project manager patted you on the back and said, "Don't worry, I've got
 everything under control."
 You are a little worried because some of the key project team members have
 come to you confidentially to inform you of the progress of the project.
 After further investigation, you discover that the project manager changed
 the database from SQL to Oracle midway through the project and didn't tell
 anyone except the project team. The project scope stated specifically that
 project development required a SQL database. The change in database
 products changed the project scope and product scope without letting the
 stakeholders know.
 This change has caused schedule delays because the project team members
 have told you they need to be trained to use the new database development
 tools before they can proceed. Additionally, many of the programs have
 already been written to interface with SQL, not Oracle, and will have to be
 modified. To add insult to injury, the database switch will impact the project
 budget in two ways. First, purchasing the Oracle database involves
 substantially more money than purchasing the SQL database, and it requires
 the purchase of new development tools for the programming team. Second,
  the purchase of new development tools for the programming team. Second,
  several members of the programming staff will have to attend multiple
  training sessions on the new database product to fully integrate the programs
  and system. Training is currently running $2,200 per session per person.
  Because you're a key stakeholder, you decide to bring this information out
  into the open at the next project status meeting. Additionally, you plan to
  meet with the project sponsor and the procurement department to determine
  what alternatives you have to request that the contracting firm realign the
  project to meet the original contractual requirements. However, you fear that
  because the project manager is the one who gave the orders to change the
  database, your organization might not have a lot of recourse. You will also
  make the project sponsor aware that the project manager doesn't have the
  skills needed to conduct this project and a new project manager should be
  hired as soon as possible. The project manager is invaluable to the
  organization as a programmer, but he doesn't have the project management
  experience needed to conduct a project of this size and complexity. This
  might cause further setback to the project, but the project management plan
  and project schedule will require updates anyway as a result of the existing
  project manager's decisions. You also determine to document all that has
  happened as a lesson learned and to set up a change control process to
  prevent this from happening in the future.


Monitoring and Controlling Schedule Changes
The Control Schedule process involves determining the status of the project
schedule, determining whether changes have occurred or should occur, taking
corrective or preventive action when needed, and influencing and managing
schedule changes. In the following sections, you'll look at this process's inputs,
tools and techniques, and outputs.

Control Schedule Inputs
Control Schedule inputs include the following:
   Project management plan
   Project schedule
   Work performance data
   Project calendars
   Schedule data
   Organizational process assets
I've covered each of these inputs previously. Keep in mind that the Control
Schedule process works hand in hand with the Perform Integrated Change
Control process we covered in Chapter 10 (as all the change control processes
do) and that means any changes to the schedule baseline must be processed
through Perform Integrated Change Control.




  Keeping the schedule on track means you're monitoring and controlling time
  --one of the classic triple constraints.


Control Schedule Tools and Techniques
The tools and techniques of the Control Schedule process are as follows:
   Performance reviews
   Project management software
   Resource optimization techniques
   Modeling techniques
   Leads and lags
   Schedule compression
   Scheduling tool
We've covered all of these tools and techniques previously. I'll give you a few
new points you should know regarding performance reviews.
Performance reviews in this process examine elements such as actual start and
end dates for schedule activities and the remaining time to finish uncompleted
activities. There are several techniques you can use in this process, including
trend analysis, critical path method, critical chain method, and earned value
management. If you've taken earned value measurements, the SV and SPI will be
helpful in determining the impact of the schedule variations and in determining
whether corrective actions are necessary.
whether corrective actions are necessary.
You will recall that the critical path is the longest path on the project schedule
with zero or negative float. If there are variances in critical path tasks, your
schedule is likely at risk. Examining critical path tasks, or those near a critical
path task, can help alert you to schedule risk.
The PMBOK(R) Guide notes that if you're using the critical chain method to
construct the schedule, you should compare the amount of buffer needed to the
amount of buffer remaining to help determine if the schedule is on track. This
will also indicate whether corrective actions are necessary to adjust the schedule.
In the Control Schedule process, because you're dealing with time issues, it's
imperative that you act as quickly as possible to implement corrective actions so
that the schedule is brought back in line with the plan and the least amount of
schedule delay as possible is experienced.




  Schedule changes might be potential hot buttons with certain stakeholders
  and can burn you if you don't handle them correctly. No one likes to hear
  that the project is going to take longer than originally planned. That doesn't
  mean you should withhold this information, however. Always report the
  truth. If you've been keeping your stakeholders abreast of project status, they
  should already know that the potential for schedule changes exists.
  Nevertheless, be prepared to justify the reason for the schedule change or
  start dusting off your resume--maybe both, depending on the company.

Make sure to examine the float variance of the critical path activities when
monitoring the schedule. Thinking back to the Develop Schedule process, you'll
recall that float is the amount of time you can delay starting an activity without
increasing the amount of time it takes to complete the project. Because the
activities with the least amount of float have the potential to cause the biggest
schedule delays, examine float variance in ascending order of critical activities.
Keep in mind that not all schedule variances will impact the schedule. For
example, a delay to a noncritical path task will not delay the overall schedule
and might not need corrective action. Use caution here, though--if a delay
occurs on a noncritical path task or its duration is increased for some reason, that
task can actually become part of the critical path. Delays to critical path tasks
will always cause delays to the project completion date and require corrective
action. Careful watch of the variances in schedule start and end dates will help
you control the total time element of the project.

Control Schedule Outputs
The Control Schedule process has the following outputs:
   Work performance information
   Schedule forecasts
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
Project management plan updates include making updates to the schedule
baseline, the schedule management plan, and/or the cost baseline. Changes to the
cost baseline may be necessary when you've used a schedule compression or
crashing technique. Changes to approved schedule start and end dates in the
schedule baseline are called revisions. They generally occur as a result of a
project scope change, or changes to activity estimates, and might result in a
schedule baseline update. Schedule baseline updates occur when significant
changes to the project schedule, such as the changes just mentioned, are made.
This means a new schedule baseline is established that reflects the changed
project activity dates. Once the new baseline is established, it is used as the basis
for future performance measurements. Never re-baseline a schedule without first
having it approved by the project sponsor and archiving a copy of the original
baseline and schedule.




  Take care when re-baselining a project schedule. Don't lose the original
  baseline information. Why do you care? Because the original baseline serves
  as historical information to reference for future projects. Make a backup
  copy of the original schedule so that you have a record of the original
  baseline as a reference. Even though some project management software
  allows you to save several baselines plus the original, it's still good practice
  to make a backup copy of the original.
  to make a backup copy of the original.

Changes to the project schedule might or might not require updates to other
elements of the project management plan as well. For example, extending a
schedule activity involving a contractor might impact the costs associated with
that activity.
The project documents updates output may require updates to the schedule data,
project schedule, and/or the risk register. For example, project schedule network
diagrams require updates as a result of schedule model data updates. Don't forget
to document these changes and inform your stakeholders.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that when any changes are made to a project, as the
  project manager you must ensure that the team is working toward the revised
  project goals. Once the changes are accepted and agreed on by the
  stakeholders, the newly revised project goals--including new schedule
  dates, scope changes, and so on--are what you and the team should work
  toward. Project success will be measured against the revised goals, not the
  original goals.


Utilizing Control Quality Techniques
Plan Quality Management, Perform Quality Assurance, and Control Quality are
part of the Project Quality Management Knowledge Area. These processes work
together to define and monitor the work of the project and to make certain the
quality activity results meet the quality requirements laid out in the plan.
Control Quality is specifically concerned with monitoring work results and
project deliverables to see whether they comply with the standards set out in the
quality management plan. You should practice Control Quality throughout the
project to identify and remove the causes of unacceptable results. Remember that
Control Quality is concerned with project results both from a management
perspective, such as schedule and cost performance, and from a product
perspective. In other words, the end product should conform to the requirements
and product description defined during the Planning processes.

Control Quality Inputs
Control Quality includes the following inputs:
   Project management plan
   Quality metrics
   Quality checklists
   Work performance data
   Approved change requests
   Deliverables
   Project documents
   Organizational process assets
I've discussed each of these inputs previously, so I'll move on to tools and
techniques.

Control Quality Tools and Techniques
The tools and techniques in the Control Quality process are as follows:
   Seven basic quality tools
   Statistical sampling
   Inspection
   Approved change requests review




  The seven basic quality tools are cause-and-effect diagrams, control charts,
  flowcharts, checksheets, histograms, Pareto diagrams, and scatter diagrams.
  We talked about the fishbone diagram (a cause-and-effect diagram), also
  known as the Ishikawa diagram, in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning." Recall that
  the fishbone diagram is used to help determine root causes. Kaoru Ishikawa
  is known not only for the fishbone diagram; he was also a significant
  contributor in the realm of quality.

The primary purpose of each of the seven basic quality tools is to examine the
product, service, or result as well as the project processes for conformity to
standards. They are used with the plan-do-check-act cycle we talked about in
Chapter 1, "What Is a Project?," to help identify and resolve problems related to
quality defects. If the results fall within the tolerance range specified, the results
are acceptable. Alternatively, if the results fall within the control limits set for
the product (as defined by the various tools and techniques I'll discuss in the
following sections), the process you are examining is said to be in control.
Spend time understanding these tools and their individual uses because you
might see exam questions about each of them.
I talked about cause-and-effect diagrams as a diagramming technique in the
Identify Risks process in Chapter 6. This technique helps identify root causes. If
you need a refresher, refer to Figure 6.2 in that chapter.
I also discussed flowcharts in the same section of Chapter 6. Flowcharts are
diagrams that show the logical steps that must be performed in order to
accomplish an objective. They can also show how the individual elements of a
system interrelate. Flowcharting can help identify where quality problems might
occur on the project and how problems happen. This is important because it
gives the project team the opportunity to develop alternative approaches for
dealing with anticipated quality problems identified with this tool and technique.
Refer to Figure 6.3.
Histograms are typically bar charts that depict the distribution of variables over
time. Chapter 7, "Planning Project Resources," contains an example of a
histogram. In Control Quality, the histogram usually depicts the attributes of the
problem or situation. (I'll discuss attributes shortly.)
We will look at the remaining types of the seven basic quality tools and the other
tools and techniques in more detail in the following sections.

Control Charts
Control charts measure the results of processes over time and display the results
in graph form. Control charts are a way to measure variances to determine
whether process variances are in control or out of control.
A control chart is based on sample variance measurements. From the samples
chosen and measured, the mean and standard deviation are determined. Control
Quality is usually maintained--or said to be in control--within plus or minus
three standard deviations. In other words, Control Quality says that if the process
is in control (that is, the measurements fall within the control limits), you know
that 99.73 percent of the parts going through the process will fall within an
acceptable range of the mean. If you discover a part outside of this range, you
acceptable range of the mean. If you discover a part outside of this range, you
should investigate and determine whether corrective action is needed.
Figure 11.2 illustrates an example of a control chart.




Figure 11.2 Control chart
Let's assume you've determined from your sample measurements that 5 mm is
the mean in the example control chart. One standard deviation equals 0.02.
Three standard deviations on either side of the mean become your upper and
lower control points on this chart. Therefore, if all control points fall within plus
or minus three standard deviations on either side of the mean, the process is in
control. If points fall outside the acceptable limits, the process is not in control
and corrective action is needed.
Differences in results will occur in processes because there is no such thing as a
perfect process. When processes are considered in control, differences in results
might occur because of common causes of variances or special-cause variances.
Common causes of variances come about as a result of circumstances or
situations that are relatively common to the process you're using and are easily
controlled at the operational level. Special-cause variances are variances that are
not common to the process. For example, perhaps you have very detailed
processes with specific procedures that must be followed in order to produce the
output and a process gets missed. Or maybe your project requires the
manufacturing of a certain part and a machine on the line has a problem and
requires a special calibration. This is an easy set of terms to remember because
their names logically imply their definitions.
For the exam, you should understand the three types of variances that make up
common causes of variances:
Random Variances Random variations might be normal, depending on the
processes you're using to produce the product or service of the project, but they
occur, as the name implies, at random.
Known or Predictable Variances Known or predictable variances are
variances that you know exist in the process because of particular characteristics
of the product, service, or result you are processing. These are generally unique
to a particular application.
Variances That Are Always Present in the Process The process itself will
have inherent variability that is perhaps caused by human mistakes, machine
variations or malfunctions, the environment, and so on, which are known as
variances always present in the process. These variances generally exist across
all applications of the process.
Common cause variances that do not fall within the acceptable range are difficult
to correct and usually require a reorganization of the process. This has the
potential for significant impact, and decisions to change the process always
require management approval.

  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, when a process is in control, it should not
  be adjusted. When a process falls outside the acceptable limits, it should be
  adjusted.

The Rule of 7 is another way for the project team to use control charts and
determine if the process is in control. The Rule of 7 works like this. If seven
consecutive points or more fall on one side of the mean, this may indicate there
are factors influencing the result and they should be investigated. So, while the
overall results are within the control limits, the process may not necessarily be in
control and those factors should be examined more closely.
Control charts are used most often in manufacturing settings where repetitive
activities are easily monitored. For example, the process that produces widgets
by the case lot must meet certain specifications and fall within certain variances
to be considered in control. However, you aren't limited to using control charts
only in the manufacturing industry. You can use them to monitor any output.
You might consider using control charts to track and monitor project
management processes. You could plot cost variances, schedule variances,
frequency or number of scope changes, and so on to help monitor variances.

Pareto Diagrams
You have probably heard of the 80/20 rule. Vilfredo Pareto, an Italian economist
and sociologist, is credited with discovering this rule. He observed that 80
percent of the wealth and land ownership in Italy was held by 20 percent of the
population. Over the years, others have shown that the 80/20 rule applies across
many disciplines and areas. As an example, generally speaking, 80 percent of the
deposits of any given financial institution are held by 20 percent of its customer
base. Let's hope that rule doesn't apply to project managers, though, with 20
percent of the project managers out there doing 80 percent of the work!
The 80/20 rule as it applies to quality says that a small number of causes (20
percent) create the majority of the problems (80 percent). Have you ever noticed
this with your project or department staff? It always seems that just a few people
cause the biggest headaches. But I'm getting off track.
Pareto diagrams are displayed as histograms that rank-order the most important
factors--such as delays, costs, and defects, for example--by their frequency
over time. Pareto's theory is that you get the most benefit if you spend the
majority of your time fixing the most important problems. The information
shown in Table 11.1 is plotted on an example Pareto chart shown in Figure 11.3.
Table 11.1 Frequency of failures
       Item Defect Frequency Percent of Defects Cumulative Percent
       A           800              33                  33
       B           700              29                  62
       C           400              17                  79
       D           300              13                  92
       E           200                8               100
Figure 11.3 Pareto chart
The problems are rank-ordered according to their frequency and percentage of
defects. The defect frequencies in this figure appear as bars, and the cumulative
percentages of defects are plotted as circles. The rank-ordering of these problems
shows you where corrective action should be taken first. You can see in Figure
11.3 that problem A should receive priority attention because the most benefit
will come from fixing this problem.

Checksheets
Checksheets, also known as tally sheets, are used to help organize data when
you're performing inspections and gathering information on defects. They are
similar to checklists. The frequencies or impacts of defects that are recorded on a
checksheet can be displayed as a Pareto diagram.

Scatter Diagrams
Scatter diagrams use two variables: an independent variable, which is an input,
and a dependent variable, which is an output. Scatter diagrams, also known as
correlation charts, display the relationship between these two elements as points
on a graph. This relationship is typically analyzed to prove or disprove cause-
and-effect relationships. As an example, maybe your scatter diagram plots the
ability of your employees to perform a certain task. The length of time (in
months) they have performed this task is plotted as the independent variable on
the x-axis, and the accuracy they achieve in performing this task, which is
expressed as a score--the dependent variable--is plotted on the y-axis. The
scatter diagram can help you determine whether cause-and-effect (in this case,
increased experience over time versus accuracy) can be proved. Scatter diagrams
can also help you look for and analyze root causes of problems.
The important point to remember about scatter diagrams is that they plot the
dependent and independent variables, and the closer the points resemble a
diagonal line, the closer these variables are related. Figure 11.4 shows a sample
scatter diagram.




Figure 11.4 Scatter diagram

Statistical Sampling
Statistical sampling involves taking a sample number of parts from the whole
population and examining them to determine whether they fall within acceptable
variances. The formula for calculating the correct sample size is beyond the
scope of this book. However, Creative Research Systems has an online
calculator and an explanation of statistical sampling that you might find useful;
visit www.surveysystem.com/sscalc.htm.
Perhaps you determine to statistically sample 25 parts out of a lot or run. The
quality plan outlines that the lot will pass if four parts or fewer fall outside the
allowable variance.
Statistical sampling might also involve determining the standard deviation for a
process, as discussed in the control chart tool and technique. The quality
management plan determines whether plus or minus two standard deviations--
95.44 percent of the population--is adequate or whether plus or minus three
standard deviations--99.73 percent--is adequate.

Inspection
Inspection involves physically looking at, measuring, or testing results to
determine whether they conform to the requirements or quality standards. It's a
tool used to gather information and improve results. Inspections might occur
after the final product is produced or at intervals during the development of the
product to examine individual components. Acceptance decisions are made
when the work is inspected and the work is either accepted or rejected. When
work is rejected, it might have to go back through the process for rework.
According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, inspection is also known as reviews, peer
reviews, audits, or walkthroughs.
Inspection might take actual measurements of components to determine whether
they meet requirements. Maybe a component part for your product must be
exactly 5 mm in length. To pass inspection, the parts are measured and must
meet the 5 mm length requirement. If they measure 5 mm, they pass; if they do
not, they fail.

  Exam Spotlight
  Don't confuse inspection with prevention; they're two different tools.
  Inspection keeps errors in the product from reaching the customer.
  Prevention keeps errors from occurring in the process. It always costs less to
  prevent problems in the first place than it does to fix problems built into the
  product after the fact. Rework, labor costs, material costs, and potential loss
  of customers are all factors to consider when weighing prevention costs
  versus the cost of rework. Philip Crosby developed the theory of Zero
  Defects, which deals with prevention costs. Loosely translated, Zero Defects
  means doing it right the first time.

Measurements can vary even if the variances are not noticeable. Machines wear
down, people make mistakes, the environment might cause variances, and so on.
Measurements that fall within a specified range are called tolerable results. So,
instead of 5 mm exactly, maybe a range between 4.98 mm and 5.02 mm is an
acceptable or tolerable measurement for the component. If the samples that are
measured fall within the tolerable range, they pass; otherwise, they fail
inspection.
One inspection technique uses measurements called attributes. The
measurements taken during attribute sampling determine whether they meet one
of two options, conforming or nonconforming. In other words, the measurements
conform or meet the requirement or they do not conform. This can also be
considered a pass/fail or go/no-go decision.
Attribute conformity and inspections are not necessarily performed on every
component part or every end product that's produced. That's time-consuming and
inefficient when you're producing numerous components. Inspection in cases
like this is usually performed on a sampling of parts or products where every x
number of parts is tested for conformity or measurement specifics.
Inspection will tell you where problems exist and will give you the opportunity
to correct them, thereby leading to quality improvements. The other tools and
techniques I'll talk about in these sections also lead to quality improvements in
the product or process or in both.



         Real World Scenario

  An Ounce of Prevention
  One of the main thoroughfares into your city requires a bridge replacement.
  You were appointed the project manager for the city and have managed this
  project since its initiation 15 months ago. The project entailed hiring a
  contractor to build the new bridge and manage the contract.
contractor to build the new bridge and manage the contract.
Approximately 28,000 vehicles travel across this bridge daily, carrying
commuters and college students back and forth to the downtown area. One
of the requirements was no more than three of the six lanes of traffic could
be closed at one time during construction. Another requirement was that
each piece of steel had to be painted with two coats before it was brought on
site. A third coat of paint was to be applied at the site after construction. The
paint was to be guaranteed to last 25 to 30 years.
An onsite quality control inspection revealed that some of the paint was
peeling. After further investigation, you discovered that the contractor did
not allow the first coat of paint to cure properly, so when the second coat
was applied, it peeled and flaked.
You informed the contractor that, according to the terms of the contract and
the SOW specifications, they were required to apply three coats of paint to
the bridge, and the paint was required to last 25 to 30 years. Paint that peeled
before construction was completed did not comply with specifications.
Corrective action was needed. As a result, the contract company decided to
subcontract the painting work to another company while they finished their
remaining tasks on the project.
Unfortunately, the subcontractor they hired was not up to the task and was
unable to complete the paint job. Several months passed, and the original
project completion date was missed. Obviously, revisions to the project
schedule were required when it became clear that the subcontractor wasn't
going to make the deadline to complete the painting task.
The original contractor found another subcontractor capable of completing
the paint job. Because it was the middle of winter and temperatures were
cold, the painting crew had to hang insulated tarps between the bays on the
bridge and use heaters to warm up small areas of steel to the proper
temperature to apply the paint. This process extended the completion date by
more than three times its original estimate and ultimately delayed the
completion of the project by two years. Additional costs were incurred to
hire the subcontractor and rent the heaters.
Corrective action was taken as a result of the inspection, and eventually the
project was completed, but not without schedule delays, schedule changes,
scope changes, and rework--not to mention the increased cost to the original
contractor. Because the contract was a fixed-price contract, the contractor's
profit was eaten away paying for the painting job. The cost to correct the
  profit was eaten away paying for the painting job. The cost to correct the
  quality issue did not impact the city, but it did impact the contractor. This is
  a case where an ounce of prevention would have been worth several gallons
  of cure, as the old saying goes.


Approved Change Requests Review
We've talked about approved change requests a few times. The key in this
process is to make certain you have reviewed the approved change requests and
assure that they were implemented the way they were documented and approved.

Control Quality Outputs
Quality improvement, as mentioned in the Perform Quality Assurance process
discussed in Chapter 9, "Conducting Procurements and Sharing Information," is
a primary goal of the quality processes. Failure to meet quality requirements can
have a significant impact on the project and the project team and might result in
rework. Rework causes a project to take longer and cost more than originally
planned because the project team has to repeat processes to correct the work.
You should try to keep rework to a minimum so as not to impact the project
schedule and budget. Rework has the potential to cause morale issues as well,
especially if the team members thought they were doing a good job all along.
Rework might require the project team to put in long hours, which in turn might
cause more errors or other negative consequences. Monitor quality periodically
so that rework is kept to a minimum.




  Perform Quality Assurance is concerned with ensuring that the project is
  using the correct and most efficient processes to meet the project
  requirements; Control Quality is concerned with the accuracy of the project
  results.

Control Quality has several outputs:
   Quality control measurements
   Validated changes
   Verified deliverables
   Work performance information
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
I've already discussed many of these outputs, but I'll add a few quick notes here.
The results of changes, defect repairs, or variances that have been inspected and
corrected are called validated changes. Validated changes, particularly corrective
and preventive actions, can contribute to overall quality improvements and
should be noted in the lessons learned documentation. Remember that processes
that are in control should not be adjusted. Processes that are out of control might
require adjusting, but this should occur only as a result of a management
decision.
Verifying deliverables involves using the tools and techniques of this process to
determine if the deliverable is correct and accurate and meets the user's needs.
This output becomes an input to the next process we'll discuss, Validate Scope,
which entails accepting the deliverables.
Completed checklists become part of the project's documentation and are
included as part of the organizational process asset updates. Lessons learned
should include the causes of variances found during this process and why the
corrective actions were recommended.
Updates to the quality management plan and the process improvement plan may
be required as part of the project management plan updates output of this
process. Quality standards may also need to be updated as a result of this
process, and they are included in the project documents updates output.

Validating Project Scope
Managing and reporting on project progress make up the primary focus of the
Monitoring and Controlling processes. The primary purpose of the Validate
Scope process, which is one of those processes, is to formally accept completed
deliverables and obtain sign-off that the deliverables are satisfactory and meet
stakeholders' expectations and the documented requirements.
The inputs of the Validate Scope process are the project management plan,
requirements documentation, requirements traceability matrix, verified
requirements documentation, requirements traceability matrix, verified
deliverables, and work performance data. This process involves evaluating these
inputs to determine whether the work is complete and whether it satisfies the
project objectives. Evaluation is performed using inspection and group decision-
making techniques, the only tools and techniques of this process. Even if the
project is canceled, you should perform Validate Scope to document the degree
to which the project was completed. This will serve as historical information,
and if the project is ever started up again, you will have documentation that tells
you what was completed and how far the project progressed.

  Exam Spotlight
  The most important fact you should know about the Validate Scope process
  is that Validate Scope formalizes the acceptance of the project scope and is
  primarily concerned with the acceptance of project deliverables. Don't
  confuse this process with the Control Quality process I just discussed.
  You can remember the difference between Validate Scope and Control
  Quality this way:
      Control Quality = checking for correct work results and assuring that the
      quality requirements are met
      Validate Scope = accepting work results

The outputs of Validate Scope are accepted deliverables, change requests, work
performance information, and project documents updates. Accepted deliverables
are concerned with the formal acceptance of the work by the stakeholders.
Remember that stakeholders include customers, the project sponsor, the project
team, the management team, and so on. Document their acceptance with formal
sign-off, and keep this with your project documents.

Controlling Scope
The Project Scope Management Knowledge Area includes Plan Scope
Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create WBS, Validate
Scope, and Control Scope. You'll recall that project scope describes the work
required to produce the product, service, or result of the project. This broad
statement usually includes the product scope statement and the product
description, which describes the characteristics, features, and functionality of the
product, service, or result. The Control Scope process involves monitoring the
status of both the project and the product scope, monitoring changes to the
project and product scope, and managing changes to the scope baseline. As with
all the change processes, change requests and preventive and corrective actions
that come about during this process are managed through the Perform Integrated
Change Control process.
Any modification to the agreed-on WBS is considered a scope change. (It has
been eons ago that you looked at this, so remember that the work breakdown
structure is a deliverables-oriented hierarchy that defines the total work of the
project.) This means the addition or deletion of activities or modifications to the
existing activities on the WBS constitute a project scope change.
Changes in product scope require changes to the project scope as well. Let's say
one of your project deliverables is the design of a piece of specialized equipment
that's integrated into your final product. Now let's say that because of
engineering setbacks and some miscalculations, the specialized equipment
requires design modifications. The redesign of this equipment impacts the end
product or product scope. Because changes to the product scope impact the
project requirements, which are detailed in the scope document, changes to
project scope are also required. This change, along with recommended corrective
actions, should be processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control
process.
Unapproved or undocumented changes that sometimes make their way into the
project are referred to as scope creep. How often have you overheard a
stakeholder speaking directly with a project team member and asking them to
make "this one little change that doesn't impact anybody ... really, no one will
notice"? Make certain your project team members are well versed in the change
control process and insist that they inform you of shenanigans like this. Scope
creep can kill an otherwise viable project. Little changes add up and eventually
impact budget, schedule, and quality.

Control Scope Inputs
The Control Scope process has five inputs, all of which you've seen before:
   Project management plan
   Requirements documentation
   Requirements traceability matrix
   Work performance data
   Organizational process assets
There is no new information you need to know about these inputs for this
process, so let's move on to tools and techniques.

Control Scope Tools and Techniques
The Control Scope process has one tool and technique: variance analysis.
Variance analysis includes reviewing project performance measurements to
determine whether there are variances in project scope. It's also important to
determine and document the cause and amount of variances and examine those
against the scope baseline so that you can implement corrective or preventive
actions if needed.




  If you are using a configuration management system to control product
  scope, the change control system must also integrate with it. The
  configuration management system manages changes to product and project
  scope and ensures that these changes are reasonable and make sense before
  they're processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.


Control Scope Outputs
The outputs of the Control Scope process are as follows:
   Work performance information
   Change requests
   Project management plan updates
   Project documents updates
   Organizational process assets updates
Changes to scope will likely require that you repeat some of the project Planning
processes and make any needed adjustments, including updating the project
documents. Scope changes require an update to the project scope statement. This
may require an update to the WBS and WBS dictionary as well. Here's a pop
quiz: The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are collectively
quiz: The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are collectively
known as what? The answer is the scope baseline. Scope baseline updates are
part of the project management plan updates output of this process.
Scope changes include any changes to the project scope as defined by the
agreed-on WBS. This in turn might require changes or updates to project
objectives, costs, quality measures or controls, performance measurements
baselines, or time in the form of schedule revisions. Scope changes almost
always affect project costs and/or require schedule revisions.




  Schedule revisions are almost always needed as a result of scope changes,
  but not all scope changes lengthen the project schedule. Some scope changes
  (a reduction in overall project requirements, for example) might reduce the
  number of hours needed to complete the project, which in turn might reduce
  the project budget. This most often occurs when the schedule is the primary
  constraint on the project and the start or end dates cannot be changed.

When scope changes are requested, all areas of the project should be
investigated to determine what the changes will impact. The project team should
perform estimates of the impact and of the amount of time needed to make the
changes. Sometimes, however, the change request is so extensive that even the
time to perform an estimate should be evaluated before proceeding. In other
words, if the project team is busy working on estimates, they aren't working on
the project. That means extensive change requests could impact the existing
schedule because of the time and effort needed just to evaluate the change. Cases
like these require you to make a determination or ask the change control board
(CCB) to decide whether the change is important enough to allow the project
team time to work on the estimates.
Always remember to update your stakeholders regarding the changes you're
implementing and their impacts. They'll want to know how the changes affect
the performance baselines, including the project costs, project schedule, project
scope, and quality.
This process concludes the Monitoring and Controlling process group. You'll
look at the Closing processes in the next chapter.
       Real World Scenario

Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
Stakeholders have asked for an updated status on the project schedule as
well as a remaining cost projection. You decide to provide several cost and
schedule performance figures for the project on the status report.
"Build-out is behind schedule. They were scheduled to be completed by the
15th of January, but they aren't going to finish up until the 24th."
"What's that going to do to my schedule?" Jill asks. "I'm starting interviews
for the store positions on the 16th. I hope to have that wrapped up by the
19th. As long as I have the majority of the staff hired by the 20th, we can
have them stocking shelves starting the 22nd."
"Let's finish up the status of the other items, and I'll come back to that."
You've calculated some performance measurements, including earned value
measures, and you show them to Jill and Dirk (all figures are in millions of
dollars):
   BAC = 2, PV = 1.86, EV = 1.75, AC = 1.70
   SPI is 0.94 (1.75 / 1.86)
   CPI is 1.03
   EAC is 1.96; 1.70 + [(2 - 1.75) / (1.03 X 0.94)]
   ETC is 0.30 (2 - 1.70)
"What is all this telling us?" Dirk asks.
"The cost performance index tells us we're getting a good return for the
money spent on the project so far. In other words, we've experienced a $1.03
value for every dollar spent to date," you respond.
"The schedule performance index isn't as cheery, but it's not dreadful news
either. This performance indicator says that work is progressing at 94
percent of what we anticipated by this point.
"The estimate at completion tells us that based on what we know today, the
total project will cost $1.94 million. That's coming in under the original $2
total project will cost $1.94 million. That's coming in under the original $2
million we had budgeted for completion, so we're on track with the project
budget. The last figure is the estimated cost of the remaining work."
"It looks like we're a little behind schedule based on what you have figured
here," Dirk says.
"Yes, that's correct," you reply. "That brings us back to Jill's question. I have
two alternatives to propose. One, we overlap the schedule and allow
Gomez's crew to complete their work while Jill's staff starts stocking
shelves."
Jill says, "I don't like this option. We'll be tripping over each other, and I
don't want merchandise damaged by workers who are still dragging
equipment around inside the store. What's your other option?"
"We could ask Gomez to increase the crew size so that they complete on
time according to the contract. We have a provision in the contract that
stipulates they add crew members if it looks as though they'll miss the
scheduled completion date. I will instruct the contract management
department to inform Gomez that we're requiring additional crew members."
"That will do the trick," Jill says. "We need the storefront to ourselves when
stocking and preparing for opening. I'm glad you had that stipulation in the
contract."
You report that sign-off has been obtained for the completed deliverables to
date. Quality inspections and comparisons of the deliverables to the
acceptance criteria were completed to Jill and Ricardo's satisfaction on the
work performed to date.
Project Case Study Checklist
    Control Costs
        Cost change control system
        Performance measurement analysis
        Forecasting
    Control Schedule
        Schedule compression
    Validate Scope
        Validated work results
      Control Quality
         Assured quality requirements were met


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
With the exception of the Perform Integrated Change Control process, we
covered the meaty portion of the Monitoring and Controlling process group in
this chapter. It's critical to monitor every process we discussed in order to keep
the project in alignment with the objectives and to be able to take corrective
action as soon as possible.
Controlling Risks is a process you'll perform once the work of the project begins
and throughout the remainder of the project. Just like change, risk is something
that will occur on most projects you undertake. I've never managed a project
(except for projects that were started and finished within a matter of days) that
didn't encounter risk. My experience has been that most risks are known-
unknown, which makes contingency reserves (both time and money) essential on
any project. Unknown-unknown risks are common also and require adequate
management reserves. For example, during the writing of this book, we moved
to a new home. I did the smart thing and got three estimates from three reputable
moving companies in the area. The estimates were based on an hourly rate for a
certain number of movers. Two estimates came back very close to each other,
and the third was more than double the other estimates. I picked the company
that said they could get us moved in two days rather than the three their
competitor quoted. Fortunately, we don't move very often. Unfortunately, I
didn't realize moving companies woefully underbid the amount of time it
actually takes to pack you up, load the truck, and unload at the other end. By the
third day, I had to insist they complete the job in four hours because we were at
more than double the original quote at that point. It's a good thing I had a reserve
tucked away for the unexpected, but this overrun wiped out the entire
contingency fund! Taking on a project without knowing that risks will occur and
without having some contingency set aside is a huge gamble because even the
smallest projects can have risks.
Earned value management is a tool you can't live without for measuring
performance on your project, particularly the cost and schedule variance and the
cost and schedule performance indexes. The size and complexity of the project
will dictate how often you should run the performance measurements. The
mantra of stakeholders everywhere is "on time and on budget." Therefore,
controlling the project budget and the schedule will likely be two of your most
time-consuming project management tasks. Use the tools we discussed in this
chapter to keep yourself and your stakeholders informed of what's happening
regarding these two important areas. If cost or schedule changes must occur, it's
imperative you communicate what happened, why it happened, and if it's
expected to happen again and that you realign stakeholders' expectations with
the new forecasted estimates.
Control Quality and Validate Scope work together to measure, inspect, and
accept the project deliverables. Validating and accepting the work of the project
shouldn't be a mind-boggling task at this point if you've been following the
project management processes all along. For example, you should monitor and
inspect deliverables as they're completed. At project's end, additional testing or
inspection might be needed to verify that all the deliverables work together (if
they're required to do so), but many issues or problems you've discovered
regarding the deliverables should have been discovered already. However, I
know that exceptions do exist. It isn't always possible to inspect the work of the
project as it progresses because some projects aren't complete until the last piece
of the puzzle is put into place. In that case, inspection, testing, and deliverables
acceptance won't occur until the end of the project. However, if you've used
sound Monitoring and Controlling tools and techniques to monitor the processes,
ideally you won't encounter any big surprises at this stage.
Control Scope is absolutely essential for all projects. Time and again I've seen
changes to scope end up pitting stakeholders against the project team because the
requirements weren't defined adequately in the first place and because neither
party clearly understood what was being requested. Scope changes can kill a
project by significantly delaying the finish date or by so drastically modifying
the original objective of the project that it no longer resembles what it set out to
accomplish. I try to keep the questions regarding scope change simple, as in,
"Do you absolutely have to have this to meet the objective of this project?" That
isn't always easy for people to understand because we often confuse wants with
needs. So, I might come up with an analogy they can relate to--something like
this: "Let's say your one and only culinary skill is boiling water. Do you really
need a designer stove with dual fuel options and a built-in warming oven to boil
water? Wouldn't a simple store brand work in that case?"
Summary
We covered a lot of material in this chapter, and we also closed out the
Monitoring and Controlling process group.
The Control Risks process responds to risks as they occur and implements
workarounds for unplanned risk events. Some risk events planned for during the
Plan Risk Responses process will occur, and some will not. Perhaps risk events
that were previously identified do occur, and their impacts are much greater than
anticipated during the Plan Risk Responses process. These will require updates
to the risk management plan or workarounds.
Control Costs involves managing changes to project costs. It's also concerned
with monitoring project budgets to prevent unauthorized or incorrect costs from
getting included in the cost baseline. Control Costs uses tools and techniques
such as earned value management (CV, SV, CPI, SPI), forecasting (ETC, EAC,
and TCPI), variance analysis, trend analysis, and EVM to monitor costs.
Control Schedule involves determining the status of the project schedule,
determining whether changes have occurred or should occur, and influencing
and managing schedule changes.
Control Quality monitors work results to see whether they fulfill the quality
standards outlined in the quality management plan. Control Quality should occur
throughout the life of the project. It uses many tools and techniques. Inspection
measures results to determine whether the results conform to the quality
standards. Attributes are measurements that either conform or do not conform.
Control charts measure the results of processes over time, and Pareto charts are
histograms that rank-order the most important quality factors by their frequency
over time. You should not adjust processes that are in control; however, you can
change these processes to realize improvements.
Validate Scope involves validating and accepting work results, while Control
Scope is concerned with controlling changes to project scope.

Exam Essentials
Describe the purpose of Control Risks. Control Risks involves identifying
and responding to new risks as they occur. Risk monitoring and reassessment
should occur throughout the life of the project.
Name the purpose of the Control Costs process. The Control Costs process
is concerned with monitoring project costs to prevent unauthorized or incorrect
costs from being included in the cost baseline.
Be able to describe earned value management techniques. Earned value
management (EVM) monitors the planned value (PV), earned value (EV), and
actual costs (AC) expended to produce the work of the project. Cost variance
(CV), schedule variance (SV), cost performance index (CPI), and schedule
performance index (SPI) are the formulas used with the EVM technique.
Be able to name the tools and techniques of the Control Costs process. The
tools and techniques of the Control Costs process are earned value management,
forecasting, to-complete performance index, performance reviews project
management software, and reserve analysis.
Be able to name the purpose of the Control Quality process. The purpose
of the Control Quality process is to monitor work results to see whether they
comply with the standards set out in the quality management plan.
Name the purpose of the Validate Scope process. The purpose of Validate
Scope is to determine whether the work is complete and whether it satisfies the
project objectives.
Be able to describe product verification. Product verification confirms that
all the work of the project was completed accurately and to the satisfaction of the
stakeholder.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are working on a project that was proceeding well until a manufacturing
   glitch occurred that requires corrective action. It turns out the glitch was an
   unintentional enhancement to the product, and the marketing people are
   absolutely crazy about its potential. The corrective action is canceled, and
   you continue to produce the product with the newly discovered
   enhancement. As the project manager, you know that a change has occurred
   to the product scope because the glitch changed the characteristics of the
   product. Which of the following statements is true?
   A. Changes to product scope should be reflected in the project scope.
   B. Changes to product scope should be documented in the scope
      management plan.
   C. Changes to product scope will result in cost changes.
   D. Changes to product scope are a result of corrective action.
2. You are working on a project that was proceeding well until a manufacturing
   glitch occurred that requires corrective action. It turns out the glitch was an
   unintentional enhancement to the product, and the marketing people are
   absolutely crazy about its potential. The corrective action is canceled, and
   you continue to produce the product with the newly discovered
   enhancement. As the project manager, you know that a variance has
   occurred. Which of the following is true?
   A. Common causes of variance, also known as special-cause variances, are
      situations that are unique and not easily controlled at the operational
      level.
   B. Random variances, known or predictable variances, and variances that
      are always present in the process are known as common causes of
      variance.
   C. Attribute inspection determines whether measurements fall within
      tolerable results.
   D. Scatter diagrams display the relationships between an independent and a
      dependent variable to show variations in the process over time.
3. Your project has experienced some changes to the agreed-on WBS elements.
   The changes were approved through the proper change control process. The
   WBS changes might in turn require which of the following?
   A. Scope changes
   B. Cost changes
   C. Schedule revisions
   D. Risk response changes
4. You are a project manager for Dakota Software Consulting Services. You're
   working with a major retailer that offers its products through mail-order
   catalogs. It is interested in knowing customer characteristics, the amounts of
   first-time orders, and similar information. The stakeholders have accepted
   the project scope. Work has begun on the project, and you're confirming
   some of the initial work results with the stakeholders. You've asked for
   acceptance of the work results. Which process are you performing?
   A. Control Risks
   B. Control Quality
   C. Validate Scope
   D. Control Scope
5. You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency
   of the United States government. Getting top-secret clearances for
   contractors takes quite a bit of time, and waiting for clearances would
   jeopardize the implementation date. Your mission--should you choose to
   accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. Your
   programmers are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing
   work when your agency appoints a new executive director. Your
   programmers are siphoned off this project to work on the executive director's
   hot new project. Which of the following addresses the purpose of Validate
   Scope in this case?
   A. Validate Scope determines the correctness and completion of all the
      work.
   B. Validate Scope documents the level and degree of completion.
   C. Validate Scope determines whether the project results comply with
      quality standards.
   D. Validate Scope documents the correctness of the work according to
      stakeholders' expectations.
6. Which of the following statements is true regarding schedule variances?
   A. Schedule variances impact scope, which impacts the schedule.
   B. Schedule variances sometimes impact the schedule.
   C. Schedule variances always impact the schedule.
   D. Schedule variances never impact the schedule.
7. You are a project manager for Laurel's Theater Productions. Your new
   project is coming in over budget and requires a cost change through the cost
   change control system. You know all of the following statements are true
   regarding Control Costs except for which one?
   A. A description of how cost changes should be managed and controlled is
      found in the cost management plan.
    B. Approved cost changes are reflected in the cost baseline.
    C. EVM is used to determine the cost performance that must be realized for
       the remaining work of the project to meet the BAC goal.
    D. This equation, EAC = BAC / cumulative CPI, is used to forecast an
       estimate at completion assuming future project performance will be the
       same as past performance.
 8. Which of the following might require re-baselining of the cost baseline?
    A. Corrective action
    B. Revised cost estimates
    C. Updates to the cost management plan
    D. Budget updates
 9. What are the performance measurements for the Control Schedule process?
    A. SV = (EV - PV) and SPI = (EV / PV)
    B. SV = (EV - AC) and SPI = (EV / AC)
    C. SV = (EV - BAC) and SPI = (EV / BAC)
    D. SV = (PV - EV) and SPI = (PV / EV)
10. This measurement is the value of the work that has been completed to date
    compared to the budget.
    A. PV
    B. AC
    C. EV
    D. EAC
11. You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution
    company. Your project is to develop a website for the company that allows
    retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate
    link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the
    consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating
    the parent company, growers, and distributors. You are preparing a
    performance review and have the following measurements at hand: PV =
    300, AC = 200, and EV = 250. What do you know about this project?
    A. The EAC is a positive number, which means the project will finish under
       budget.
    B. You do not have enough information to calculate CPI.
    C. The CV is a negative number in this case, which means you've spent less
       than you planned to spend as of the measurement date.
    D. The CV is a positive number in this case, which means you're under
       budget as of the measurement date.
12. A negative result from an SV calculation means which of the following?
    A. PV is higher than EV.
    B. PV equals 1.
    C. EV is higher than PV.
    D. EV is higher than AC.
13. You are a contract project manager for a wholesale flower distribution
    company. Your project is to develop a website for the company that allows
    retailers to place their flower orders online. You will also provide a separate
    link for individual purchases that are ordered, packaged, and mailed to the
    consumer directly from the grower's site. This project involves coordinating
    the parent company, growers, and distributors. You are preparing a
    performance review and have the following measurements at hand: PV =
    300, AC = 200, and EV = 250. What is the CPI of this project?
    A. 0.80
    B. 1.25
    C. 1.5
    D. 0.83
14. You have accepted project performance to date and assume future work
    (ETC) will be performed at the budgeted rate. If BAC = 800, ETC = 275, PV
    = 300, AC = 200, EV = 250, and CPI = 1.25, what is the EAC?
    A. 640
    B. 750
    C. 600
    D. 550
15. You know that EAC = 375, PV = 300, AC = 200, and EV = 250. You expect
    the work of the project to continue as planned. What is the ETC?
    A. 300
    B. 125
    C. 175
    D. 50
16. You expect future project performance to be consistent with the project
    performance experienced to date for this work component. If BAC = 800,
    ETC = 275, PV = 300, AC = 200, EV = 250, and CPI = 1.25, what is the
    EAC?
    A. 640
    B. 750
    C. 600
    D. 550
17. You know that BAC = 500, PV = 325, AC = 275, CPI = 0.9, and EV = 250,
    and you are using actual costs to date and assuming ETC uses the budgeted
    rate. Variance at completion tells you which of the following?
    A. 25
    B. -52
    C. 52
    D. -25
18. You know that BAC = 2500, PV = 1250, AC = 1275, EV = 1150, and that
    you are experiencing typical cost variances. What is ETC?
    A. 1467
    B. 2625
    C. 1500
    D. 2778
19. Your project progressed as planned until yesterday. Suddenly, an unexpected
    risk event occurred. You quickly devised a response to deal with this
    negative risk event using which of the following outputs of Control Risks?
    A. Risk management plan updates
    B. Workarounds
    C. Corrective action
    D. Additional risk identification
20. Which of the following is considered the most critical EVM metric?
    A. CPI
    B. CV
    C. SPI
    D. SP
CHAPTER 12
Closing the Project and Applying Professional
Responsibility
THE PMP(R) EXAM CONTENT FROM THE CLOSING PERFORMANCE
DOMAIN COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER INCLUDES THE
FOLLOWING:
   Task 1: Obtain final acceptance of the project deliverables from
  relevant stakeholders in order to confirm that project scope and
  deliverables were achieved.
   Task 2: Transfer the ownership of deliverables to the assigned
  stakeholders in accordance with the project plan in order to facilitate
  project closure.
   Task 3: Obtain financial, legal, and administrative closure using
  generally accepted practices and policies in order to communicate
  formal project closure and ensure transfer of liability.
   Task 4: Prepare and share the final project report according to the
  communications management plan in order to document and convey
  project performance and assist in project evaluation.
   Task 5: Collate lessons learned that were documented throughout the
  project and conduct a comprehensive project review in order to update
  the organization's knowledge base.
   Task 6: Archive project documents and materials using generally
  accepted practices in order to comply with statutory requirements and
  for potential use in future projects and audits.
   Task 7: Obtain feedback from relevant stakeholders using
  appropriate tools and techniques and based on the stakeholder
  management plan in order to evaluate their satisfaction.
   Knowledge and Skills:
     Archiving practices and statutes
     Compliance (statute/organization)
        Contract closure requirements
        Closeout procedures
        Feedback technique
        Performance measurement techniques (KPI and key success factors)
        Project review techniques
        Transition planning technique
Congratulations! You've made terrific progress, and after finishing this chapter
you will be well equipped to take the Project Management Professional (PMP)(R)
exam.
The Closing process group, which is the last process group we'll cover, has two
processes: Close Project or Phase and Close Procurements. The Close Project or
Phase process is concerned with verifying that the work of the project was
completed correctly and to the stakeholders' satisfaction. Close Procurements
supports the Close Project or Phase process and also verifies that the work of the
project was completed correctly and the deliverables accepted.
Once you've obtained the PMP(R) designation, you have an obligation to maintain
integrity, apply your subject matter and project management knowledge, and
maintain the code of conduct published by the PMI. You'll also be required to
balance the interests and needs of stakeholders with the organization's needs.
The exam might include questions on any of these topics.
As a project manager, you'll find yourself in many unique situations, different
organizations, and possibly even different countries. Even if you never get
involved in international project management, you will still come in contact with
people from cultures and backgrounds different than yours. If you work as a
contract project manager, you'll be exposed to many different organizations;
each will have its own culture and ways of doing things. You should always
strive to act in a professional, courteous manner in these situations.
I'll talk about each of these topics in this chapter.




  The process names, inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and descriptions of
  the project management process groups and related materials and figures in
  this chapter are based on content from A Guide to the Project Management
  Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide), Fifth Edition (PMI, 2013).


Formulating Project Closeout
All good projects must come to an end, as the saying goes. Ideally, you've
practiced all the topics I've talked about that have led up to this point, and you've
delivered a successful project to the stakeholders and customers. You've also put
some of the vital tools of project management into play--planning, executing,
controlling, and communicating--to help you reach that goal.
But how do you know when a project has ended successfully? Delivering the
product or service of the project doesn't mean it has been completed
satisfactorily. Remember back to the opening chapters, where I said a project is
completed successfully when it meets stakeholders' expectations and satisfies
the goals of the project. During the Closing processes--Close Project or Phase
and Close Procurements--you'll document the acceptance of the product of the
project with a formal sign-off and file it with the project records for future
reference. The formal sign-off is the way stakeholders indicate that the goals
have been met, that the project scope and deliverables were achieved, and that
the project meets their expectations so the project ends.

Characteristics of Closing
A few characteristics are common to all projects during the Closing processes.
One is that the probability of completing the project is highest during this
process and risk is lowest. You've already completed the majority of the work of
the project--if not all of the work--so the probability of not finishing the project
is very low.
Stakeholders have the least amount of influence during the Closing processes,
while project managers have the greatest amount of influence. Costs are
significantly lower during this process because the majority of the project work
and spending has already occurred. Remember those costly S curves we talked
about in the Determine Budget process? This is where they taper off as project
spending comes to an end.
One last common characteristic of projects during closing is that weak matrix
organizations tend to experience the least amount of stress during the Closing
processes. This is because, in a weak matrix organization, the functional
manager assigns all tasks (project-related tasks as well) so the team members
manager assigns all tasks (project-related tasks as well) so the team members
have a job to return to once the project is completed and there's no change in
reporting structure.
All projects do eventually come to an end. You'll now examine a few of the
reasons for project endings before getting into the Close Project or Phase and
Close Procurements processes.

Project Endings
Projects come to an end for several reasons:
   They're completed successfully.
   They're canceled or killed prior to completion.
   They evolve into ongoing operations and no longer exist as projects.
Four formal types of project endings exist that you might need to know for the
exam:
   Addition
   Starvation
   Integration
   Extinction
You'll look at each of these ending types in detail in the following sections.

Addition
Projects that evolve into ongoing operations are considered projects that end
because of addition; in other words, they become their own ongoing business
unit. An example of this is the installation of an enterprise resource planning
system. These systems are business management systems that integrate all areas
of a business, including marketing, planning, manufacturing, sales, financials,
and human resources. After the installation of the software, these systems can
develop into their own business unit because ongoing operations, maintenance,
and monitoring of the software require full-time staff. These systems usually
evolve into an arm of the business reporting system that no one can live without
once it's installed.
A project is considered a project when it meets these criteria: It is unique, has a
definite beginning and ending date, and is temporary in nature. When a project
becomes an ongoing operation, it is no longer a project.
becomes an ongoing operation, it is no longer a project.

Starvation
When resources are cut off from the project or are no longer provided to the
project, it's starved prior to completing all the requirements, and you're left with
an unfinished project on your hands. Starvation can happen for any number of
reasons:
   Other projects come about and take precedence over the current project,
   thereby cutting the funding or resources for your project.
   The customer curtails an order.
   The project budget is reduced.
   A key resource quits.
Resource starving can include cutting back or withholding human resources,
equipment and supplies, or money. In any case, if you're not getting the people,
equipment, or money you need to complete the project, it's going to starve and
probably end abruptly.
In such cases, documentation becomes your best friend. Organizations tend to
have short memories. As you move on to bigger and better projects, your
memory regarding the specifics of the project will fade. Six months after the fact
when someone important wonders why that project was never completed and
begins the finger-pointing routine, the project documents will clearly outline the
reasons the project ended early. That's one of the reasons project documentation
is such an important function. I'll talk more about documenting project details
shortly.

Integration
Integration occurs when the resources of the project--people, equipment,
property, and supplies--are distributed to other areas in the organization or are
assigned to other projects. Perhaps your organization begins to focus on other
areas or other projects, and the next thing you know, functional managers come
calling to retrieve their resources for other, more important things. Again, your
project will come to an end due to lack of resources because they have been
reassigned to other areas of the business or have been pulled from your project
and assigned to another project.
  The difference between starvation and integration is that starvation is the
  result of staffing, funding, or other resource cuts whereas integration is the
  result of reassignment or redeployment of the resources.

Again, good documentation describing the circumstances that brought about the
end of a project because of integration should be archived with the project
records for future reference.

Extinction
This is the best kind of project end because extinction means the project was
completed and accepted by the stakeholders. As such, it no longer exists because
it had a definite ending date, the goals of the project were achieved, and the
project was closed out.



         Real World Scenario

  Pied Piper
  Jerome Reed is the project manager for Pied Piper's newest software project.
  His team is working on a program that will integrate the organization's
  human resources information, including payroll records, leave-time accruals,
  contact information, and so on. His top two programmers, Brett and Kathy,
  are heading up the coding team and are in charge of the programming and
  testing activities.
  Pied Piper recently hired a new CIO who started working with the company
  just a few weeks ago. Jerome is concerned about his human resources
  project. It was the former CIO's pet project, but he's not sure where it falls on
  the new CIO's radar screen.
  Jerome is in the computer room checking out the new hardware that just
  arrived for his project. Liz Horowitz, the director of network operations,
  approaches Jerome.
  "That's a nice piece of hardware," Liz comments.
"That's a nice piece of hardware," Liz comments.
"It sure is. This baby is loaded. It's going to process and serve up data to the
users so fast they'll be asking us to upgrade all the servers."
Liz replies, "You're right about that. I've asked Richard to burn it in and load
the software."
"What software?" Jerome asks.
"You know, the new customer relationship management software. The CIO
hired some vendor she has worked with before to come in and install their
CRM system here. She said it was our top priority. I knew this new server
was already on order, and it happens to be sized correctly for the new CRM
system."
"I purchased this server for the human resources project. What am I
supposed to use for that?"
Liz answers, "I've got a server over there on the bottom of the third rack that
might work, or maybe you can order another one. But you should take this
up with the CIO. All I know is she authorized me to use this server. She
understood I was taking it from your project, so maybe she's thinking about
going another direction with the human resources project.
"You probably should know I also asked to have Brett and Kathy assigned to
the CRM project. Even though it's a vendor project, it still requires some of
our coders. The CIO wanted the best, and they're the best we've got. It
shouldn't take them long to make the changes I need, and then you can have
them back for your project. In the meantime, they can give directions to your
other programmers so they can keep working."
"I'm going to go see whether the CIO is in," Jerome replies.
This is a case where Jerome's project ends by integration because of the
reassignment of resources. The new CIO came on board and changed the
direction and focus of the project priorities, making her new project a higher
priority than the previous project. As a result, Jerome's hardware and his top
two resources were reassigned to the new project. Had the CIO cut the
resources and equipment on the original project altogether, it would have
ended because of starvation.
Closing Out the Project
The key activity of Close Project or Phase is concerned with completing all the
activities associated with closing out the project management processes in order
to officially close out the project or phase. In this process, you will review the
scope baseline and other project documents to make certain the work reflected in
the documents is complete and accurate. The work of the project was accepted
and validated in the Validate Scope process. Remember that the project scope is
measured against the project management plan, so by this point in the project,
the project management plan and associated project documents should be
complete and up-to-date. For example, perhaps some scope change requests
were implemented that changed some of the characteristics of the final product.
The project information you're collecting during this process should reflect the
characteristics and specifications of the final product. Don't forget to update your
resource assignments as well. Some team members will have come and gone
over the course of the project; you need to double-check that all the resources
and their roles and responsibilities are noted.
Once the project outcomes are documented, you'll request formal acceptance
from the stakeholders or the customer. They're also interested in knowing
whether the product or service of the project meets the goals the project set out
to accomplish. If your documentation is up-to-date, you'll have the project
results at hand to share with them.




  Remember that you obtained acceptance of the deliverables back in the
  Validate Scope process. In this process, you'll obtain final sign-off for the
  project or phase itself, verifying that all the exit criteria have been met.

The Close Project or Phase process is also responsible for analyzing the project
management processes to determine their effectiveness and to document lessons
learned concerning them. One of the other key functions of the Close Project or
Phase process is to archive all project documents for historical reference and to
perform administrative closure procedures for the project. This may include
documenting the exit criteria for the project or phase, transferring the results of
the phase or project to the operations area of the organization, and/or collecting
project records and performing audits and lessons learned. You can probably
guess that Close Project or Phase belongs to the Project Integration Management
guess that Close Project or Phase belongs to the Project Integration Management
Knowledge Area since this process touches so many areas of the project.
Every project requires closure. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the
completion of each project phase requires project closure as well. Before we
dive into the inputs of this process, let's examine some of the administrative
closure procedures you will perform as part of the project or phase closeout.

  Exam Spotlight
  Project closure occurs at the end of each phase of the project in order to
  properly document project information and keep it safe for future reference.
  You shouldn't wait until project completion to perform the Close Project or
  Phase process but rather perform it at the end of every phase, no matter
  whether the project phase was completed successfully or ended for some
  other reason.


Administrative Closure Procedures
Administrative closure procedures involve collecting all the records associated
with the project, performing a comprehensive analysis of the project success (or
failure), documenting and gathering lessons learned, archiving project records,
and updating the organization's knowledge base. The project records may
include legal, financial, procurement, and other administrative records. Keep in
mind that when projects are performed under contract, the archiving of financial
records is especially important. These records might need to be accessed if there
are payment disputes, so you need to know where they are and how they were
filed. Projects with large financial expenditures also require particular attention
to the archiving of financial records for the same reasons. Financial information
is especially useful when estimating future projects--so again, be sure to archive
the information so it's easily accessible.
All of these documents should be indexed for reference and stored in a safe
place. Don't forget to include electronic databases and electronic documents as
part of your project archives as well. These records can be stored on a network
drive or other data repository. When records are stored electronically, don't
forget that they are subject to your organization's retention policies, and
depending on the organization, they may also be subject to statutory
requirements regarding their storage, retention, and destruction. These policies
will describe when it is appropriate to archive and eventually delete the records.
Administrative closure procedures also document the project team members' and
stakeholders' roles and responsibilities in performing this process. According to
the PMBOK(R) Guide, this should include the processes and methodologies for the
following:
    Approval requirements of the stakeholders for project deliverables and
    changes to deliverables.
    Assuring and confirming that the project meets the requirements of the
    stakeholders, customers, and sponsor. This includes documenting necessary
    actions to verify that the deliverables have been accepted and exit criteria
    have been met.
    Assuring that all activities associated with transferring the product, service,
    or result to the operations area (or next phase of the project) are complete.
    Assuring and confirming that the exit criteria for the project are satisfied.
Next, we'll look at the inputs of the Close Project or Phase process.

Close Project or Phase Inputs
The Close Project or Phase process gathers all the project records and verifies
that they are up-to-date and accurate. According to the PMBOK(R) Guide, the
overall purpose of this process is to finalize all the activities associated with all
of the project management process groups in order to formally complete the
project or project phase.
The project records must correctly identify the final specifications of the product
or service the project set out to produce. Close Project or Phase is the place to
ensure that this information accurately reflects the true results of the project.
The inputs to the Close Project or Phase process are as follows:
    Project management plan
    Accepted deliverables
    Organizational process assets
I've talked about all of these inputs previously.

Close Project or Phase Tools and Techniques
The three tools and techniques of Close Project or Phase are expert judgment,
analytical techniques, and meetings. When you're conducting administrative
closure activities, which we talked about earlier, the subject matter experts can
help assure that the process is performed according to the organization's and
project management standards. Analytical techniques in this process might
include regression analysis and/or trend analysis. Meetings in this process are
used for final reviews, lessons learned, and closeout.

Close Project or Phase Outputs
Sometimes you'll work on projects where everything just clicks, your project
team functions at the performing stage, the customers and stakeholders are
happy, and things just fall into place according to plan. I often find it difficult to
perform Close Project or Phases on projects that have progressed particularly
well, just because I don't want them to end. Believe it or not, the majority of
your projects can fall into this category if you practice good project management
techniques and exercise those great communication skills.
The Close Project or Phase process has the following outputs:
   Final product, service, or result transition
   Organizational process assets updates
We'll take a brief look at each in the following sections.

Final Product, Service, or Result Transition
The name of this output is somewhat misleading. This actually refers to the
turnover of the product, service, or result of the project to the organization. This
usually requires a formal sign-off (I'll talk about that next), and in the case of a
project performed on contract, it definitely requires a formal sign-off or receipt
indicating acceptance of the project.
Formal acceptance includes distributing a notice of the acceptance of the product
or service of the project by the stakeholders, customer, or project sponsor to
stakeholders and customers. You should require formal sign-off indicating that
those signing accept the product of the project. It's important to note that you'll
want financial, legal, and administrative sign-off so that you can communicate
formal project closeout and transfer liability to the owner of the product of the
project. You will use the communications management plan as your guide in
distributing the final project report and the notice of acceptance.
  The final product, service, or result is concerned with transitioning the final
  product, service, or result to the organization; organizational process assets
  updates involve documenting and archiving formal acceptance.


Organizational Process Assets Updates
The organizational process assets updates output is where the formal sign-off of
the acceptance of the product is documented, collected, and archived for future
reference. Documenting formal acceptance is important because it signals the
official closure of the project, and it is your proof that the project was completed
satisfactorily.
Another function of sign-off is that it kicks off the beginning of the warranty
period. Sometimes project managers or vendors will warranty their work for a
certain time period after completing a project. Projects that produce software
programs, for example, might be warranted from bugs for a 30-or 60-day time
frame from the date of implementation or acceptance. Typically in the case of
software projects, bugs are fixed for free during the warranty period. Watch out,
because users will try to squeeze new requirements into the "bug" category
mold. If you offer a warranty, it's critical that the warranty spells out exactly
what is covered and what is not.
This is also where the other project records and files are collected and archived.
This includes the project planning documents (for example, the project scope
statement, budget, schedule, risk responses, and quality plan and baselines),
change records and logs, issue logs, lessons learned, and so on.
Project or phase closure documents are included in this output. These include
documentation showing that the project or phase is completed and that the
transfer of the product of the project to the organization (or department
responsible for ongoing maintenance and support) has occurred in accordance
with the project plan. In the case of a phase completion, the transfer would be
the official hand-off to the next phase of the project rather than to an operations
or maintenance group. If your project is canceled or ends prematurely, you
should document the reasons for its premature end as well as the procedures for
transferring the completed and uncompleted deliverables.

  Exam Spotlight
  Exam Spotlight

  According to the PMBOK (R) Guide, the project manager is responsible for
  reviewing documentation from prior phases of the project, reviewing and
  obtaining customer acceptance documentation (formal acceptance of the
  deliverables occurs in the Validate Scope process, but you will collect and
  store the sign-off document during this process), and reviewing the contract
  if applicable to make certain all the requirements of the project are
  completed. If the requirements are not complete, you should not proceed
  with the Close Project or Phase process unless the project or phase has been
  terminated.

Historical information and lessons learned are used to document the successes
and failures of the project. You should collate all of the lessons learned
throughout the project and hold one last comprehensive review of the project. As
an example, lessons learned document the reasons specific corrective actions
were taken, their outcomes, the causes of performance variances, unplanned
risks that occurred, mistakes that were made and could have been avoided, and
so on.
Unfortunately, sometimes projects do fail. You can learn lessons from failed
projects as well as from successful projects, and you should document this
information for future reference. Most project managers, however, do not
document lessons learned. The reason for this is that employees don't want to
admit to making mistakes or learning from mistakes made during the project.
They do not want their names associated with failed projects or even with
mishaps on successful projects.




  Lessons learned can include some of the most valuable information you'll
  take away from a project. We can all learn from our experiences, and what
  better way to have even more success on your next project than to review a
  similar past project's lessons learned document? However, lessons learned
  will be there only if you document them now. I strongly recommend you not
  skip this step.

You and your management team will have to work to create an atmosphere of
trust and assurance that lessons learned are not reasons for reprimanding or
trust and assurance that lessons learned are not reasons for reprimanding or
dismissing employees but are learning opportunities that benefit all those
associated with the project. Lessons learned allow you to carry knowledge
gained on this project to other projects you'll work on going forward. They'll
also prevent repeat mistakes in the future if you take the time to review the
project documents and lessons learned prior to undertaking your new project.
Post-implementation audits aren't an official output, but they are a good idea.
They go hand in hand with lessons learned because they examine the project
from beginning to end and look at what went right and what went wrong. They
evaluate the project goals and determine whether the product or service of the
project satisfies the objectives. Post-implementation audits also examine the
activities and project processes to determine whether improvements are possible
on future projects.
Organizations might conduct post-implementation audits instead of lessons
learned sessions. Documenting and gathering information during this procedure
can serve the same function as lessons learned if you're honest and include all
the good, the bad, and the ugly. Let's hope there's very little ugly.



         Real World Scenario

  Cimarron Research Group
  The Cimarron Research Group researches and develops organic pesticides
  for use on food crops. It is a medium-sized company and has established a
  project management office (PMO) to manage all aspects of project work.
  The PMO consists of project managers and administrative staff who assist
  with information handling, filing, and disbursement.
  Terri Roberts is the project manager for a project that has just closed. Terri
  diligently filed all the pertinent project documents as the project progressed
  and has requested the research files and engineering notes from the director
  of engineering. All information regarding the research on this project should
  be included with the project archives because it's important that all the
  information about the project be in one place. The engineering department
  complies with her request but chooses to keep its own set of research records
  as well.
  Terri's assistant has indexed all the project documents and recently sent
  Terri's assistant has indexed all the project documents and recently sent
  notice of formal acceptance and approval of this project to the stakeholders,
  project sponsor, and management team. This notice officially closes the
  project. The next step is to archive the files and store them.


Closing Out the Procurements
Procurements have life cycles of their own--just like projects. I talked about the
contract life cycles in Chapter 9, "Conducting Procurements and Sharing
Information." As such, procurements and contracts come to a close just as
projects come to a close. As you might guess, there is a process that deals with
procurement closings; it's called Close Procurements.
The Close Procurements process is concerned with completing and settling the
terms of the procurement. It supports the Close Project or Phase process because
the Close Procurements process determines whether the work described in the
procurement documentation or contract was completed accurately and
satisfactorily. This is called product verification. Projects that have multiple
deliverables may have procurements for some of the deliverables but not all.
Obviously, this process applies only to those phases, deliverables, or portions of
the project that were performed under some form of procurement.




  Close Project or Phase verifies and documents the project outcomes, just as
  the Close Procurements process does. Keep in mind that not all projects are
  performed under contract, so not all projects require Close Procurements.
  However, all projects do require the Close Project or Phase process. Because
  verification and documentation of the project outcomes occur in both of
  these processes, projects that are performed under contract need to have
  project results verified only one time.

Close Procurements is where you'll update records to document the final results
of the contract or agreement, close out open claims, and archive the procurement
information for future reference. These records detail the final results of the
work of the project. I'll talk about the specifics of this when I cover the Close
Procurements outputs.
Procurement documents might have specific terms or conditions for completion
Procurement documents might have specific terms or conditions for completion
and closeout. You should be aware of these terms or conditions so that project
closure isn't held up because you missed an important detail. If you are not
administering the procurement yourself, be certain to ask your procurement
department whether there are any special conditions that you should know about
so that your project team doesn't inadvertently delay contract or project closure.

  Exam Spotlight
  For the exam, remember that product verification, which determines whether
  all of the project work was completed correctly according to the contract or
  other procurement terms and is satisfactory according to stakeholder
  expectations, is performed during the Closing processes. Product
  documentation and deliverables are validated and accepted during the
  Validate Scope process. One more note: When projects end prematurely, the
  Validate Scope process is where the level of detail concerning the amount of
  work completed gets documented.


Close Procurements Inputs
The Close Procurements process has two inputs:
   Project management plan
   Procurement documents
I've discussed both these inputs before, but you should know a few more things
about procurement documents for this process. Procurement documents include
the contract itself (or other procurement documents) and all the supporting
documents that go along with it. These might include things such as the WBS,
the project schedule, change control documents, technical documents, financial
and payment records, quality control inspection results, and so on. This
information--along with all the other information gathered during the project--
is indexed and filed once the project is closed out so that anyone considering a
future project of similar scope can reference what was done.

Close Procurements Tools and Techniques
The Close Procurements process has three tools and techniques: procurement
audits, procurement negotiations, and records management system. The records
management system here serves the same function as the records management
system I talked about in the discussion of the Control Procurements process in
Chapter 9. Procurement audits are reviews of procurement processes to
determine whether they are meeting the right needs and are being performed
correctly and according to standards. The PMBOK(R) Guide says procurement
audits are concerned with reviewing the procurement process, starting with the
Plan Procurement Management process through Close Procurements.
The primary purpose of the procurement audit is to identify lessons learned
during the procurement process. Procurement audits examine the procurement
process to determine areas of improvement and to identify flawed processes or
procedures. This allows you to reuse the successful processes on other
procurement items for this project, on future projects, or elsewhere in the
organization. It also alerts you to problems in the process so that you don't repeat
them.
Procurement audits might be used by either the buyer or the vendor, or by both,
as an opportunity for improvement. Documenting the lessons learned--including
the successes and failures that occurred--allows you to improve other
procurement processes currently underway on this project or other projects. It
also gives you the opportunity to improve the process for future projects.
Procurement negotiations occur when using an alternative dispute resolution
(ADR) technique due to disagreements about deliverables, payments,
performance, and so on. Reaching a negotiated settlement through the aid of
ADR techniques is the most favorable way to resolve the dispute.

Close Procurements Outputs
One of the purposes of the Close Procurements process is to provide formal
notice to the seller--usually in written form--that the procurement is complete.
The output of Close Procurements that deals with this is called closed
procurements. This is a formal acceptance and closure of the procurement. It's
your responsibility as project manager to document the formal acceptance of the
procurement. Many times the provisions for formalizing acceptance and closing
the procurement are spelled out in the procurement documents.
If you have a procurement department that handles contract administration, they
will expect you to inform them when the procurement is completed and will in
turn follow the formal procedures to let the seller know it's complete. However,
you'll still note the procurement completion in your copy of the project records.
  Depending on the terms of the procurement, early termination (whether by
  agreement, via default, or for cause) might result in additional charges to the
  buyer. Be certain to note the reasons for early termination in your
  procurement documentation.

The other output of Close Procurements is organizational process assets updates.
This includes updating the procurement file, deliverables acceptance, and
lessons learned. The procurement file is simply an indexed file of all the
procurement records and supporting documents. These records should be
indexed for easy reference and included as part of the project files in the Close
Project or Phase process.

  Exam Spotlight

  The PMBOK (R) Guide does not state in which order these processes should be
  performed. In practice, you will likely close out the procurement before
  closing the project and archiving the project documents.

This process is your organization's way of formally accepting the product of the
project from the vendor and closing out the procurement. The deliverable
acceptance portion of the organizational process assets updates includes the
formal written notice from the buyer that the deliverables are acceptable and
satisfactory or have been rejected. If the product or service does not meet
expectations, the vendor will need to correct the problems before you issue a
formal acceptance notice. Ideally, quality audits have been performed during the
course of the project, and the vendor was given the opportunity to make
corrections earlier in the process than the closing stage. It's not a good idea to
wait until the very end of the project and then spring all the problems and issues
on the vendor at once. It's much more efficient to discuss problems with your
vendor as the project progresses because it provides the opportunity for
correction when the problems occur.
Lessons learned include information and documentation about what worked well
and what didn't work well regarding the procurement processes. You can use this
information on future projects to improve performance and prevent
inefficiencies.
inefficiencies.

Celebrate!
I think it's a good idea to hold a celebration at the conclusion of a successfully
completed project or a successfully completed phase on a large project. The
project team should celebrate their accomplishment, and you should officially
recognize their efforts and thank them for their participation. Any number of
ideas come to mind here--a party, a trip to a ball game, pizza and sodas at
lunchtime. This shouldn't be the only time you've recognized your team, as
discussed during the Develop Project Team process, but now is the time to
officially close the project and thank your team members. Even if no funds are
available for a formal celebration, your heartfelt "thank you" can go a long way
with the members of your team. It's tough for team members to remain
disgruntled, and it's easier to revive them, when they know their efforts are
appreciated.
A celebration helps team members formally recognize the project end and brings
closure to the work they've done. It also encourages them to remember what
they've learned and to start thinking about how their experiences will benefit
them and the organization during the next project.

Releasing Project Team Members
Releasing project team members is not an official process. However, it should be
noted that at the conclusion of the project, you will release your project team
members, and they will go back to their functional managers or be assigned to a
new project if you're working in a matrix-type organization.
You will want to keep the functional managers or other project managers
informed as you get closer to project completion so that they have time to
adequately plan for the return of their employees. Start letting them know a few
months ahead of time what the schedule looks like and how soon they can plan
on using their employees on new projects. This gives the other managers the
ability to start planning activities and scheduling activity dates.
In all the excitement of wrapping up the project, we shouldn't forget about our
stakeholders. Let's take a look at balancing the stakeholders' interests and
assuring we've met their expectations in the next section.


Balancing Stakeholders' Interests at Project
Close
I know we discussed Manage Stakeholder Engagement in Chapter 9. Although
stakeholder satisfaction is the key to project success and acceptance, I want to
add some closing thoughts on this topic and discuss a few new concepts.
Projects are undertaken at the request of customers, project sponsors, executive
managers, and others. You'll recall that stakeholders are those who have
something to gain or lose by implementing the project. As such, stakeholders
have different interests and needs, and one of your jobs is to balance the needs of
the stakeholders.
Customer satisfaction is probably the primary goal you're striving for in any
project. If your customer is satisfied, it means you've met their expectations and
delivered the product or service they were expecting. You've got a winning
combination when the customer is satisfied with the product, and you've also
provided excellent customer service along the way. Satisfied customers tell
others about your success and will most likely use your services in the future.
One of the key ways to ensure that customer satisfaction is achieved is to apply
appropriate project management techniques to your project. This includes taking
the time to discover all the requirements of the project and documenting them in
the scope statement. You will find that stakeholders who have a clear
understanding of the requirements and have signed off on them won't suffer from
faulty memory or pull the ever-famous "I thought that was included" technique.
Take the time to define your requirements and get stakeholder sign-off. You
can't forget or fudge what's written down.
At project closure, you will once again meet with the stakeholders to obtain their
observations and feedback on the project processes and evaluate their
satisfaction with the project results. The stakeholder management plan will be
your guide for this meeting because it describes the strategies for encouraging
stakeholder participation and the process for decision making. Together, you will
examine if these processes were successful and document what worked well and
what needs improvement on future projects.
In the following sections, I'll discuss how to juggle the competing needs of
stakeholders, how to handle the issues and problems with stakeholders, and
finally, how to balance project constraints against stakeholder needs.

Competing Needs
Stakeholders come from all areas of the organization and include your customer
Stakeholders come from all areas of the organization and include your customer
as well. Because stakeholders do not all work in the same areas, they have
competing needs and interests. One stakeholder's concern on a typical IT project
might take the form of system security issues, while another stakeholder is
concerned about ease of use. As the project manager, you will have situations in
which stakeholder needs compete with each other, and you'll have to decide
between them and set priorities. Sometimes you'll be able to accommodate their
needs, and sometimes you'll have to choose. You want to examine the needs
against the project objectives and then use your negotiation and communication
skills to convince the stakeholders of priorities.
Individual stakeholders might or might not have good working relationships with
other stakeholders. Because of this, office politics come into play. I advise you
to stay away from the politics game but get to know your stakeholders. You'll
want to understand their business processes and needs in order to make decisions
about stakeholder requirements.

Dealing with Issues and Problems
Problems will occur on your project--they're part of the process. Throughout
this book, I've talked about how to deal with problems and risks and how to use
conflict resolution techniques in handling problems. Balancing stakeholder
needs comes into play here also.
You'll have to determine alternatives that will meet the key requirements of the
project without jeopardizing the competing needs of stakeholders. Once you're
into the Executing processes of the project and beyond, redefining scope
becomes less and less of an option. So your responsibility is to resolve issues
and determine alternative solutions to problems as they occur without changing
the original objectives of the project. Enlist the help of your project team
members and stakeholders during these times. Use some of the techniques I
talked about in Chapter 6, "Risk Planning," such as brainstorming and the
Delphi technique, to find solutions.
You might also have difficulty trying to make stakeholders understand your
decision or the technical nature of a problem. Again, this is where
communication skills help you immensely. Take the case of a technical problem
that's cropped up on your project. You should not expect your stakeholder to
understand the technical aspects of rocket science if they work in the finance
department, for example. It's up to you to keep the explanation at a level they
can understand without loading them down with technical jargon and
specifications. Keep your explanations simple, yet don't skip important details
specifications. Keep your explanations simple, yet don't skip important details
they'll need to make decisions.

Balancing Constraints
Your toughest issues will almost always center on the triple constraints: time,
cost, and scope. Because of the nature of the constraints, one of these is the
primary driver, and one is the least important. Keep a close eye on stakeholders
who want to switch the priority of the constraints for their own purposes. Let's
say the project sponsor already told you that time is the primary constraint.
Another stakeholder tells you that a requirement of the project is being
overlooked and quality is suffering. Be careful that the stakeholder isn't trying to
divert the primary constraint from time to quality to suit their own objectives.



         Real World Scenario
  The Geographic Information System
  Ryan Loveland is a project manager for a multinational company. He's
  working on a complex software project that involves rewriting the
  organization's mainframe accounting system to become a browser-based
  system running on thin-client architecture. A major problem with the
  existing system occurs when new accounts are entered into the system or
  account information changes. The accounts are tied to geographic areas,
  which are assigned to individual sales associates. Sales commissions are
  paid based on where the account resides. To date, the process of determining
  which territory an account belongs to has been done manually by looking at
  a map.
  The project sponsor, Victor, requested a geographic information system
  (GIS) as part of the requirements of this project. The hope is that errors will
  be eliminated and commissions will be processed correctly. The sponsor
  hopes that Ryan's internal team can write the GIS that will tie to the
  accounting system. Let's drop in on Ryan and Victor's conversation.
  "I just don't understand," Victor says. "I can go onto that Internet site and
  plug in an address and get directions and a map detailing those directions
  from my house to anywhere in the country. It seems easy enough to me.
  Why can't your team write code like that?"
  "It isn't that we can't write a program to do that. But there are several issues
 "It isn't that we can't write a program to do that. But there are several issues
 surrounding this request that I'd like to explain to you. I'd like you to
 understand why I'm asking to purchase a software product from an external
 vendor that will take care of these functions for us."
 "Let's hear it," Victor says.
 "One of the first problems is that our sales force is multinational. It would
 take us months just to obtain address information to populate the program.
 The second issue is that our sales districts are not divided by any known
 boundaries. Most GIS systems work off latitude and longitude or geographic
 boundaries such as county borders or zip code boundaries."
 Victor interrupts, "Well, here's what we do. You give me a set of maps, I'll
 hand-draw in the sales districts, and then you can scan it into the system."
 "Unfortunately, it's not that easy. Our sales district boundaries are not
 consistent with known boundaries, and our existing address database is not
 standardized. For example, some addresses use the word Street spelled out;
 some use the abbreviation St. All of the addresses need to be standardized,
 and then we'll have to figure out which addresses belong to which territory.
 "This process could take a great deal of time. There are vendors specializing
 in GIS that could have us operational in a matter of weeks. I've already
 checked on a couple of the top vendors, and there aren't any problems
 interfacing with our new system. The time we'd save in the long run far
 outweighs the cost associated with purchasing this system from a vendor.
 And one last point: If I were to build this system internally, I'd have to take
 our top programming team off existing project priorities to put them on this.
 GIS is extremely complicated. We're talking several months' delay--if not a
 year or more--to get our programmers up to speed on GIS techniques and
 then write the programs."
 Victor says, "If we're talking about a major delay in the schedule as you say,
 we can at least look at what these vendors have to offer. It's important that
 this system is accurate as well, and I think I hear you saying, `Why reinvent
 the wheel?' Let's have a look at the costs."

We have officially closed out the project and hopefully satisfied our
stakeholders' expectations. We have also completed our study of all of the
project management processes from Initiating to Closing. But there's one more
area you need to know about for the exam. We'll look at it next.
Professional Responsibility
As a certified Project Management Professional, you are required to adhere to
the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. You can find a copy of this
code on the PMI(R) website, http://www.pmi.org/.
You should read and understand this code because you will be agreeing to
adhere to its terms as part of the certification process. The PMI(R) Code of Ethics
and Professional Conduct outlines four areas of focus:
   Responsibility
   Respect
   Fairness
   Honesty

  Exam Spotlight
  Each of these areas is described in the code, along with sections called
  "Aspirational Standards" and "Mandatory Standards" for each one. We will
  not cover every standard in this chapter, so I recommend you read them and
  understand them for the exam. The PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional
  Conduct notes that although it might be difficult to measure the aspirational
  standards, they are something we should hold ourselves and other
  practitioners accountable to and they are not optional.




  There is no section on the exam that pertains solely to professional
  responsibility. Instead, the exam incorporates professional responsibility
  concepts into other questions throughout the exam. For example, you may
  find that many of the questions in the Executing process group (and others)
  pertain to Executing concepts and professional responsibility concepts
  combined into one question. To make it easier to learn the principles in the
  professional responsibility area, I've broken this topic out into its own
  section in this chapter with questions based on these principles.
  section in this chapter with questions based on these principles.

You may find at least a few exam questions regarding professional responsibility
on the exam, so we'll look at each of these areas and a few others for good
measure.

Responsibility
Responsibility is the act of making decisions that are for the good of the
organization rather than ourselves, admitting our mistakes, being responsible for
the decisions we make (or those we don't make) and the consequences that
result, along with other actions. We'll look at several elements that fall within the
responsibility arena.

Ensuring Integrity
As a project manager, one of your professional responsibilities is to ensure
integrity of the project management process, the product, and your own personal
conduct. I've spent the majority of this book discussing how to achieve project
management integrity by following the project management processes.




  A product that has integrity is one that is complete and sound or fit for use.

Correctly applying the project management processes you've learned will ensure
the integrity of the product. The effective execution of the Planning, Executing,
and Monitoring and Controlling processes--including documenting scope,
performing quality inspections, measuring performance, and taking corrective
actions--will ensure that a quality product that satisfies the requirements of the
stakeholders (and the project management plan) is produced. As you learned
earlier, you will seek acceptance of the product from the stakeholders and
customer during the Closing process group.

Accepting Assignments
This topic, as well as many of the others discussed in these sections, crosses two
of the areas noted in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
--responsibility and honesty. You should always honestly report your
qualifications, your experience, and your past performance of services to
potential employers, customers, PMI(R), and others. You should not knowingly
accept assignments that are beyond your capabilities or experience.
Be honest about what you know and what you don't know as it relates to your
experience. For example, the Quality Management processes as described in the
PMBOK(R) Guide are used extensively in the manufacturing industry. However,
the information technology field looks at quality issues in different ways. If
you're a project manager in the information technology field, you've probably
never used control charts and cause-and-effect diagramming techniques. Don't
lead others to believe that you have used techniques you haven't used or that you
have experience you don't have.
Emphasize the knowledge you do have and how you've used it in your specific
industry, and don't try to fudge it with processes and techniques you've never
used. Potential clients and employers would much rather work with you and
provide training where you might need it than think they've got someone fully
experienced with the project or industry techniques needed for a project when
they don't.
If you're working on contract or you're self-employed, you have a responsibility
to ensure that the estimates you provide potential customers are accurate and
truthful. Clearly spell out what services you're providing and let the customer
know the results they can expect at the end of the project. Accurately represent
yourself, your qualifications, and your estimates in your advertising and in
person.

Laws and Regulations Compliance
This might seem obvious, but as a professional, you're required to follow all
applicable laws and rules and regulations that apply to your industry,
organization, or project. This includes PMI(R) organizational rules and policies as
well. You should also follow any ethical standards and principles that might
govern your industry or the state or country in which you're working. Remember
that rules or regulations you're used to in the United States might or might not
apply to other countries, and vice versa.

Confidential Information
Many project managers work for consulting firms where their services are
contracted out to organizations that need their expertise for particular projects. If
you work in a situation like this, you will likely come across information that is
sensitive or confidential. Again, this might seem obvious, but as part of the
PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, you agree not to disclose
sensitive or confidential information or use it in any way for personal gain.
Often when you work under contract, you'll be required to sign a nondisclosure
agreement. This agreement simply says that you will not share information
regarding the project or the organization with anyone--including the
organization's competitors--or use the information for your personal gain.
However, you don't have to work under contract to come into contact with
sensitive or private information. You might work full-time for an organization or
a government agency that deals with information regarding its customer base or
citizens. For example, if you work for a bank, you might have access to personal
account information. If you work for a government agency, you might have
access to personal tax records or other sensitive material. It would be highly
unethical and maybe even illegal to look up the account information of
individuals not associated with the project at hand just to satisfy your own
curiosity. In my organization, that is grounds for dismissal.




  Don't compromise your ethics or your organization's reputation by sharing
  information that is confidential to the organization or would jeopardize an
  individual's privacy.


Company Data
Although it might seem obvious that you should not use personal information or
an organization's trade secrets for personal gain, sometimes the organization has
a legitimate need to share information with vendors, governmental agencies, or
others. You need to understand which vendors or organizations are allowed to
see sensitive company data. In some cases, you might even need to help
determine which individuals can have access to the data. When in doubt, ask.
Here are some examples. Maybe the company you're working with has periodic
mailings it sends to its customer base. If one of your project activities includes
finding a new vendor to print the mailing labels, your organization might require
the vendor to sign a nondisclosure agreement to guard the contents of the
customer lists. Discovering just who should have access to this information
customer lists. Discovering just who should have access to this information
might be tricky.
Another example involves data on citizens that is maintained by the government.
You might think that because the data belongs to one agency of the government
--say the Internal Revenue Service--any other agency of the government can
have access to it. This isn't the case. Some agencies are refused access to the data
even though they might have good reason to use it. Others might have restricted
access, depending on the data and the agency policy regarding it. Don't assume
that others should have access to data because it seems logical.
Most organizations require vendors or other organizations to sign nondisclosure
agreements when the vendors or others will have access to sensitive company
data. It's your responsibility to ensure that the proper nondisclosure agreements
are signed prior to releasing the data. The procurement department often handles
this function.

Intellectual Property
You are likely to come into contact with intellectual property during the course
of your project management career. Intellectual property includes items
developed by an organization that have commercial value but are not tangible
and copyrighted material such as books (including this one), software, and
artistic works. It might also include ideas or processes that are patented. Or it
might involve an industrial process, business process, or manufacturing process
that was developed by the organization for a specific purpose.
Intellectual property is owned by the business or person who created it. You
might have to pay royalties or ask for written permission to use the property.
Intellectual property should be treated just like sensitive or confidential data. It
should not be used for personal gain or shared with others who should not have
access to it.

Respect
Respect involves several areas as well, including the way we conduct ourselves,
the way we treat others, listening to other viewpoints, conducting ourselves in a
professional manner, and so on. We'll look at some of the elements of respect
next.

Professional Demeanor
Acting in a professional manner is required of almost everyone who works in the
business world. Although you are not responsible for the actions of others, you
are responsible for your own actions and reactions. Part of acting professionally
involves controlling yourself and your reactions in questionable situations. For
example, a stakeholder or customer might lash out at you but have no basis for
their outburst. You can't control what they said or did, but you can control how
you respond. As a professional, your concern for the project and the organization
should take precedence over your concern for your own feelings. Therefore,
lashing out in return would be unprofessional. Maintain your professional
demeanor, and don't succumb to shouting matches or ego competitions with
others.
As project manager, you have a good deal of influence over your project team
members. One of the items on the agenda at the project team kickoff meeting
should be a discussion of where the team members can find a copy of
organizational policies regarding conflict of interest, cultural diversity, standards
and regulations, and customer service and standards of performance. Better yet,
have copies with you that you can hand out at the meeting or have available the
addresses of websites where they can find these documents.
When you see project team members acting out of turn or with less-than-
desirable customer service attitudes, coach and influence those team members to
conform to the standards of conduct expected by you and your organization.
Your team members represent you and the project. As such, they should act
professionally. It's your job as the project leader to ensure that they do.

Reporting Ethics Violations
When you hold the PMP(R) certification, one of the responsibilities that falls into
this category is your responsibility to report violations of the PMP(R) code of
conduct. To maintain integrity of the profession, everyone who holds the PMP(R)
certification must adhere to the code of conduct that makes all of us accountable
to each other.
When you know a violation has occurred and you've verified the facts, notify
PMI(R). Part of this process--and a requirement of the code of conduct--is that
you'll verify that an ethics violation has occurred (in other words, don't report
bogus or unsubstantiated reports) and will assist PMI(R) in the investigation by
supplying information, confirming facts and dates, and so on. This includes
anything listed as violations in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct, such as conflicts of interest, untruthful advertising, false reporting of
project management experience and credentials, appearances of impropriety, and
so on. This one calls for some judgment on your part, but it's mostly based on
common sense. For example, in most situations, a project manager with the
PMP(R) designation should not have a family member working on the project
team reporting to them (unless they own and run a family business).

Cultural Awareness
More and more companies compete in the global marketplace. As a result,
project managers with multinational experience are increasingly in demand. This
requires a heightened awareness of cultural influences and customary practices
of the country where they're temporarily residing.
If you are used to working in the United States, for example, you know that the
culture tends to value accomplishments and individualism. US citizens tend to be
informal and call each other by their first names, even if they've just met. In
some European countries, people tend to be more formal, using surnames instead
of first names in a business setting, even when they know each other well. Their
communication style is more formal than in the United States, and although they
tend to value individualism, they also value history, hierarchy, and loyalty. The
Japanese, on the other hand, tend to communicate indirectly and consider
themselves part of a group, not as individuals. The Japanese value hard work and
success, as most of us do.
One thing I've witnessed when working in foreign countries is US citizens trying
to force their own culture or customs on those with whom they're visiting or
working. That isn't recommended, and it generally offends those you're trying to
impress. Don't expect others to conform to your way of doing things, especially
when you're in their country. You know the saying "When in Rome, do as the
Romans do." Although you might not want to take that literally, the intent is
good. For example, a quick kiss on both cheeks is a customary greeting in many
countries. If that is the case and it's how you're greeted, respond with the same.

Culture Shock
Working in a foreign country can bring about an experience called culture shock.
When you've spent years acting certain ways and expecting normal, everyday
events to follow a specific course of action, you might find yourself disoriented
when things don't go as you expected.
One of the ways you can avoid culture shock is to read about the country you're
going to work in before getting there. The Internet is a great resource for
information such as this. Your local library is another place to research customs
information such as this. Your local library is another place to research customs
and acceptable practices in foreign countries.
When in doubt about a custom or what you should do in a given situation, ask
your hosts or a trusted contact from the company you'll be working with to help
you. People are people all over the world, and they love to talk about themselves
and their cultures. They're also generally helpful, and they will respect you more
for asking what's expected rather than acting as though you know what to do
when you clearly do not.

Diversity Training
Sometimes you might find yourself working with teams of people from different
countries or cultures. Some team members might be from one country and some
from another. The best way to ensure that cultural or ethical differences do not
hinder your project is to provide training for all team members.
Team-building activities are ways to build mutual trust and respect and bond
team members with differing backgrounds. Choose activities that are inoffensive
and ones in which everyone can participate.
Diversity training makes people aware of differences between cultures and
ethnic groups, and it helps them to gain respect and trust for those on their team.
Provide training regarding the project objectives and the company culture as
well.




  Remember that project objectives are why you are all together in the first
  place. Keeping the team focused on the objectives cuts across cultural
  boundaries and will help everyone concentrate on the project and tasks at
  hand rather than each other.


Respecting Your Neighbors
Americans tend to run their lives at high speed and get right down to business
when working with vendors or customers. It isn't unusual for a businessperson to
board a plane in the morning, show up at the client site and take care of business,
and hop another flight to the next client site that night.
You'll find that this is not that common in many other countries. People in other
You'll find that this is not that common in many other countries. People in other
countries will often expect you to take time to get to know them first, building an
atmosphere of trust and respect. Some cultures build relationships first and then
proceed to business. Don't expect to do that relationship building in a few hours.
It could take several days, depending on the culture. They might even want you
to meet their family and spend time getting to know them. Resist the urge to get
right down to business if that's not customary in the culture because you'll likely
spoil the deal or damage relationships past the point of repair.




  Spend time building relationships with others. Once an atmosphere of
  mutual trust and cooperation is established, all aspects of project planning
  and management--including negotiating and problem solving--are much
  easier to navigate.


Perceiving Experiences
All of us see the world through our own experiences. Your experiences are not
someone else's experiences; therefore, what you perceive about a situation might
be very different from what others believe. Keep this in mind when it appears
that a misunderstanding has occurred or that someone you're working with
doesn't respond as you expect. This is especially true when you're working with
someone from another country. Always give others the benefit of the doubt and
ask for clarification if you think there is a problem. Put your feelings in check
temporarily, and remember that what you think the other person means is not
necessarily as it appears.

Fairness
Fairness includes avoiding favoritism and discrimination against others,
avoiding and reporting conflict of interest situations, and maintaining
impartiality in a decision-making process. We'll focus on conflict of interest in
this section.

Conflict of Interest
The PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct discusses your
responsibility to report to the stakeholders, customers, or others any actions or
circumstances that could be construed as a conflict of interest.
A conflict of interest is when you put your personal interests above the interests
of the project or when you use your influence to cause others to make decisions
in your favor without regard for the project outcome. In other words, your
personal interests take precedence over your professional obligations, and you
make decisions that allow you to personally benefit regardless of the outcome of
the project. Let's look at a few examples.

Associations and Affiliations
Conflicts of interest might include your associations or affiliations. For example,
perhaps your brother-in-law owns his own construction company and you are the
project manager who has just published an RFP. Your brother-in-law bids on the
project and ends up winning the bid.
If you sit on the decision committee and don't tell anyone about your association
with the winning bidder, that is clearly a conflict of interest. If you influence the
bid decision so that it goes to your brother-in-law, he benefits from your
position. Alternatively, if you are not so fond of your brother-in-law, you could
influence the decision against him, in which case he loses the bid. Either way,
this is a conflict of interest. You put your personal interests--or in this case the
interests of your associations--above the project outcome. Even if you did not
influence the decision in any way, when others on the project discover the
winning bidder is your brother-in-law, they will assume a conflict of interest
occurred. This could jeopardize the awarding of the bid and your own position as
well.
The correct thing to do in this case would be to, first, inform the project sponsor
and the decision committee that your brother-in-law intends to bid on the
project. Second, refrain from participating on the award-decision committee so
as not to unduly influence others in favor of your brother-in-law. Last, if you've
done all these things and your brother-in-law still wins the bid, appoint someone
else in your organization to administer the contract and make the payments for
the work performed by him. Also, make certain you document the decisions you
make regarding the activities performed by him and keep them with the project
files. The more documentation you have, the less likely someone can make a
conflict of interest accusation stick.

Vendor Gifts
Some professionals work in situations where they are not allowed to accept gifts
in excess of certain dollar amounts. This might be driven by company policy, the
in excess of certain dollar amounts. This might be driven by company policy, the
department manager's policy, and so on. I have worked in organizations where it
was considered a conflict of interest to accept anything from a vendor, including
gifts (no matter how small), meals, or even a cup of coffee. Vendors and
suppliers often provide their customers and potential customers with lunches,
gifts, ball game tickets, and the like. It's your responsibility to know whether a
policy exists that forbids you from accepting these gifts. It's also your
responsibility to inform the vendor if they've gone over the limit and you are
unable to accept the gift.
The same situation can occur here as with the brother-in-law example earlier. If
you accept an expensive gift from a vendor and later award that vendor a
contract or a piece of the project work, it looks like and probably is a conflict of
interest. This violates PMI(R) guidelines and doesn't look good for you personally
either.




  Using the "I didn't know there was a policy" excuse probably won't save you
  when there's a question about conflict of interest. Make it your business to
  find out whether the organization has a conflict of interest policy and
  understand exactly what it says. Get a copy, and keep it with your files.
  Review it periodically. Put a note on your calendar every six months to
  reread the policy to keep it fresh in your mind. This is a case where not
  knowing what you don't know can hurt you.

Don't accept gifts that might be construed as conflicts of interest. If your
organization does not have a policy regarding vendor gifts, set limits for yourself
depending on the situation, the history of gift acceptance by the organization in
the past, and the complexity of the project. It's always better to decline a gift
you're unsure about than to accept it and later lose your credibility, your
reputation, or your PMP(R) status because of bad judgment.

Stakeholder Influence
Another potential area for conflict of interest comes from stakeholders.
Stakeholders are usually folks with a good deal of authority and important
positions in the company. Make certain you do not put your own personal
interests above the interests of the project when you're dealing with powerful
interests above the interests of the project when you're dealing with powerful
stakeholders. They might have the ability to promote you or reward you in other
ways. That's not a bad thing--but if you let that get in the way of the project or
let a stakeholder twist your arm with promises of rewards, you're getting mighty
close to a conflict of interest. Always weigh your decisions with the objectives
of the project and the organization in mind--not your own personal gain.
Keep in mind that you might not always be on the receiving end of the spectrum.
You should not offer inappropriate gifts or services or use confidential
information you have at your disposal to assist others because this can also be
considered a conflict of interest.



         Real World Scenario

  The Golf Trip
  Amanda Anderson is the project manager for a network upgrade project for
  her organization. This project will be outsourced to a vendor, and Amanda
  will manage the vendor's work. She also wrote the RFP and is a member of
  the selection committee.
  The project consists of converting the organization's network from 100 MB
  Ethernet to Gigabit Ethernet. This will require replacing all of the routers
  and switches. Some of the cabling in the buildings will need to be replaced
  as well. The RFP requires that the vendor who wins the bid install all the
  new equipment and replace the network interface cards in each of the servers
  with Gigabit Ethernet cards. The grand total for this project is estimated at
  $1.2 million.
  Steve James is a vendor with whom Amanda has worked in the past. Steve is
  very interested in winning this bid. He drops in on Amanda one day shortly
  after the RFP is posted.
  "Amanda, it's good to see you," Steve says. "I was in the neighborhood and
  thought I'd stop in to see how things are going."
  "I'm great," Amanda replies. "I'll bet you're here to talk to me about that
  RFP. You know I can't say anything until the whole process closes."
  "You bet we bid on the project. I know you can't talk about the RFP, so I
  won't bring it up. I wanted to chat with you about something else. My
  company is sending 15 lucky contestants and one friend each to Scottsdale,
  company is sending 15 lucky contestants and one friend each to Scottsdale,
  Arizona, for a `conference.' The conference includes the use of the
  Scottsdale Golf Club (green fees paid, of course), and all the hotel and meal
  expenses are on us for the length of the trip. I know Scottsdale is one of your
  favorite places to golf, so I thought of you. What do you say?"
  Amanda sits forward in her chair and looks at Steve for a minute. "That
  sounds fabulous, and I do love Scottsdale. But you and I both know this isn't
  a conference. I wouldn't feel right about accepting it."
  "Come on, Amanda. Don't look a gift horse in the mouth. It is a conference.
  I'll be there and so will the top brass from the company. We have some
  presentations and demonstrations we'd like to show you while you're there,
  no obligation of course, and then you're free to spend the rest of the time
  however you'd like."
  "I appreciate the offer. Thanks for thinking of me, but no thanks. I'm on the
  selection committee for the RFP, and it would be a conflict of interest if I
  attended this conference. Besides, the value of the conference is over the
  $100 limit our company sets for vendor gifts and meals," Amanda says.
  "Okay, we'll miss you. Maybe next time."


Honesty
Honesty can include a lot of topics: reporting the truth regarding project status,
being honest about your own experience, not deceiving others, not making false
statements, and so on.
One of the aspects of honesty includes your truthfulness about your PMP(R)
application and certification, your qualifications, and the continuing reports you
provide to PMI(R) to maintain your certification. Let's look at a few others.

Personal Gain
Honesty involves not only information regarding your own background and
experience but information regarding the project circumstances as well. For
example, let's say you're a project manager working on contract. Part of your
compensation consists of a bonus based on total project billing. Now, let's
suppose your project is finishing sooner than anticipated, and this means your
personal profit will decrease by $1,500. Should you stretch the work to meet the
original contracted amount so that your personal bonus comes in at the full
amount even though your project team is finished? I think you know the answer
is of course not.
Your personal gain should never be a consideration when billing a customer or
working on a project. Personal gain should never be a factor in any project
decision. If the project finishes sooner than planned, you should bill the
customer according to the terms of the procurement agreement. Compromising
the project for the sake of your personal gain shows a lack of integrity, which
could ultimately cost you your PMP(R) status and even your job.

Truthful Reporting
As a project manager, you are responsible for truthfully reporting all information
in your possession to stakeholders, customers, the project sponsor, and the public
when required. Always be up front regarding the project's progress.




  Nothing good will come of telling stakeholders or customers that the project
  is on track and everything looks great when in fact the project is behind
  schedule or several unknown risk events have occurred that have thrown the
  project team a curveball. I've personally witnessed the demise of the careers
  of project managers who chose this route.

Tell the truth regarding project status, even when things don't look good.
Stakeholders will likely go to great lengths to help you solve problems or
brainstorm solutions. Sometimes, though, the call needs to be made to kill the
project. This decision is usually made by the project sponsor or the stakeholders
based on your recommendation and predictions of future project activities. Don't
skew the reporting to prevent stakeholders from making this decision when it is
the best solution based on the circumstances.
Truthful reporting is required when working with the public as well. When
working in situations where the public is at risk, truthfully report the facts of the
situation and what steps you're taking to counteract or reduce the threats. I
recommend you get approval from the organization regarding public
announcements prior to reporting the facts. Many organizations have public
relations departments that will handle this situation for you.
  You probably remember something your mother always told you: Actions
  speak louder than words. Always remember that you lead by example. Your
  team members are watching. If you are driven by high personal ethics and a
  strong desire for providing excellent customer service, those who work for
  you will likely follow your lead.


Role Delineation Study
In addition to the areas covered in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct, you should be aware of four other focus areas that PMI(R) discusses in
its role delineation study. This study was published in PMI(R)'s publication
Project Management Professional (PMP(R)) Examination Specification. The four
focus areas are as follows:
   Ensure personal integrity and professionalism.
   Contribute to the project management knowledge base.
   Enhance personal professional competence.
   Promote interaction among team members and other stakeholders.
Throughout this chapter, I've covered most of the concepts surrounding these
focus areas with the exception of contributing to the project management
knowledge base. We'll look at that topic next.

Applying Professional Knowledge
Professional knowledge involves the knowledge of project management
practices as well as specific industry or technical knowledge required to
complete an assignment.
As a PMP(R) credential holder, you should apply project management knowledge
to all your projects. Take the opportunity to educate others by keeping them up-
to-date on project management practices, training your team members to use the
correct techniques, informing stakeholders of the correct processes, and then
sticking to those processes throughout the course of the project. This isn't always
easy, especially when the organization doesn't have any formal processes in
place. But once the stakeholders see the benefits of good project management
practices, they'll never go back to the "old" way of performing their projects.
One way to apply professional knowledge is to become and remain
knowledgeable in project management best practices techniques. I'll cover this
topic next, along with how to become a PMI(R) education provider and the
importance of having industry knowledge.

Project Management Knowledge
Project management is a growing field. Part of the responsibility when you hold
the PMP(R) designation is to stay abreast of project management practices,
theories, and techniques. You can do this in many ways, one of which includes
joining a local PMI(R) chapter. There are hundreds of local chapters throughout
the United States and in other countries as well. You can check the PMI(R)
website to find a chapter near you.
Chapter meetings give you the opportunity to meet other project managers, find
out what techniques they're using, and seek advice regarding your project.
Usually, guest speakers appear at each chapter meeting and share their
experiences and tips. Their stories are always interesting, and they give you the
opportunity to learn from someone else's experiences and avoid making wrong
turns on your next project. You might have a few stories of your own worth
sharing with your local chapter. Volunteer to be a speaker at an upcoming
meeting, and let others learn from your experiences.
One of the things you'll get when you join the PMI(R) organization and pay your
yearly dues is its monthly magazine. This publication details real-life projects
and the techniques and issues project managers have to deal with on those
projects. Reading the magazine is a great way to learn new project management
techniques or reinforce the information you already know. You might discover
how to apply some of the knowledge you've already learned in more efficient
ways as well.
PMI(R) offers educational courses through its local chapters and at the national
level as well. These courses are yet another way for you to learn about project
management and meet others in your field.

Education Providers
PMI(R) has a program that allows you or your organization to become a
Registered Education Provider (REP). This enables you--once you're certified--
to conduct PMI(R)-sanctioned project management training, seminars, and
conferences. The best part is that your attendees are awarded professional
development units (PDUs) for attending the training or seminar. As a PMP(R)
credential holder, and especially as an REP, you have a responsibility to the
profession and to PMI(R) to provide truthful information regarding the PMI(R)
certification process, the exam applications, the PDU requirements, and so on.
Keep up to date on PMI's certification process by periodically checking the
website.

Industry Knowledge
Contributing and applying professional knowledge goes beyond project
management experience. You likely have specific industry or technical
experience as well. Part of applying your professional knowledge includes
gaining knowledge of your particular industry and keeping others informed of
advances in these areas.
Information technology has grown exponentially over the past several years. It
used to be that if you specialized in network operations, for example, it was
possible to learn and become proficient in all things related to networks. Today
that is no longer the case. Each specialized area within information technology
has grown to become a knowledge area in and of itself. Many other fields have
either always had individual specialties or just recently experienced this
phenomenon, including the medical field, bioengineering, manufacturing, and
pharmaceuticals, to name a few. You need to stay up-to-date regarding your
industry so that you can apply that knowledge effectively. Today's fast-paced
advances can leave you behind fairly quickly if you don't stay on top of things.
Earlier in the book, I mentioned that as a project manager you are not required to
be a technical expert, and that still holds true. But it doesn't hurt to stay abreast
of industry trends and knowledge in your field and have a general understanding
of the specifics of your business. Again, you can join industry associations and
take educational classes to stay on top of breaking trends and technology in your
industry.



         Real World Scenario
Project Case Study: New Kitchen Heaven Retail Store
Dirk strolls into your office maintaining his formal and dignified manners as
always and then sits down in the chair beside your desk.
"I just want to congratulate you on a job well done," he says. "The grand
opening was a success, and the store had a better-than-expected first week.
I'm impressed you were able to pull this off and get the store opened prior to
the Home and Garden Show. That was the key to the great opening week."
"Thank you, Dirk. Lots of people put in a lot of hard work and extra hours to
get this job done. I'm glad you're happy with the results."
"I thought the banner with our logo, `Great Gadgets for People Interested in
Great Food,' was a wonderful touch."
"That was Jill's idea. She had some great ideas that made the festivities
successful. As you know, though," you continue, "we did have some
problems on this project. Fortunately, they weren't insurmountable, but I
think we learned a thing or two during this project that we can carry forward
to other projects."
"Like what?" Dirk asks.
"We should have contracted with Gomez Construction sooner so that we
didn't have to pay overtime. We had a very generous budget, so the overtime
expense didn't impact this project, but it might impact the next one. And we
came fairly close to having a hardware disaster on our hands. Next time, we
should order the equipment sooner, test it here at headquarters first, and then
ship it out to the site after we know everything is working correctly."
"Good ideas. But that's old news." Dirk continues, "Now that this project is
over, I'd like to get you started on the next project. We're going to introduce
cooking classes in all of our retail stores. The focus is the home chef, and we
might just call the classes the Home Chef Pro series. We'll offer basic
classes all the way to professional-series classes if the project is a hit. We'll
bring in guest chefs from the local areas to give demos and teach some of the
classes as well."
"I'm very interested in taking on this project and can't wait to get started. I'm
thrilled that you want me to head this up. But I do have a few things here to
wrap up before I start work on the new project," you reply.
Dirk says, "The project is over. The grand opening was a success. It's time to
Dirk says, "The project is over. The grand opening was a success. It's time to
move on. Let Jill take over now; the retail stores are her responsibility."
"Jill has taken over the day-to-day operations. However, I've got to finish
collecting the project information, close out the contract with Gomez, and
make the final payment. Jake verified that all the work was completed
correctly and to his satisfaction. Then I need to publish the formal
acceptance notice to all of the stakeholders via email. I will also create a
document that outlines the things I mentioned earlier that we should
remember and reference during the next project; that document is called
lessons learned. Then, after all those things are completed, all of the project
records need to be indexed and archived. I can have all that done by the end
of the week and will be free starting Monday to work on requirements-
gathering and the charter document for the new project."
"This is just like the planning process discussion we got into with the tree,
the breakdown structure thing, and all the planning, I suspect. I do have to
admit all the planning paid off." As he gets up to leave, Dirk continues, "I'll
give you until the end of the week to close out this project. Come see me
Monday to get started on Home Chef Pro."
Jill Overstreet thought you did such a great job of managing this project that
she has offered to buy you lunch at one of those upscale, white-tablecloth-
type French restaurants. The iced teas have just been delivered, and you and
Jill are chatting about business.
"I'm impressed with your project management skills," she remarks. "This
store opening was the best on record. And you really kept Dirk in line--I
admire that. He can be headstrong, but you had a way of convincing him
what needed doing and then sticking to it."
"Thanks," you reply. "I've got several years of project management
experience, so many of those lessons learned on previous projects helped me
out with this project. I enjoy project management and read books and articles
on the subject whenever I get the chance. It's nice when you can learn from
others' mistakes and avoid making them yourself."
Jill takes a long drink of tea. She glances at you over the top of her glass and
pauses before setting it down. "You know," she starts, "We almost didn't
hire anyone for your position. Dirk wanted to do away with the project
management role altogether. He had a real distaste for project management
after our last project."
"Why is that?"
"Why is that?"
"The last project manager got involved in a conflict of interest situation. She
was working on a project that involved updating and remodeling all the
existing stores. Things like new fixtures, signs, shelving, display cases, and
such were up for bid--and it was a very sizable bid. Not only did she accept
an all-expenses-paid weekend visit to a resort town from one of the vendors
bidding on the contract, she also revealed company secrets to them, some of
which leaked to our competitors."
Your mouth drops open. "I can't believe she would accept gifts like that
from a vendor. Revealing company secrets is even worse. Conflict of interest
situations and not protecting intellectual property violate the code of
professional conduct that we agree to when we gain PMP(R) certification. I
can understand why Dirk didn't want to hire another project manager.
Behavior like that makes all project managers look bad."
"I'm glad you kept things aboveboard and won Dirk back over. The project
management role is important to Kitchen Heaven, and I know your skills in
this discipline are what made this project such a success."
"Jill, not only would I never compromise my own integrity through a
conflict of interest situation, I would report the situation and the vendor to
the project sponsor and to PMI(R) as an ethics violation. It's better to be honest
and let the project sponsor or key stakeholders know what's happening than
to hide the situation or, even worse, compromise your own integrity by
getting involved in it in the first place. You have my word that I'll keep
business interests above my own personal interests. I'll report anything that
even looks like it would call my actions into question just to keep things
honest and out in the open."
"That's good to hear," Jill replies. "Congratulations on your new assignment.
Dirk and I were discussing the new Home Chef Pro project yesterday. We're
venturing into new territory with this project, and I'm confident you'll do an
excellent job heading it up. Dirk made a good choice."
Project Case Study Checklist
   Close Project or Phase
       Product verification (work was correct and satisfactory)
       Collecting project documents
       Disseminating final acceptance notice
         Documenting lessons learned
         Archiving project records
     Close Procurements
         Product verification (work was correct and satisfactory)
         Formal acceptance and closure
     Adhering to the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
         Ensuring personal and professional integrity
         Not placing personal gain above business needs
         Avoiding conflict of interest situations
         Truthfully reporting questionable situations and maintaining honesty
         Protecting intellectual property


Understanding How This Applies to Your Next
Project
Closing out the project should always include a formal sign-off (from the project
sponsor and key stakeholders at a minimum) that the work of the project is
acceptable and complete. You've probably experienced, as I have, stakeholders
with short-term memory lapses. For example, I'll get to the end of the project and
find that a stakeholder has a list of additional requirements longer than their arm.
Some of this goes back to ensuring that requirements are accurately defined
during the Planning processes and that ongoing communication regarding
project status, along with feedback from the stakeholders, is occurring on a
regular basis. Another key here is making certain you are managing stakeholder
expectations throughout the project. You might indeed have identified all the
requirements and accurately documented the objective of the project. However,
if the stakeholder had expectations that weren't captured or that took shape after
the work of the project began, you could end up with a very unhappy stakeholder
on your hands and, potentially, a failed project. In my experience, stakeholder
expectations tend to stray midway through the project. That's because they are
beginning to see nearly completed deliverables and new possibilities for the
product are developing that weren't thought of during the Planning stage. It's
similar to buying a new house based on blueprints and then going on that first
walk-through when the framing is finished. It's during walk-through that you
walk-through when the framing is finished. It's during walk-through that you
think, "Gee, I thought that closet was bigger than this." Tune into what your
stakeholders are saying and get at the basis of their questions (dig deep) so that
there are no hidden expectations and you're able to manage any new expectations
that pop up.
The professional responsibility section of this chapter can easily be boiled down
to the Golden Rule: "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you." I
wish I could tell you that everything I talked about here is practiced by all
project managers everywhere. Unfortunately, you've likely read, as I have, the
endless stories in the news about corporate execs acting in their own best interest
rather than that of their organizations. Project managers make the news as well,
especially when they're working on projects that involve public funds or
charitable organizations. In my humble opinion, ignoring the practices and
advice in this chapter isn't worth the damage it might cause to my organization,
to the project, or to my career.
I'd also add that if your first thought on a new project is what a great resume
builder it's going to be for you and how you'll likely score that next big
promotion after the project is complete, you've started off on the wrong foot.
Although I'm the first to admit big projects (when they are executed well and
satisfy the stakeholder expectations) are resume builders, it's the wrong reason to
take on a project. Consider your experience level and how and what you'll be
able to contribute to the project to make it a success. It's okay if the project is a
stretch for you--you can't grow your experience without taking on more
complex projects as your career progresses. But also be wise enough to know
when you might be in over your head.
There's no substitute for integrity and honesty when conducting your projects.
Once you've tarnished your integrity, whether intentionally or not, it's almost
impossible to regain the trust of your stakeholders and management staff.
Because of this, I'm never afraid of telling anyone, "I don't know," but I always
follow it up with, "But I'll find out." You're a project manager, not a miracle
worker. No one expects you to have all the answers any more than they expect
you to perform every single task on the project.
I had the unfortunate experience of being instructed to lie about project status
and to purposely withhold project information from oversight boards. I spent a
few sleepless nights worrying about where I'd find my next job because I
immediately disobeyed those orders and reported the truth. I knew it would cost
me my job. But I also knew it was better for me to lose the job than to
compromise my integrity. As it turned out, I found a new job quickly. In
compromise my integrity. As it turned out, I found a new job quickly. In
retrospect, if I had not left the position when I did, my reputation would have
taken a hit--not because of anything I had done but through association with the
people on the project who compromised when they shouldn't have.
I hope you've found this study guide helpful both for your studies for the PMP(R)
exam and for your next project. Thank you for spending some time with me in
the pages of this book. I wish you the best of luck in your project management
endeavors.


Summary
Project closure is the most often neglected process of all the project management
processes. The two processes in the Closing process group are Close Project or
Phase and Close Procurements. The four most important tasks of closure are as
follows:
   Checking the work for completeness and accuracy
   Documenting formal acceptance
   Disseminating project closure information
   Archiving records and lessons learned
Close Project or Phase involves analyzing the project management processes to
determine their effectiveness and to document lessons learned concerning them.
It also involves archiving all project documents for historical reference and
performing administrative closure procedures for the project. Documenting the
formal acceptance of the project product is an important aspect of project closure
as well because this ensures that the project scope, compared to the project
management plan, is complete and accurate and meets the exit criteria.
Ultimately, you want to assure that the stakeholder or customer is satisfied with
the work of the project and that it meets their needs.
Projects come to an end in one of four ways: addition, starvation, integration, or
extinction. Addition is when projects evolve into their own business unit.
Starvation happens because the project is starved of its resources. Integration
occurs when resources are taken from the existing project and dispersed back
into the organization or assigned to other projects. Extinction is the best ending
because the project was completed, accepted, and closed.
Close Project or Phase is performed at the end of each phase of the project as
well as at the end of the project. Close Project or Phase involves documenting
formal acceptance and disseminating notice of acceptance to the stakeholders,
customer, and others. All documentation gathered during the project and
collected during this process is archived and saved for reference purposes on
future projects.
Close Procurements is concerned with settling the contract and completing the
contract according to its terms. Its primary outputs include the contract file and
formal acceptance and closure (both are components of the organizational
process assets updates).
Lessons learned document the successes and failures of the project and of the
procurement processes. Many times lessons learned are not documented because
staff members do not want to assign their names to project errors or failures.
You and your management team need to work together to assure employees that
lessons learned are not exercises used for disciplinary purposes but benefit both
the employee and the organization. Documenting what you've learned from past
experiences lets you carry this forward to new projects so that the same errors
are not repeated. It also allows you to incorporate new methods of performing
activities that you learned on past projects.
Project management professionals are responsible for reporting truthful
information about their PMP(R) status and project management experience to
prospective customers, clients, employers, and PMI(R). As a project manager,
you're responsible for the integrity of the project management process and the
product. In all situations, you are responsible for your own personal integrity.
Personal integrity means adhering to an ethical standard. As part of your PMP(R)
designation, you'll be required to adhere to the Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct established by PMI(R). Part of this code involves avoiding putting your
own personal gain above the project objectives.
As a professional, you should strive to maintain honesty in project reporting.
You're required to abide by laws, rules, and regulations regarding your industry
and project management practices. You should also report any instance that
might appear to be a conflict of interest. It's always better to inform others of an
apparent conflict than to have it discovered by others and have your methods
called into question after the fact.
You will likely come across confidential information or intellectual property
during your project management experiences. Respect the use of this
information and always verify who might have permission to access the
information and when disclosures are required.
information and when disclosures are required.
Stakeholders have competing needs and business issues and as such will
sometimes cause conflict on your project. You will be required to balance the
needs and interests of the stakeholders with the project objectives.
Many project managers today are working in a global environment. It's
important to respect and understand the cultural differences that exist and not try
to impose your cultural beliefs on others. Culture shock is an experience that
occurs when you find yourself in an unfamiliar cultural environment. Training is
a good way to provide project team members with relationship management
techniques regarding cultural and ethnic differences.

Exam Essentials
Be able to name the primary activity of the Closing processes. The key
activity of these processes is concerned with completing all the activities
associated with closing out the project management processes in order to
officially close out the project or phase.
Be able to describe when the Close Project or Phase process is performed.
Close Project or Phase is performed at the close of each project phase and at the
close of the project.
Be able to define the purpose of lessons learned. The purpose of lessons
learned is to describe the project successes and failures and to use the
information learned on future projects.
Be able to name the publication that describes the ethical standards to
which PMP(R) credential holders are required to adhere. The ethical
standards PMP(R) credential holders are required to adhere to are described in the
PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
Describe the areas in which PMP(R) credential holders must apply
professional knowledge. PMP(R) credential holders must apply professional
knowledge in the areas of project management practices, industry practices, and
technical areas.
Know the key activity that ensures customer satisfaction. The key activity
that ensures customer satisfaction is documenting project requirements and
meeting them.
Define how multinational project managers must manage relationships.
Multinational project managers manage relationships by building relationships
based on mutual trust and acceptance and by recognizing and respecting diverse
cultures and ethnic beliefs.

Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix A.
1. You are the project manager for a top-secret software project for an agency
   of the United States government. Your mission--should you choose to
   accept it--is to complete the project using internal resources. Finding
   contractors with top-secret clearances takes quite a bit of time, and waiting
   for clearances would jeopardize the implementation date. Your programmers
   are 80 percent of the way through the programming and testing work when
   your agency appoints a new executive director. Slowly but surely your
   programmers are taken off this project and reassigned to the executive
   director's hot new project. Which of the following types of project ending is
   this?
   A. Starvation
   B. Extinction
   C. Addition
   D. Integration
2. You are a project manager for Cinema Snicker Productions. Your company
   specializes in producing comedy films for the big screen. Your latest project
   has just been canceled because of budget cuts. Which of the following
   statements is true?
   A. This project ended due to starvation because the funding was cut off.
   B. This project ended due to integration because the resources were
      distributed elsewhere.
   C. This project ended due to starvation because the resources were
      distributed elsewhere.
   D. This project ended due to integration because the funding was cut off.
3. You are a project manager for Cinema Snicker Productions. Your company
   specializes in producing comedy films for the big screen. Your latest project
   has just been completed and accepted. You've been given your next project,
   which starts right away. Which of the following statements is true?
   A. This project ended due to extinction because it was completed and
      accepted.
   B. This project ended due to integration because it was completed and
      accepted and the project manager moved on to a new project.
   C. This project ended due to addition because it was completed, accepted,
      and archived into the company's catalog of available films.
   D. This project ended due to integration because it was completed and
      accepted.
4. You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project
   involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers.
   You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close
   Procurements process and know that you should document and file which of
   the following?
   A. Administrative closure procedures
   B. Close Procurements procedures
   C. Formal acceptance
   D. Product verification
5. You are a project manager for Dutch Harbor Consulting. Your latest project
   involves the upgrade of an organization's operating system on 236 servers.
   You performed this project under contract. You are in the Close
   Procurements process and have reviewed the contracting process to identify
   lessons learned. What is the name of the tool and technique you will use to
   perform this function?
   A. Procurement audits
   B. Performance reviews
   C. Performance audits
   D. Procurement reviews
6. Your project was just completed. Because of some unfortunate
   circumstances, the project was delayed, causing cost overruns at the end of
   the project. Which of the following statements is true?
   A. You should document the circumstances as lessons learned.
   B. You should pay particular attention to archiving the financial records for
      this project.
   C. Your project ended because of starvation because of the cost overruns.
   D. You should document the circumstances surrounding the project
      completion during the Scope Verification process.
7. Procurement audits review which of the following?
   A. The procurement processes from Plan Procurement Management through
      Close Procurements
   B. The procurement processes from Plan Procurement Management through
      Control Procurements
   C. The Plan Procurement Management and Conduct Procurements
      processes
   D. The procurement processes from Plan Procurement Management through
      Close Project or Phase process
8. As a project manager, you're responsible for maintaining and ensuring
   integrity for all of the following except which one?
   A. Personal integrity of others
   B. Project management process
   C. Personal integrity
   D. Product integrity
9. You are a project manager working on contract. You've performed earned
   value analysis and discovered that the project will be completed on time and
   under the original estimated amount. This means the profit to your company
   will decrease, as will your personal bonus. Which of the following should
   you do?
   A. Add activities to the project to increase the cost enough to meet the
      original estimated amount.
   B. Tell the customer you're adding requirements to the project that were
      originally cut because of cost constraints.
    C. Upon completion, inform the customer the project has come in under
       budget.
    D. Bill the customer for the full amount of the contract because this was the
       original agreed-on price.
10. You are a project manager for a manufacturing firm that produces Civil
    War-era replicas and memorabilia. You discover a design error during a test
    production run on your latest project. Time is a critical constraint on this
    project. Which of the following is the most likely response to this problem?
    A. Reduce the technical requirements so that the error is no longer valid.
    B. Go forward with production and ignore the error.
    C. Go forward with production, but inform the customer of the problem.
    D. Develop alternative solutions to address the error.
11. You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on
    a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The
    estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are
    reviewing products from three different vendors. One of the competing
    vendors invites you to lunch. What is the most appropriate response?
    A. Thank them, but let them know this could be a conflict of interest since
       you haven't made a decision about which vendor you're going to choose.
    B. Thank them, and decline. You know this could be considered personal
       gain, which could call your integrity into question.
    C. Thank them, and accept. You don't believe there is a conflict of interest
       or a personal integrity issue.
    D. Thank them, and decline. You believe this could be a conflict of interest
       on the part of the vendor, and you don't want to encourage that behavior.
12. You are a project manager for a telecommunications firm. You're working on
    a project that entails upgrading technical hardware and equipment. The
    estimated cost of the hardware and equipment is $1,725,000. You are
    reviewing products from three vendors. One of the vendors offers you and
    your family the use of the company yacht for the upcoming three-day
    weekend. What is the most appropriate response?
    A. Thank them, and accept. You don't believe there is a conflict of interest
       or an integrity issue at stake.
    B. Thank them, and decline. You know this could be considered personal
       gain, which could call your integrity into question.
    C. Thank them, and accept. Immediately report your actions to the project
       sponsor so that your motives are not called into question after the fact.
    D. Thank them, and decline. You know this could be considered an integrity
       issue on the part of the vendor.
13. You are a project manager working on contract with a company in a foreign
    country. At the project kickoff meeting, you are given an expensive-looking
    gift. The person who presented this to you said that it is customary in their
    country to give their business partners gifts. What is the most appropriate
    response?
    A. Thank them, and decline. Explain that this is considered personal gain,
       which is unacceptable in your country.
    B. Thank them, and accept. You don't believe there is a conflict of interest
       or an integrity issue at stake.
    C. Thank them, and decline. Explain that this is considered a conflict of
       interest, which is unacceptable in your country.
    D. Thank them, and accept because you know that it would be considered
       offensive to decline the gift in their culture. Immediately report the
       acceptance of the gift to the appropriate parties at your company so that
       your actions are not called into question later.
14. Life seems to be going very well for your close friend, a project manager,
    who like you has PMP(R) certification. She has taken a trip to France,
    purchased a new car, and stocked her wine cellar with a couple dozen
    expensive bottles of wine, all within the last six months. After a few
    cocktails one evening, she tells you her secret. The vendor she's working
    with on the $4 billion project she's managing has given her all of these items
    as gifts. Which scenario is the most appropriate?
    A. You tell your friend these gifts probably aren't appropriate and leave it at
       that.
    B. You and your friend have a long conversation about the gifts, and she
       decides to return them (with the exception of the trip) and not accept any
       more gifts in the future.
    C. You're happy for your friend and say nothing.
    D. Your friend doesn't see a problem with accepting these gifts at all. You
       know this is a conflict-of-interest situation and should be reported as an
       ethical violation.
15. As a project manager, you know that the most important activity to ensure
    customer and stakeholder satisfaction is which of the following?
    A. Documenting and meeting the requirements
    B. Documenting and meeting the performance measurements
    C. Reporting changes and updating the project plan and other project
       documents where appropriate
    D. Reporting project status regularly and in a timely manner
16. Your upcoming project includes project team members from a foreign
    country. To make certain that cultural differences don't interfere with team
    performance, thereby affecting the success of the project, your first course of
    action is to do which of the following?
    A. Provide diversity training to all the team members.
    B. Co-locate the project team.
    C. Perform team-building exercises.
    D. Inform the team members of the organization's rules and standards.
17. You are a contract project manager working with the State of Bliss. Your
    latest project involves rewriting the Department of Revenue's income tax
    system. One of the key stakeholders is a huge movie buff, and she has the
    power to promote you into a better position at the conclusion of this project.
    She has discovered that one of her favorite superstars lives in the State of
    Bliss and, therefore, must file income tax returns in that state. She asks you
    to look up the account of this movie star. What is the most appropriate
    response?
    A. Report her to the management team.
    B. Refuse to comply with the request, citing conflict of interest and
       violation of confidential company data.
    C. Look up the information she has requested. Because the data is
       considered part of the project, there is no conflict of interest.
    D. You believe that tax records are public information, so you comply with
        the request.
18. You are a contract project manager working with the State of Bliss. Your
    latest project involves rewriting the Department of Revenue's income tax
    system. As project manager, you have taken all the appropriate actions
    regarding confidentiality of data. One of the key stakeholders is a huge
    movie buff, and she has the power to promote you into a better position at
    the conclusion of this project. She's reviewing some report data that just
    happens to include confidential information regarding one of her favorite
    movie superstars. What is the most appropriate response?
    A. Report her to the management team.
    B. Request that she immediately return the information, citing conflict of
       interest and violation of confidential company data.
    C. Do nothing, because she has the proper level of access rights to the data
       and this information showed up unintentionally.
    D. Request that she immediately return the information until you can
       confirm that she has the proper level of access rights to the data.
19. You are a project manager with several years of experience in project
    management. You've accepted your first project in a foreign country. You've
    been in the country a week or two and are experiencing some disorientation.
    This is known as which of the following?
    A. Co-location
    B. Diversity shock
    C. Global culturing
    D. Culture shock
20. You are a project manager for a software manufacturing firm. The project
    you just finished created a new software product that is expected to become a
    number-one seller. All prerelease of software is handled through the
    marketing department. A friend of yours, who is a certified software
    instructor, asks you for a copy of the software prior to the beta release so
    they can become familiar with it. What is the most appropriate response?
    A. Decline the request because the software is the intellectual property of
       the company.
    B. Ask them to sign a nondisclosure agreement before releasing a copy of
   the software.
C. Decline the request because you stand to gain from this transaction by
   receiving free training.
D. Because your friend is certified to teach your company's brand of
   software, provide them with a copy of the software.
Appendices
Appendix A
Answers to Review Questions
Chapter 1: What Is a Project?
1. C. The Project Management Institute (PMI(R)) is the industry-recognized
   standard for project management practices.
2. B. Projects exist to create a unique product, service, or result. The logon
   screen in this question is not a unique product. A minor change has been
   requested, indicating that this is an ongoing operations function. Some of the
   criteria for projects are that they are unique, temporary with definitive start
   and end dates, and considered complete when the project goals are achieved.
3. A. This is a project. The product line is new, which implies that this is a
   unique product--it hasn't been done before. You can discern a definite start
   and end date by the fact that the new appliances must be ready by the spring
   catalog release.
4. D. Progressive elaboration is the process of determining the characteristics
   and features of the product of the project. Progressive elaboration is carried
   out via steps in detailed fashion.
5. D. A project is considered successful when stakeholder needs and
   expectations are met.
6. B. Conflicts between stakeholders should always be resolved in favor of the
   customer. This question emphasizes the importance of identifying your
   stakeholders and their needs as early as possible in the project.
7. C. Project management brings together a set of tools and techniques to
   organize project activities. Project managers are the ones responsible for
   managing the project management processes.
8. B. Phase-end reviews can occur for all phase-to-phase relationships.
   Handoffs are typical of a sequentially phased project, not an overlapping
   phased project. Fast tracking occurs in an overlapping relationship.
9. D. Portfolios are collections of projects and/or programs. The projects or
   programs do not have to be directly related or interdependent to reside within
   the portfolio.
10. A. Negotiation and influencing skills are needed to convince Jack's boss and
    come to an agreement concerning his assignment.
11. A. The storyboard is a deliverable. Because the phases are performed
    sequentially, the deliverable must be approved before the next phase of the
    project can begin.
12. C. The best answer to this question according to the PMBOK(R)Guide is to
    negotiate with the functional manager to participate in the business analyst's
    annual performance review. D is an appropriate response but doesn't include
    the direction that the project manager should participate in the performance
    review.
13. B. The level of authority the project manager has is determined by the
    organizational structure, interactions with various management levels, and
    the project management maturity level of the organization.
14. A. Advantages for employees in a functional organization are that they have
    only one supervisor and a clear chain of command exists.
15. D. Employees in a balanced matrix often report to two or more managers.
    Functional managers and project managers share authority and responsibility
    for projects. There is a balance of power between the functional managers
    and project managers.
16. C. Projectized organizations are focused on the project itself. One issue with
    this type of structure is determining what to do with project team members
    when they are not actively involved in the project. One alternative is to
    release them when they are no longer needed.
17. D. Remember the acronym that that sounds like syrup of ipecac: IPECC
    (Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing).
18. B. An overlapping phase-to-phase relationship allows you to begin the next
    phase before the phase you're working on is completed.
19. C. The Initiating process group is where stakeholders have the greatest
    ability to influence outcomes of the project. Risk is highest during this stage
    because of the high degree of unknown factors.
20. D. The three types of PMOs are supportive, controlling, and directive.
Chapter 2: Creating the Project Charter
1. A. The buyer provides the SOW when projects are performed under contract.
2. B. This came about because of a strategic opportunity/business need. Staff
   members were spending unproductive hours producing information for the
   management report that wasn't consistent or meaningful.
3. A. Develop Project Charter has five inputs, and they are project SOW,
   business case, agreements, enterprise environmental factors, and
   organizational process assets.
4. C. The most correct answer is to perform a feasibility study. Because this
   project is taking the company into a new, unknown market, there's lots of
   potential for error and failure. A feasibility study would help the stakeholders
   determine whether the project is viable and cost effective and whether it has
   a high potential for success.
5. D. Project Time Management involves the following processes: Plan
   Schedule Management, Define Activities, Sequence Activities, Estimate
   Activity Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, Develop Schedule, and
   Control Schedule.
6. B. The project SOW should contain the business need for the project and the
   product scope description and should support the organization's strategic
   plan.
7. B. Historical information on projects of a similar nature can be helpful when
   initiating new projects. They can help in formulating project deliverables and
   identifying constraints and assumptions and will be helpful later in the
   project Planning processes as well.
8. B. The Project Integration Management Knowledge Area consists of the
   following processes: Develop Project Charter, Develop Project Management
   Plan, Direct and Manage Project Work, Monitor and Control Project Work,
   Perform Integrated Change Control, and Close Project or Phase.
9. A. Benefit measurement methods include comparative methods, scoring
   methods, and cash flow analysis. They are used as project selection tools to
   determine which project to proceed with or to determine which project
   among a list of projects should be undertaken.
10. B. Projects with NPV greater than 0 should be given an accept
    recommendation.
11. B. Projects with the highest IRR value are favored over projects with lower
    IRR values.
12. A. Net present value (NPV) assumes reinvestment is made at the cost of
    capital.
13. C. Year 1 and 2 inflows are each $100,000 for a total of $200,000. Year 3
    inflows are an additional $300,000. Add one more quarter to this total, and
    the $575,000 is reached in three years and three months, or 39 months.
14. D. IRR assumes reinvestment at the IRR rate and is the discount rate when
    NPV is equal to 0.
15. C. The purpose of the business case is to understand the business need for
    the project and determine whether the investment in the project is
    worthwhile. This may include analysis using mathematical models and/or
    benefit measurement methods, but that is not the primary purpose of the
    business case.
16. A. Stakeholder analysis involves three steps including: identifying
    stakeholders, analyzing potential impact, and assessing how stakeholders are
    likely to react to given situations.
17. B. Project B has a payback period of 21 months; $50,000 is received in the
    first 12 months, with another $75,000 coming in over each of the next three
    quarters, or nine months.
18. C. Payback period does not consider the time value of money and is,
    therefore, the least precise of all the cash flow analysis techniques.
19. C. The project should be kicked off with a project charter that authorizes the
    project to begin, assigns the project manager, and describes the project
    objectives and purpose for the project. Doing so ensures that everyone is
    working with the same purposes in mind.
20. D. According to the PMBOK(R)Guide, the project charter should be issued by
    the project sponsor or the project initiator. Once approved, the charter
    formalizes the authority assigned to the project manager and ensures
    commitment and acceptance of the project by the stakeholders as well as
    ensuring a common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and
    roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders.
Chapter 3: Developing the Project Scope
Statement
1. A. The PMIS is one of the elements of the enterprise environmental factors,
   which is an input to the Develop Project Management Plan process.
2. C. The project management plan describes the processes you'll use to
   perform the project and describes how the project will be executed,
   monitored, and controlled and how the work of the project will be executed
   to meet the objectives.
3. B. The scope management plan describes how project scope will be defined
   and validated, how the scope statement will be developed, how the WBS will
   be created and defined, and how project scope will be managed and
   controlled. Project scope is measured against the project management plan,
   whereas product scope is measured against the product requirements. It is
   based on the approved project scope.
4. D. These four decision-making techniques belong to the Collect
   Requirements process and are part of the group decision-making tool and
   technique in this process.
5. B. The project scope statement further elaborates the project deliverables and
   documents the constraints and assumptions for the project. It serves as a
   basis for future project decisions.
6. D. The requirements traceability matrix links requirements to their origin and
   traces them throughout the project. Option A describes the requirements
   management plan, not the requirements document. Option B is partially true
   with the exception of the first statement. Requirements documents do not
   have to be formal or complex. Option C refers to the project scope statement,
   not the requirements.
7. C. The scope baseline consists of the approved project scope statement, the
   WBS, and the WBS dictionary.
8. D. Alternatives generation is a tool and technique of the Define Scope
   process that includes brainstorming and lateral thinking techniques.
9. C. You could use each product as a level-one entry on the WBS so option A
   is correct, but you may choose to construct the WBS differently. Option C is
   not correct because rolling wave planning is the process of fully elaborating
    near-term WBS work packages and elaborating others, like the third product
    in this question, at a later time when all information is known.
10. D. Option A might seem like a correct answer, but option D is more correct.
    There isn't enough information to determine whether stakeholders will
    require overtime. We do know that poor scope definition might lead to cost
    increases, rework, schedule delays, and poor morale.
11. D. Each element in the WBS is assigned a unique identifier (a numbering
    system). These are collectively known as the code of accounts. Typically,
    these codes are associated with a corporate chart of accounts and are used to
    track the costs of the individual work elements in the WBS.
12. A. The work package level is the lowest level in the WBS and facilitates
    resource assignment and cost and time estimates. In this question, the work
    package level contains four subprojects, so it would not be used to create the
    activity list. The activity list will be created from the work package level for
    each WBS created for each subproject.
13. C. The primary constraint is time. Since the trade show demos depend on
    project completion and the trade show is in late September, the date cannot
    be moved. The budget is the secondary constraint in this example.
14. A. Decomposition subdivides the major deliverables into smaller
    components. It is a tool and technique of the Create WBS process and is used
    to create a WBS. Level-two components might be deliverables, phases,
    subprojects, or some combination.
15. B. Product analysis includes techniques such as value engineering, value
    analysis, systems analysis, systems engineering, product breakdown, and
    functional analysis.
16. D. The primary constraint is quality. If you made the assumption as stated in
    options A, B and C, you assumed incorrectly. Clarify these assumptions with
    your stakeholders and project sponsors.
17. C. This is an example of an assumption. You've used this vendor before and
    haven't had any problems. You're assuming there will be no problems with
    this delivery based on your past experience.
18. B. Constraints restrict the actions of the project team.
19. A. The project came about because of a business need. The phones have to
    be answered because that's the core business. Upgrading the system to handle
    more volume is a business need. An assumption has been made regarding
    vendor availability. Always validate your assumptions.
20. B. The steps of decomposition include identify major deliverables, organize
    and determine the structure, identify lower-level components, assign
    identification codes, and verify correctness of decomposition.
Chapter 4: Creating the Project Schedule
 1. C. The tools and techniques for Estimate Activity Durations are expert
    judgment, analogous estimating, parametric estimating, three-point
    estimating, group decision-making techniques, and reserve analysis.
 2. B. The Sequence Activities process produces project schedule network
    diagrams and project documents updates, which may include updating
    activity attributes. The purpose of this process is to identify all activity
    dependencies.
 3. C. Reserve analysis takes schedule risk into consideration and adds a
    percentage of time or additional work periods to the estimate to prevent
    schedule delays.
 4. A. Parametric estimating uses an algorithm or formula that multiplies a
    known element--such as the quantity of materials needed--by the time it
    takes to install or complete one unit of materials. The result is a total
    estimate for the activity. In this case, 10 servers multiplied by 16 hours per
    server gives you a 160-hour total duration estimate.
 5. C. The activity list is a component of the project schedule, not the WBS. The
    activity list includes all the project activities, an identifier, and a description
    of the activity. The activity list is an output of the Define Activities process.
 6. D. This is an example of a mandatory dependency, also known as hard logic.
    Mandatory dependencies are inherent in the nature of the work.
    Discretionary dependencies, also called preferred logic, preferential logic,
    and soft logic, are defined by the project management team.
 7. A. The precedence diagramming method is also known as the activity on
    node (AON) diagramming method. GERT stands for Graphical Evaluation
    and Review Technique, a diagramming method that allows for conditions,
    branches, and loops.
 8. B. The arrow diagramming method uses only finish-to-start dependencies.
 9. D. Finish-to-start (FS) is the most commonly used logical relationship in
    PDM and the default relationship in most project management software
    packages.
10. C. CPM calculates a single early and late start date and a single early and late
    finish date for each activity. Once these dates are known, float time is
    calculated for each activity to determine the critical path. The other answers
    contain elements of PERT calculations.
11. B. The only information you have for this example is activity duration;
    therefore, the critical path is the path with the longest duration. Path A-D-E-
    H with a duration of 34 days is the critical path.
12. D. The only information you have for this example is activity duration, so
    you must calculate the critical path based on the durations given. The
    duration of A-B-C-E-H increased by 3 days, for a total of 35 days. The
    duration of A-F-G-H and A-F-G-E-H each increased by 3 days. A-F-G-E-H
    totals 36 days and becomes the new critical path.
13. D. You calculate the critical path by adding together the durations of all the
    tasks with zero or negative float. The critical path can be compressed using
    crashing techniques.
14. C. The calculation for PERT is the sum of optimistic time plus pessimistic
    time plus four times the most likely time divided by 6. The calculation for
    this example is as follows: (48 + 72 + (4 x 60)) / 6 = 60.
15. D. You calculate the standard deviation by subtracting the optimistic time
    from the pessimistic time and dividing the result by 6. The calculation for
    this example is as follows: (72 - 48) / 6 = 4.
16. D. There is a 95 percent probability that the work will finish within plus or
    minus two standard deviations. The expected value is 500, and the standard
    deviation times 2 is 24, so the activity will take from 476 to 524 days.
17. B. A 68 percent probability is calculated using plus or minus one standard
    deviation, a 95 percent probability uses plus or minus two standard
    deviations, and a 99 percent probability uses plus or minus three standard
    deviations.
18. A. Crashing the schedule includes tasks such as adding resources to the
    critical path tasks or speeding up deliveries of materials and resources.
19. C. Resource leveling is used for overallocated resources and allows for
    changes to the schedule completion dates. Crashing and fast tracking are
    schedule compression techniques that shorten the schedule. Resource
    smoothing techniques will not allow for changes to the critical path or
    project end date, and since you are concerned about not overusing this
    resource, lengthening the schedule is a better option.
20. A. Project management software is a useful tool for the project manager, and
    it automates project scheduling, allowing for what-if analysis and easy
    changes. But if you focus too much on the tool and ignore the project, the
    tool becomes a hindrance.
Chapter 5: Developing the Project Budget and
Communicating the Plan
 1. A. The inputs for the Estimate Costs Process are the cost management plan,
    human resource management plan, scope baseline, project schedule, risk
    register, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process assets.
 2. D. The cost management plan, an output of the Plan Cost Management
    process, is used to establish the criteria for planning, estimating, budgeting,
    and controlling costs. It is based on the approved project charter, project
    scope, schedule, resources, and other information in order to manage project
    costs.
 3. D. Control thresholds are variance thresholds (typically stated as a
    percentage of deviation from the baseline) used for monitoring cost
    performance.
 4. C. A control account can be placed at any level of the WBS and is used for
    earned value measurement calculations regarding project costs.
 5. A. The inputs of Estimate Costs are cost management plan, human resource
    management plan, scope baseline, project schedule, risk register, enterprise
    environmental factors, and organizational process assets.
 6. B. Three-point estimating can improve activity cost estimates because they
    factor in estimation uncertainty and risk.
 7. A. Reserve analysis accounts for cost uncertainty by including a contingency
    reserve, usually expressed as a percentage of the estimated cost.
 8. C. The expected activity cost using the three-point beta distribution formula
    (also known as PERT) is calculated this way: ((4 x most likely) + optimistic
    + pessimistic) 6. Therefore, the answer is ((4 x 42) + 35 + 54) 6 = 43.
 9. C. Future period operating costs are considered ongoing costs and are not
    part of project costs.
10. B. Bottom-up techniques are the most time-consuming and generally the
    most accurate estimates you can use. With bottom-up estimating, each work
    item is estimated and rolled up to a project total.
11. A. Funding limit reconciliation concerns reconciling the funds to be spent on
    the project with funding limits placed on the funding commitments for the
    project.
12. B. The cost baseline is displayed as an S curve because of the way project
    spending occurs. Spending begins slowly, picks up speed until the spending
    peak is reached, and then tapers off as the project winds down.
13. D. Cost of quality is a tool and technique of Estimate Costs. The tools and
    techniques of Determine Budget are cost aggregation, reserve analysis,
    expert judgment, historical relationships, and funding limit reconciliation.
14. A. Analogous--or top-down--estimating techniques are a form of expert
    judgment. Because this project is similar to another recent project, you can
    use the cost estimates from the previous project to help you quickly
    determine estimates for the current project.
15. D. There are 36 channels of communication, yourself plus 8 stakeholders.
    The formula is 9 (9 - 1) / 2 = 36. Lines of communication are considered
    when using the communications requirements analysis tool and technique.
16. D. Communications requirements analysis, communication technology,
    communication models, communication methods, and meetings are the tools
    and techniques of the Plan Communications Management process.
17. C. Acknowledgment means the receiver has received the message but does
    not mean they agree with the message.
18. A. Push communication assures that information is distributed to specific
    recipients but does not certify that it was understood by the intended
    recipients.
19. B. This describes interactive communication. It is a communication method,
    which is a tool and technique of Plan Communications Management.
20. C. Reasons for the distribution of information belong in the communications
    management plan.
Chapter 6: Risk Planning
 1. B. The cause-and-effect flowcharts--also called fishbone diagrams or
    Ishikawa diagrams--show the relationships between the causes and effects
    of problems.
 2. C. The purpose of Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is to determine what
    impact the identified risk events will have on the project and the probability
    they'll occur. It also puts risks in priority order according to their effects on
    the project objectives and assigns a risk score for the project.
 3. B. The risk management plan details how risk management processes will be
    implemented, monitored, and controlled throughout the life of the project.
    The risk management plan does not include responses to risks or triggers.
    Responses to risks are documented in the risk register as part of the Plan
    Risk Responses process.
 4. C. Distributions graphically display the probability of risk to the project
    objectives as well as the time or cost elements.
 5. D. The information-gathering techniques in the Identify Risks process are
    brainstorming, the Delphi technique, interviewing, and root cause analysis.
 6. C. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis analyzes the probability of risks and
    their consequences using a numerical rating. Perform Qualitative Risk
    Analysis might use numeric ratings but can use a high-medium-low scale as
    well.
 7. C. Probability of achieving time and cost estimates is an update that is
    produced from the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.
 8. B. This risk event has the potential to save money on project costs, so it's an
    opportunity, and the appropriate strategy to use in this case is the exploit
    strategy.
 9. D. This risk event has the potential to save money on project costs. Sharing
    involves using a third party to help assure that the opportunity occurs.
10. A. The best answer is A. Triggers are warning signs of an impending risk
    event.
11. C. The probability and impact matrix multiplies the probability and impact to
    determine a risk score. Using this score and a predetermined matrix, you
    determine if the score is a high, medium, or low designation.
12. B. Monte Carlo analysis is a simulation technique that computes project
    costs many times in an iterative fashion.
13. C. Mitigation attempts to reduce the impact of a risk event should it occur.
    Making plans to arrange for the leased equipment reduces the consequences
    of the risk.
14. C. Risk appetite, risk tolerance, and risk threshold are the components of risk
    attitude.
15. A. This question describes risk tolerance levels of the stakeholders. Risk
    triggers are recorded in the risk register during the Plan Risk Responses
    process. The risk of buying a machine from a new supplier would pose a
    threat to the project, not an opportunity. Interviewing might have been used,
    but this question wasn't describing the Identify Risks process.
16. B. The question describes sensitivity analysis, which is a tool and technique
    of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. Tornado diagrams are
    often used to display sensitivity analysis data.
17. B. Decision tree diagrams are used during the Perform Quantitative Risk
    Analysis process. All the other options are diagramming techniques used in
    the Identify Risks process.
18. D. The RBS describes risk categories, and the lowest level can be used as a
    checklist to help identify risks. Risk owners are not assigned from the RBS
    but typically are assigned as soon as the risk is identified.
19. D. This is a response strategy known as passive acceptance because the team
    has decided to take no action and make no plans for the risk. This is a
    strategy that can be used for either positive or negative risks.
20. C. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is a fast and easy method of
    determining probability and impact.
Chapter 7: Planning Project Resources
 1. D. Make-or-buy analysis is determining whether it's more cost effective to
    purchase the goods or services needed for the project or more cost effective
    for the organization to produce them internally.
 2. C. Firm fixed-price contracts have the highest risk to the seller and the least
    amount of risk to the buyer. However, the price the vendor charges for the
    product or service will compensate for the amount of risk they're assuming.
 3. B. Either the buyer or the seller can write the SOW. Sometimes the buyer
    will write the SOW and the seller might modify it and send it back to the
    buyer for verification and approval.
 4. A. The cost plus incentive fee contract reimburses the seller for the seller's
    allowable costs and includes an incentive or bonus for exceeding the
    performance criteria laid out in the contract.
 5. D. The RAM and RACI charts are tools and techniques of this process.
 6. C. Source selection criteria can be based on price alone when there are many
    vendors who can readily supply the goods or services. The question states
    that only three vendors make the machine, which means source selection
    criteria should be based on more than price.
 7. A. A constraint can be anything that limits the option of the project team.
    Organizational structures, collective bargaining agreements, and economic
    conditions are all constraints that you might encounter during this process.
 8. C. Fixed-price contracts can include incentives for meeting performance
    criteria, but the question states the vendor helping with the programming task
    will be reimbursed for their costs and, depending on your satisfaction with
    their results, may receive an additional award. This describes a cost plus
    award fee contract, not a fixed price incentive fee contract.
 9. A. RACI stands for responsible, accountable, consult, and inform.
10. B. Plan Procurement Management can directly influence the project
    schedule, and the project schedule can directly influence this process.
11. B. This is a cost-reimbursable contract that includes a fee as a percentage of
    allowable costs. This type of contract is known as a cost plus percentage of
    cost (CPPC) contract.
12. A. Design of experiments is a tool and technique of the Plan Quality
    Management process that provides statistical analysis for changing key
    product or process elements all at once (not one at a time) to optimize the
    process.
13. C. Philip Crosby devised the zero defects theory, meaning do it right the first
    time. Proper Plan Quality Management leads to less rework and higher
    productivity. Joseph Juran's fitness for use says that stakeholders' and
    customers' expectations are met or exceeded.
14. A. W. Edwards Deming conjectured that the cost of quality is a management
    problem 85 percent of the time and that once the problem trickles down to
    the workers, it is outside their control.
15. C. The benefits of meeting quality requirements are increased stakeholder
    satisfaction, lower costs, higher productivity, and less rework.
16. A. Internal failure costs are costs associated with not meeting the customer's
    expectations while you still had control over the product. This results in
    rework, scrapping, and downtime.
17. B. Quality metrics are an output of the Plan Quality Management process
    and not part of the quality management plan.
18. D. This is an example of design of experiments.
19. B. Six Sigma is a measurement-based strategy that focuses on process
    improvement and variation reduction by applying Six Sigma methodologies
    to the project.
20. C. Teaming agreements are not a named input of the Plan Procurement
    Management process, but they are an input to all of the Planning processes
    collectively.
Chapter 8: Developing the Project Team
 1. B. Corrective action brings anticipated future project outcomes back into
    alignment with the project management plan. Because an important deadline
    that depends on a positive outcome of this test is looming, the equipment is
    exchanged so that the project plan and project schedule are not impacted.
 2. A. The most difficult aspect of the Direct and Manage Project Work process
    is coordinating and integrating all the project elements. The clue to this
    question is in the next-to-last sentence.
 3. A. The Executing process group and Monitoring and Controlling process
    group serve as inputs to each other.
 4. B. This question describes the deliverable output. Deliverables can be
    intangibles, such as the completion of training.
 5. D. Work performance data includes elements such as schedule status, the
    status of deliverables completion, lessons learned, and resource utilization.
 6. C. The enterprise environmental factors input of the Acquire Project Team
    process considers elements such as prior experience, interest in working on
    the project, cost rates, and availability of potential team members.
 7. A. This question describes a defect repair that was discovered and
    implemented. Defect repairs come about as a result of approved changes.
    Approved changes are implemented in the Direct and Manage Project Work
    process. The question implies that the change request was approved because
    the problem was corrected and the rest of the production run went smoothly.
 8. B. Teams in the norming stage of team development exhibit affection and
    familiarity with one another and make joint decisions.
 9. C. The introduction of a new team member will start the formation and
    development of the team all over again with the forming stage.
10. D. Delegating is a situational leadership style that is used when team
    members have performed the task before and need little to no input from the
    manager. The supporting style requires some input from the leader. An
    autocratic manager makes all the decisions with no input from the team, and
    the laissez-faire leader lets the team make all the decisions and has little
    involvement with the team. Neither the autocratic nor laissez-faire leadership
    style is a named style in the Blanchard Situational Leadership II Model.
11. B. The Expectancy Theory says that people are motivated by the expectation
    of good outcomes. The outcome must be reasonable and attainable.
12. B. Co-location would bring your team members together in the same location
    and allow them to function more efficiently as a team. At a minimum,
    meeting in a common room, such as a war room, for all team meetings would
    bring the team closer together.
13. B. Collaborate/problem solve is a problem-solving technique that seeks to
    determine the facts and find solutions based on the facts. It involves hearing
    multiple viewpoints and examining several perspectives. This results in a
    win-win resolution for all parties.
14. A. Referent power is power that is conferred on a leader by their
    subordinates as a result of the high level of respect for the leader.
15. B. Theory Y managers believe that people will perform their best if they're
    provided with the proper motivation and the right expectations.
16. A. Improving competencies, team interactions, and the team environment are
    characteristics of the Develop Project Team process, not the Manage Project
    Team process.
17. D. This technique is called 360-degree feedback. It's part of the project
    performance appraisals tool and technique of the Manage Project Team
    process.
18. C. This question refers to preassignments, which are a tool and technique of
    the Acquire Project Team process. The other tools and techniques of this
    process are negotiation, acquisition, virtual teams, and multi-criteria decision
    analysis.
19. B. Smoothing (also known as accommodating) and withdrawal (also known
    as avoidance) are both lose-lose techniques. Forcing is a win-lose technique.
    Compromise and reconcile is where neither side wins or loses.
20. D. Theory Z encourages employee loyalty because jobs are offered for life.
    This leads to increased productivity and morale and high employee
    satisfaction.
Chapter 9: Conducting Procurements and
Sharing Information
 1. D. Procurement documents include bids, quotations, RFIs, IFBs, RFPs,
    RFQs, and so on as you learned in the Plan Procurement Management
    process. They are an input of the Conduct Procurements process.
 2. C. Receivers filter information through cultural considerations, knowledge of
    the subject matter, language abilities, geographic location, emotions, and
    attitudes.
 3. A. Project reports describe project status and are an item that is distributed,
    not a distribution tool.
 4. B. Groups of 5 to 11 participants make the most accurate decisions.
 5. B. Lessons learned (which is what this question describes) are useful for
    activities and processes for the current project as well as future projects.
 6. A. Weighted systems are a type of proposal evaluation technique, which is
    one of the tools and techniques of this process used to evaluate vendors
    based on selection criteria defined by the organization.
 7. D. Bidder conferences are also known as vendor conferences, prebid
    conferences, and contractor conferences, according to the PMBOK(R)Guide.
 8. D. Qualified seller lists are a component of the organizational assets input of
    Conduct Procurements. Their purpose is to provide information about the
    sellers.
 9. C. Independent estimates, also called should cost estimates, are a way to
    check proposed pricing.
10. C. Fait accompli is a tactic used during contract negotiations where one party
    convinces the other that the particular issue is no longer relevant or cannot be
    changed.
11. B. Market research is a tool and technique of the Plan Procurement
    Management process. The tools and techniques of Conduct Procurements are
    bidder conference, proposal evaluation techniques, independent estimates,
    expert judgment, advertising, analytical techniques, and procurement
    negotiations.
12. B. The acceptance of work results happens later during the Validate Scope
    process, not during a quality audit.
13. A. The process analysis tool and technique in the Perform Quality Assurance
    process includes root cause analysis to analyze a problem and solution and to
    create preventive actions.
14. C. Tree diagrams allow you to establish expected values for dependent
    relationship in the hierarchy. Quality Management and Control Tools
    includes affinity diagrams, process decision program charts, interrelationship
    digraphs, tree diagrams, prioritization matrices, activity network diagrams,
    and matrix diagrams.
15. C. Face-to-face meetings are the most effective means for resolving
    stakeholder issues, provided these meetings are practical.
16. B. Status meetings are to report on the progress of the project. They are not
    for demos or show-and-tell. Option C is not correct because stakeholders are
    not concerned about the content of the technical documentation; they need to
    know that a qualified technician has reviewed the technical documentation
    and that the documentation task is accurate and complete.
17. D. The selected sellers output requires a negotiated contract.
18. A. The project manager alone is responsible for managing stakeholder
    expectations.
19. B. Procurement negotiations, a tool and technique of Conduct Procurements,
    can become its own process with inputs and outputs for large or complex
    projects.
20. C. The requirements phase is where the SOW is prepared. The fourth phase
    is where the contract is awarded. The solicitation phase is where bids and
    proposals are prepared. However, evaluation criteria is not applied and
    reviewed until the award phase. The requisition phase is where the RFP is
    prepared.
Chapter 10: Measuring and Controlling Project
Performance
1. D. Work authorization systems are a tool used during Project Executing
   processes and are a subset of the project management information system
   considered part of the enterprise environmental factors input of the Monitor
   and Control Project Work process. They formally initiate the work of each
   work package and clarify the assignments.
2. B. You are in the Monitor and Control Project Work process and should
   recommend a change request that can take the form of a corrective action.
   Preventive actions reduce the possibility of negative impacts from risk events
   and do not apply to this situation.
3. D. Negotiation is the preferred method of settling claims or disputes in the
   Control Procurements process.
4. D. The tools and techniques of the Control Procurements process are contract
   change control system, procurement performance reviews, inspection and
   audits, performance reporting, payment systems, claims administration, and
   records management system.
5. C. The contract change control system describes the processes you'll use to
   make changes to the contract; it is not a means of communication. The
   changes might include contract term changes, date changes, and termination
   of a contract.
6. B. According to the PMBOK(R)Guide, the Control Procurements process is
   closely coordinated with the Direct and Manage Project Work, Control
   Quality, Perform Integrated Change Control, and Control Risks processes.
7. A. Communication methods are a tool and technique of the Manage
   Communications process.
8. A. This question describes the Control Communications process, which is
   concerned with collecting and reporting information regarding project
   progress and project accomplishments to the stakeholders.
9. A. The tools and techniques of the Control Communications process are
   information management systems, expert judgment, and meetings. Records
   management systems are a tool and technique of the Control Procurements
    and Close Procurements processes.
10. B. The Delphi method, technology forecasting, scenario building, and
    forecast by analogy are all in the judgmental methods category of
    forecasting.
11. B. This question describes the issue log input of the Control
    Communications process. It is used to track issues, assign owners, track due
    dates, and more. Options A and C are tools and techniques of this process,
    and option D is an input.
12. B. When you are dealing with contested changes, the PMBOK(R)Guide says
    that alternative dispute resolution (ADR) is the technique you should use to
    try to reach resolution. The other options are alternatives after you've tried
    ADR.
13. B. Change requests are submitted through other processes like the Monitor
    and Control Project Work process, and they are reviewed, tracked, managed,
    analyzed, and documented in this process.
14. D. Change control systems are documented procedures that describe how to
    submit change requests. They track the status of the change requests,
    document the management impacts of change, track the change approval
    status, and define the level of authority needed to approve changes. Change
    control systems do not approve or deny the changes--that's the responsibility
    of the change control board (CCB).
15. C. The key to this question was that the characteristics of the product were
    documented with this tool. Configuration management documents the
    physical characteristics and the functionality of the product of the project.
16. C. Change control boards (CCBs) review change requests and have the
    authority to approve or deny them. Their authority is defined by the
    configuration control and change control process.
17. A. The three activities associated with configuration management are
    configuration identification, configuration status accounting, and
    configuration verification and auditing.
18. D. Configuration management systems are a way to manage approved
    changes to the specifications of the deliverables or the project management
    processes.
19. C. These are elements with which the Monitor and Control Project Work
    process is concerned.
20. C. The other names for CCBs may include TAB, which stands for technical
    assessment board; TRB, which is a technical review board; and ERB, which
    is an engineering review board.
Chapter 11: Controlling Work Results
 1. A. Changes to product scope should be reflected in the project scope.
 2. D. Scatter diagrams display the relationship between an independent and
    dependent variable over time.
 3. C. WBS element changes are scope changes. According to the
    PMBOK(R)Guide, schedule revisions are often required as a result of scope
    changes.
 4. C. The Validate Scope process is concerned with the acceptance of work
    results. It also formalizes the acceptance of the project scope.
 5. B. Validate Scope should document the level and degree of completion of
    the project given the circumstances in this question. If you come back at a
    later date and restart this project, Validate Scope will describe how far the
    project progressed and give you an idea of where to start.
 6. B. Schedule variances will sometimes--but not always--impact the
    schedule. Changes to noncritical path tasks will not likely impact the
    schedule, but changes to critical path tasks will always impact the schedule.
 7. C. To-complete performance index determines the cost performance that
    must be realized for the remaining work of the project to meet a goal such as
    BAC or EAC.
 8. D. Budget updates might require cost re-baselining.
 9. A. Schedule variance is (EV - PV) and schedule performance index is (EV /
    PV).
10. C. Earned value is referred to as the value of the work that's been completed
    to date compared to the budget.
11. D. The CV is a positive number and is calculated by subtracting AC from
    EV as follows: 250 - 200 = 50. A positive CV means the project is coming
    in under budget, meaning you've spent less than you planned as of the
    measurement date.
12. A. The SV calculation is EV - PV. If PV is a higher number than EV, you'll
    get a negative number as a result.
13. B. CPI is calculated as follows: EV / AC. In this case, 250 / 200 = 1.25.
14. B. When you accept project performance to date and assume future ETC
    work will be performed at the budgeted rate, EAC is calculated as follows:
    AC + (BAC - EV). Therefore, the calculation for this question looks like
    this: 200 + (800 - 250) = 750.
15. C. The correct formula for ETC for this question is as follows: EAC - AC.
    Therefore, ETC is as follows: 375 - 200 = 175.
16. A. When project performance is expected to behave like past performance,
    EAC is calculated as follows: EAC = BAC / CPI. Therefore, the calculation
    for this question looks like this: 800 / 1.25 = 640.
17. D. You first have to calculate EAC in order to calculate VAC. EAC for
    variances that are atypical is AC + (BAC - EV). So, our numbers are 275 +
    (500 - 250) = 525. VAC is calculated this way: BAC - EAC. Therefore, 500
    - 525 = -25. Our costs are not doing as well as anticipated.
18. C. You must first calculate CPI in order to calculate ETC. CPI is EV / AC.
    We have 1150 1275 = 0.90. ETC with typical cost variances is (BAC -EV)
    CPI. Our numbers are (2500 - 1150) / 0.90 = 1500.
19. B. Workarounds are unplanned responses. They deal with negative risk
    events as they occur. As the name implies, workarounds were not previously
    known to the project team. The risk event was unplanned, so no contingency
    plan existed to deal with the risk event, and thus it required a workaround.
20. A. CPI is considered the most critical EVM metric. It measures the cost
    efficiency of the project work completed at the measuring date.
Chapter 12: Closing the Project and Applying
Professional Responsibility
1. D. Integration occurs when resources, equipment, or property are reassigned
   or redeployed back to the organization or to another project.
2. A. Starvation occurs because the project no longer receives the resources
   needed to continue. Resources include people, equipment, money, and the
   like.
3. A. Extinction is the best type of project end because it means the project was
   completed successfully and accepted by the sponsor or customer. And,
   although the film was added to the catalogue, it isn't an addition because it
   doesn't add new operations to the company.
4. C. According to The PMBOK(R)Guide, the project manager is responsible for
   documenting the formal acceptance of the work of the contract. This should
   be done during Close Procurements when projects are performed under
   contract or during Close Project or Phase if no work was performed under
   contract. In cases where part of the work was performed under contract and
   part with in-house staff, formal acceptance should occur in both of these
   processes. While the PMBOK(R)Guide doesn't specifically note that the
   project manager should document the administrative closure procedures,
   contract closure procedures, and product verification, you would wise to do
   so.
5. A. Procurement audits are used to review the procurement process and
   identify and document any lessons learned during the procurement process
   for future reference.
6. A. Lessons learned document the experiences, successes, and failures that
   occurred during this project for future reference. There isn't enough
   information in the question to determine whether option B or D is correct.
   Option C is not correct because the project was completed.
7. A. According to the PMBOK(R)Guide, the procurement audit examines the
   procurement processes from Plan Procurement Management through Close
   Procurements.
8. A. You are not responsible for the personal integrity of others, but as project
   manager you do have influence over others, such as your project team
    members. You are also responsible for reporting any issues that are
    considered a violation of the PMI(R)Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
 9. C. Integrity means you'll honestly report project outcomes and status. Your
    personal gain should not be placed above the satisfaction of the customer.
10. D. The best answer to this problem is to develop alternative solutions to
    address the design error. Reducing technical requirements might be an
    alternative solution, but it's not one you'd implement without looking at all
    the alternatives. Ignoring the error and going forward with production will
    result in an unsatisfactory product for the customer.
11. A. A luncheon date could be considered a conflict of interest prior to
    awarding a contract to a vendor. Consider what a competitor of this vendor
    would think if they spotted you having lunch together. Generally speaking, a
    single lunch invitation from a vendor is not considered personal gain. If they
    offered to buy you lunch for the entire year, or even some portion of the
    year, it could be considered personal gain and your integrity could be called
    into question.
12. B. The best response to this situation is to thank the vendor and decline
    based on the fact that this could be considered personal gain on your part.
    Option D might seem correct, but remember, you're not responsible for the
    integrity of others. It's often common business practice for vendors to offer
    gifts to potential customers.
13. D. The best response in this case is to accept the gift because it would cause
    great offense to the other party if you were to decline. Report the gift and the
    circumstances as soon as possible to the appropriate parties at your company.
14. D. This is a conflict of interest situation, and you should report it as a
    violation of the PMI(R)Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Even though
    your friend may decide to return the gifts, as stated in option B, you still
    have an obligation to report this violation.
15. A. Documenting the requirements and meeting them is one of the key things
    you can do to ensure customer satisfaction. The requirements describe what
    the customer is looking for, and the final product is compared against them
    to determine whether all of the requirements were met.
16. A. The most correct response is to first provide training to your team
    members to educate them regarding how to respect and work with others
    from different cultures. Co-location might not be possible when you're
    working with team members from two different countries. Team-building
    exercises are a good idea as well but are not your first course of action.
17. B. The situation presented here requires you to put the interest of the
    company and the confidentiality of the data above your own personal
    interests or those of your stakeholders. Option D is not the most correct
    response because it says you believe the information is public. This implies
    you haven't verified whether the data is private or public. Until you know,
    treat the data as confidential. In this case, the information is confidential and
    should be shared only with those who have a valid reason for using it.
18. C. As project manager, it's your responsibility to make sure the people you
    will be sharing data with have the proper permissions to see the data; this
    question indicated that you did that. In this case, option D is not correct
    because it implies that you did not verify ahead of time that the stakeholder
    had the proper levels of approval to use the data.
19. D. Culture shock is the disoriented feeling that people might experience
    when working in a foreign country.
20. A. The most appropriate response is to deny the request. Software is
    considered intellectual property and should not be used for personal gain or
    given to others without prior consent from the organization. This question
    states that the release of the beta software is handled through the marketing
    department, so you should not give your friend a copy of the software
    outside of this process.
Appendix B
Process Inputs and Outputs
Throughout this book, I've discussed the inputs and outputs to the PMI(R)
processes. In this appendix, you'll find the inputs, tools and techniques, outputs,
and Knowledge Areas of the project management processes listed by process in
the order they appear in the text. I think you'll appreciate the convenience of
having all this information in one location. Enjoy!

Initiating Processes
Table B.1 lists the inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and Knowledge Areas
for the Initiating process group.
Table B.1 Initiating processes
Process Name Inputs                  Tools and           Outputs       Knowledge
                                     Techniques                        Area
Develop         Project statement of Expert              Project       Integration
Project Charter work                 judgment            charter
                Business case        Facilitation
                                     techniques
                Agreements
                Enterprise
                environmental
                factors
                Organizational
                process assets
Identify        Project charter      Stakeholder         Stakeholder Stakeholder
Stakeholders                         analysis            register
                Procurement          Expert
                documents            judgment
                Enterprise           Meetings
                environmental
                factors
                factors
                Organizational

                process assets


Planning Processes
Table B.2 lists the inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and Knowledge Areas
for the processes in the Planning process group.
Table B.2 Planning processes
Process Name      Inputs        Tools and         Outputs           Knowledge
                                Techniques                          Area
Develop Project Project charter Expert            Project           Integration
Management                      judgment          management
Plan                                              plan
                Outputs from Facilitation
                other           techniques
                processes
                Enterprise
                environmental
                factors
                Organizational
                process assets
Plan Scope      Project         Expert            Scope             Scope
Management      management judgment               management
                plan                              plan
                Project charter Meetings          Requirements
                                                  management
                                                  plan
                  Enterprise
                  environmental
                  factors
                  Organizational
                  process assets
Collect           Scope          Interviews       Requirements      Scope
Requirements      management                      documentation
Requirements   management                       documentation
               plan

               Requirements Focus groups        Requirements
               management                       traceability
               plan                             matrix
               Stakeholder     Facilitated
               management workshops
               plan
               Project charter Group
                               creativity
                               techniques
               Stakeholder     Group
               register        decision-
                               making
                               techniques
                               Questionnaires
                               and surveys
                               Observations
                               Prototypes
                               Benchmarking
                               Context
                               diagrams
                               Document
                               analysis
Define Scope   Scope           Expert           Project scope   Scope
               management judgment              statement
               plan
               Project charter Product          Project
                               analysis         documents
                                                updates
               Requirements     Alternatives
               documentation    generation
               Organizational   Facilitated
               process assets   workshops
Create WBS     Scope            Decomposition Scope baseline    Scope
Create WBS      Scope         Decomposition Scope baseline       Scope
                management

                plan
                Project scope Expert            Project
                statement     judgment          documents
                                                updates
                Requirements
                documentation
                Enterprise
                environmental
                factors
                Organizational
                process assets
Plan Schedule   Project         Expert          Schedule         Time
Management      management judgment             management
                plan                            plan
                Project charter Analytical
                                techniques
                Enterprise      Meetings
                environmental
                factors
                Organizational
                process assets
Define          Schedule        Decomposition   Activity list    Time
Activities      management
                plan
                Scope           Rolling wave    Activity
                baseline        planning        attributes
                Enterprise      Expert          Milestone list
                environmental judgment
                factors
                Organizational
                process assets
Sequence        Schedule        Precedence      Project schedule Time
Activities      management diagramming          network
Activities   management       diagramming network
             plan             method (PDM) diagrams

             Activity list    Dependency       Project
                              determination    documents
                                               updates
             Activity         Leads and lags
             attributes
             Milestone list
             Project scope
             statement
             Enterprise
             environmental
             factors
             Organizational
             process assets
Estimate     Schedule         Expert          Activity       Time
Activity     management       judgment        resource
Resources    plan                             requirements
             Activity list    Alternatives    Resource
                              analysis        breakdown
                                              structure
             Activity         Published       Project
             attributes       estimating data documents
                                              updates
             Resource         Bottom-up
             calendars        estimating
             Risk register
             Activity cost
             estimates
             Enterprise       Project
             environmental    management
             factors          software
             Organizational
             process assets
Estimate     Schedule         Expert           Activity      Time
Estimate    Schedule        Expert          Activity           Time
Activity    management      judgment        duration

Durations   plan                            estimates
            Activity list   Analogous       Project
                            estimating      documents
                                            updates
            Activity        Parametric
            attributes      estimating
            Activity        Three-point
            resource        estimating
            requirements
            Resource       Group
            calendars      decision-
                           making
                           techniques
            Project scope Reserve
            statement      analysis
            Risk register
            Resource
            breakdown
            structure
            Enterprise
            environmental
            factors
            Organizational
            process assets
Develop     Schedule       Schedule         Schedule           Time
Schedule    management network              baseline
            plan           analysis
            Activity list  Critical path    Project schedule
                           method
            Activity       Critical chain   Schedule data
            attributes     method
            Project        Resource         Project
            schedule       optimization     calendars
                 schedule          optimization      calendars
                 network           techniques
                 diagrams
                 Activity          Modeling          Project
                 resource          techniques        management
                 requirements                        plan updates
                 Resource          Leads and lags Project
                 calendars                        documents
                                                  updates
                 Activity          Schedule
                 duration          compression
                 estimates
                 Project scope     Scheduling tool
                 statement
                 Risk register
                 Project staff
                 assignments
                 Resource
                 breakdown
                 structure
                 Enterprise
                 environmental
                 factors
                 Organizational
                 process assets
Plan Cost        Project           Expert            Cost            Cost
Management       management        judgment          management
                 plan                                plan
                 Project charter   Analytical
                                   techniques
                 Enterprise        Meetings
                 environmental
                 factors
                 Organizational
                 process assets
Estimate Costs   Cost           Expert               Activity cost   Cost
Estimate Costs   Cost            Expert           Activity cost     Cost
                 management      judgment         estimates
                 plan
                 Human           Analogous        Basis of
                 resource        estimating       estimates
                 management
                 plan
                 Scope           Parametric       Project
                 baseline        estimating       documents
                                                  updates
                 Project        Bottom-up
                 schedule       estimating
                 Risk register  Three-point
                                estimating
                 Enterprise     Reserve
                 environmental analysis
                 factors
                 Organizational Cost of quality
                 process assets
                                Project
                                management
                                software
                                Vendor bid
                                analysis
                                Group
                                decision-
                                making
                                techniques
Determine        Cost           Cost              Cost baseline     Cost
Budget           management aggregation
                 plan
                 Scope          Reserve           Project funding
                 baseline       analysis          requirements
                 Activity cost Expert             Project
                 estimates      judgment          documents
                                                  updates
               Basis of        Historical
               estimates       relationships
               Project         Funding limit
               schedule        reconciliation
               Resource
               calendars
               Risk register
               Agreements
               Organizational
               process assets
Plan Quality   Project        Cost-benefit      Quality         Quality
Management     management analysis              management
               plan                             plan
               Stakeholder    Cost of quality   Process
               register                         improvement
                                                plan
               Risk register  Seven basic       Quality metrics
                              quality tools
               Requirements Benchmarking Quality
               documentation                 checklists
               Enterprise     Design of      Project
               environmental experiments     documents
               factors                       updates
               Organizational Statistical
               process assets sampling
                              Additional
                              quality
                              planning tools
                              Meetings
Plan Human     Project        Organization   Human resource Human
Resource       management charts and         management     Resource
Management     plan           position       plan
                              descriptions
               Activity       Networking
               resource
                 resource
                 requirements

                 Enterprise    Organizational
                 environmental theory
                 factors
               Organizational Expert
               process assets judgment
                              Meetings
Plan           Project        Communication       Communications Communications
Communications management requirements            management
Management     plan           analysis            plan
               Stakeholder    Communication       Project
               register       technology          documents
                                                  updates
                 Enterprise       Communication
                 environmental    models
                 factors
                 Organizational  Communication
                 process assets  methods
                                 Meetings
Plan Risk        Project         Analytical    Risk             Risk
Management       management techniques         management
                 plan                          plan
                 Project charter Expert
                                 judgment
                 Stakeholder     Meetings
                 register
                 Enterprise
                 environmental
                 factors
                 Organizational
                 process assets
Identify Risks   Risk            Documentation Risk register    Risk
                 management reviews
                 plan
                plan
                Cost              Information

                management        gathering
                plan              techniques
                 Schedule         Checklist
                 management       analysis
                 plan
                 Quality          Assumptions
                 management       analysis
                 plan
                 Human            Diagramming
                 resource         techniques
                 management
                 plan
                 Scope            SWOT analysis
                 baseline
                 Activity cost    Expert
                 estimates        judgment
                 Activity
                 duration
                 estimates
                 Stakeholder
                 register
                 Project
                 documents
                 Procurement
                 documents
                 Enterprise
                 environmental
                 factors
                 Organizational
                 process assets
Perform          Risk             Risk            Project     Risk
Qualitative Risk management       probability and documents
Analysis         plan             impact          updates
                                  assessment
                               assessment
                Scope          Probability and
                baseline       impact matrix
                Risk register Risk data
                               quality
                               assessment
                Enterprise     Risk
                environmental categorization
                factors
                Organizational Risk urgency
                process assets assessment
                               Expert
                               judgment
Perform         Risk           Data gathering      Project        Risk
Quantitative    management and                     documents
Risk Analysis   plan           representation      updates
                               techniques
                Cost           Quantitative
                management risk analysis
                plan           and modeling
                               techniques
                Schedule       Expert
                management judgment
                plan
                Risk register
                Enterprise
                environmental
                factors
                Organizational
                process assets
Plan Risk       Risk           Strategies for      Project        Risk
Responses       management negative risks          management
                plan           or threats          plan updates
                Risk register Strategies for       Project
                               positive risks or   documents
                               opportunities       updates
                                opportunities   updates
                                Contingent
                                response
                                strategies
                                Expert
                                judgment
Plan            Project         Make-or-buy     Procurement      Procurement
Procurement     management      analysis        management
Management      plan                            plan
                Requirements Expert             Procurement
                documentation judgment          statement of
                                                work
                Risk register   Market          Procurement
                                research        documents
                Activity        Meetings        Source selection
                resource                        criteria
                requirements
                Project                         Make-or-buy
                schedule                        decisions
                Activity cost                   Change requests
                estimates
                Stakeholder                     Project
                register                        documents
                                                updates
                 Enterprise
                 environmental
                 factors
                 Organizational
                 process assets
Plan Stakeholder Project        Expert          Stakeholder       Stakeholder
Management       management judgment            management
                 plan                           plan
                 Stakeholder    Meetings        Project
                 register                       documents
                                                updates
                  Enterprise     Analytical
                  environmental techniques
                  factors
                  Organizational
                  process assets


Executing Processes
Table B.3 lists the inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and Knowledge Areas
for the processes in the Executing process group.
Table B.3 Executing processes
Process Name      Inputs            Tools and        Outputs           Knowledge
                                    Techniques                         Area
Direct and     Project              Expert           Deliverables      Integration
Manage Project management           judgment
Work           plan
               Approved        Project               Work
               change requests management            performance
                               information           data
                               system
               Enterprise      Meetings              Change requests
               environmental
               factors
               Organizational                        Project
               process assets                        management
                                                     plan updates
                                                     Project
                                                     documents
                                                     updates
Perform Quality Quality             Quality          Change requests Quality
Assurance       management          management
                plan                and control
                                    tools
                  Process           Quality audits   Project
                  improvement                        management
                improvement                    management
                plan                           plan updates

                Quality metrics Process        Project
                                analysis       documents
                                               updates
                Quality control                Organizational
                measurements                   process assets
                                               updates
                Project
                documents
Acquire Project Human resource Pre-assignment Project staff     Human
Team            management                    assignments       Resource
                plan
                Enterprise     Negotiation    Resource
                environmental                 calendars
                factors
                Organizational Acquisition    Project
                process assets                management
                                              plan updates
                               Virtual teams
                               Multicriteria
                               decision
                               analysis
Develop Project Human resource Interpersonal  Team              Human
Team            management     skills         performance       Resource
                plan                          assessments
                Project staff  Training       Enterprise
                assignments                   environmental
                                              factors updates
                Resource       Team-building
                calendars      activities
                               Ground rules
                               Co-location
                               Recognition
                               and rewards
                                and rewards
                                Personnel

                                assessment
                                tools
Manage Project Human resource   Observation     Change requests Human
Team           management       and                             Resource
               plan             conversation
               Project staff    Project         Project
               assignments      performance     management
                                appraisals      plan updates
               Team             Conflict        Project
               performance      management      documents
               assessments                      updates
               Issue log        Interpersonal
                                skills
               Work                         Enterprise
               performance                  environmental
               reports                      factors updates
               Organizational               Organizational
               process assets               process assets
                                            updates
Manage         Communications Communication Project          Communications
Communications management     technology    communications
               plan
               Work           Communication Project
               performance    models        documents
               reports                      updates
               Enterprise     Communication Project
               environmental methods        management
               factors                      plan updates
               Organizational Information   Organizational
               process assets management    process assets
                              systems       updates
                              Performance
                              reporting
Conduct        Procurement    Bidder        Selected sellers Procurement
Conduct        Procurement      Bidder          Selected sellers Procurement
Procurements   management       conference
               plan
               Procurement      Proposal        Agreements
               documents        evaluation
                                techniques
               Source selection Independent     Resource
               criteria         estimates       calendars
               Seller proposals Expert          Change requests
                                judgment
               Project          Advertising     Project
               documents                        management
                                                plan updates
               Make-or-buy      Analytical      Project
               decisions        techniques      documents
                                                updates
               Procurement      Procurement
               statement of     negotiations
               work
               Organizational
               process assets
Manage         Stakeholder      Communication Issue log           Stakeholder
Stakeholder    management       methods
Engagement     plan
               Communications   Interpersonal   Change requests
               management       skills
               plan
               Change log       Management      Project
                                skills          management
                                                plan updates
               Organizational                   Project
               process assets                   documents
                                                updates
                                                Organizational
                                                process assets
                                                updates
                                                    updates


Monitoring and Controlling Processes
Table B.4 lists the inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and Knowledge Areas
for the Monitoring and Controlling group processes.
Table B.4 Monitoring and Controlling processes
Process Name      Inputs           Tools and      Outputs         Knowledge
                                   Techniques                     Area
Monitor and       Project          Expert         Change          Integration
Control Project   management       judgment       requests
Work              plan
                  Schedule         Analytical     Work
                  forecasts        techniques     performance
                                                  reports
                  Cost forecasts   Project        Project
                                   management     management
                                   information    plan updates
                                   system
                  Validated        Meetings       Project
                  changes                         documents
                                                  updates
               Work
               performance
               information
               Enterprise
               environmental
               factors
               Organizational
               process assets
Perform        Project             Expert         Approved        Integration
Integrated     management          judgment       change
Change Control plan                               requests
               Work                Meetings       Change log
               performance
                 performance
                 reports

                 Change requests Change          Project
                                 control tools   management
                                                 plan updates
                 Enterprise                      Project
                 environmental                   documents
                 factors                         updates
                 Organizational
                 process assets
Validate Scope   Project          Inspection     Accepted       Scope
                 management                      deliverables
                 plan
                 Requirements     Group          Change
                 documentation    decision-      requests
                                  making
                                  techniques
                 Requirements                    Work
                 traceability                    performance
                 matrix                          information
                 Verified                        Project
                 deliverables                    documents
                                                 updates
                 Work
                 performance
                 data
Control Scope    Project          Variance       Work           Scope
                 management       analysis       performance
                 plan                            information
                 Requirements                    Change
                 documentation                   requests
                 Requirements                    Project
                 traceability                    management
                 matrix                          plan updates
                 Work                            Project
                 performance                     documents
                performance                     documents
                data                            updates

                Organizational                  Organizational
                process assets                  process assets
                                                updates
Control         Project          Performance    Work             Time
Schedule        management       reviews        performance
                plan                            information
                Project schedule Project        Schedule
                                 management     forecasts
                                 software
                Work             Resource       Change
                performance      optimization   requests
                data             techniques
                Project          Modeling       Project
                calendars        techniques     management
                                                plan updates
                Schedule data    Leads and      Project
                                 lags           documents
                                                updates
                Organizational   Schedule       Organizational
                process assets   compression    process assets
                                                updates
                                Scheduling
                                tool
Control Costs   Project         Earned value Work          Cost
                management      management performance
                plan                         information
                Project funding Forecasting Cost forecasts
                requirements
                Work            To-complete
                performance     performance
                data            index (TCPI)
                Organizational Performance Change
                process assets reviews       requests
                                Project      Project
                                 Project        Project
                                 management     management
                                 software       plan updates
                                 Reserve        Project
                                 analysis       documents
                                                updates
                                                Organizational
                                                process assets
                                                updates
Control Quality Project         Seven basic     Quality        Quality
                management      quality tools   control
                plan                            measurements
                Quality metrics Statistical     Validated
                                sampling        changes
                Quality         Inspection      Verified
                checklists                      deliverables
                Work            Approved        Work
                performance     change          performance
                data            requests        information
                                review
                Approved                        Change
                change requests                 requests
                Deliverables                    Project
                                                management
                                                plan updates
                Project                         Project
                documents                       documents
                                                updates
                Organizational                  Organizational
                process assets                  process assets
                                                updates
Control        Project           Information    Work           Communications
Communications management        management     performance
               plan              systems        information
               Project           Expert         Change
               communications    judgment       requests
                communications judgment           requests
                Issue log      Meetings           Project
                                                  management
                                                  plan updates
                Work                              Project
                performance                       documents
                data                              updates
                Organizational                    Organizational
                process assets                    process assets
                                                  updates
Control Risks   Project          Risk             Work           Risk
                management       reassessment     performance
                plan                              information
                Risk register    Risk audits      Change
                                                  requests
                Work             Variance and     Project
                performance      trend analysis   management
                data                              plan updates
                Work             Technical        Project
                performance      performance      documents
                reports          measurement      updates
                                 Reserve          Organizational
                                 analysis         process assets
                                                  updates
                                 Meetings
Control         Project          Contract         Work           Procurement
Procurements    management       change           performance
                plan             control          information
                                 system
                Procurement      Procurement      Change
                documents        performance      requests
                                 reviews
                Agreements       Inspections      Project
                                 and audits       management
                                                  plan updates
                Approved         Performance      Project
                  Approved        Performance       Project
                  change requests reporting         documents
                                                    updates
                  Work             Payment          Organizational
                  performance      systems          process assets
                  reports                           updates
                  Work             Claims
                  performance      administration
                  data
                                   Records
                                   management
                                   system
Control           Project          Information      Work           Stakeholder
Stakeholder       management       management       performance
Engagement        plan             systems          information
                  Issue log        Expert           Change
                                   judgment         requests
                  Work             Meetings         Project
                  performance                       management
                  data                              plan updates
                  Project                           Project
                  documents                         documents
                                                    updates
                                                    Organizational
                                                    process assets
                                                    updates


Closing Processes
Table B.5 lists the inputs, tools and techniques, outputs, and Knowledge Areas
for the processes in the Closing process group.
Table B.5 Closing processes
Process       Inputs            Tools and     Outputs                Knowledge
Name                            Techniques                           Area
Close Project Project           Expert        Final product,         Integration
Close Project Project         Expert         Final product,       Integration
or Phase      management      judgment       service, or result

             plan                            transition
             Accepted         Analytical     Organizational
             deliverables     techniques     process assets
                                             updates
             Organizational   Meetings
             process assets
Close        Project          Procurement    Closed               Procurement
Procurements management       audits         procurements
             plan
             Procurement      Procurement    Organizational
             documents        negotiations   process assets
                                             updates
                              Records
                              management
                              system
Comprehensive Online Learning Environment
   Register on Sybex.com to gain access to the comprehensive online interactive

          learning environment and test bank to help you study for your
              Project Management Professional (PMP) certification.


The online test bank includes:
   Assessment Test to help you focus your study to specific objectives
   Chapter Tests to reinforce what you learned
   Practice Exams to test your knowledge of the material
   Digital Flashcards to reinforce your learning and provide last-minute test
   prep before the exam
   Searchable Glossary gives you instant access to the key terms you'll need to
   know for the exam
   Audio Instruction and Review of essential concepts to help you increase
   your understanding and fine-tune critical skills
   Bonus Questions that supplement topics in the chapters, providing you with
   additional questions to help you study for the exam
Go to http://sybextestbanks.wiley.com to register and gain access to this
comprehensive study tool package.
WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley's ebook EULA.
