                          Updated for the
                        PMBOK(R) Guide 6th Ed.




PMP(R)
in Depth
Project Management
Professional Certification Study
Guide for the PMP(R) Exam

Third Edition

Paul Sanghera
      PMP(R) IN DEPTH

PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL
CERTIFICATION STUDY GUIDE FOR THE
            PMP(R) EXAM

          THIRD EDITION



           Paul Sanghera
PMP(R) in Depth: Project Management Professional Certification Study Guide for the
PMP(R) Exam
Paul Sanghera
San Francisco, California, USA
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-3909-4                       ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-3910-0
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018957626
Copyright (c) 2019 by Paul Sanghera
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dis-
similar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and
images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are
subject to proprietary rights.
PMI, PMP, and PMBOK are registered trademarks of Project Management Institute, Inc. in the United
States and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility
for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied,
with respect to the material contained herein.
     Managing Director, Apress Media LLC: Welmoed Spahr
     Acquisitions Editor: Shiva Ramachandran
     Development Editor: Laura Berendson
     Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Cover designed by eStudio Calamar
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505,
email orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a
California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc
(SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please email rights@apress.com or visit http://www.apress.
com/rights-permissions.
Apress titles may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. eBook
versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our Print
and eBook Bulk Sales web page at http://www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary material referenced by the author in this book is available
to readers on GitHub via the book's product page, located at www.apress.com/9781484239094.
For more detailed information, please visit http://www.apress.com/source-code.
Printed on acid-free paper
To my wife, Renee, and our son, Adam.
Contents
About the Author  vii
Introduction ix

Part I:      Initiating the Project  1
Chapter 1:   Project Management Framework 3
Chapter 2:   Project Environment  45
Chapter 3:   Initiating the Project  87

Part II:     Planning the Project 113
Chapter 4:   Planning Project and Scope 115
Chapter 5:   Planning for Project Schedule Management  155
Chapter 6:Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and
          Procurement 199
Chapter 7:   Planning Quality and Risk Management 251
Chapter 8:Planning for Communication and Stakeholder
          Management 313

Part III:    Executing the Project 343
Chapter 9:   Managing Execution of Project Work 345
Chapter 10: Managing Project Resources 381
Chapter 11:Managing Communication and Stakeholder
           Engagement 419

Part IV:     Monitoring and Controlling the Project 437
Chapter 12: Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work 439
Chapter 13:Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
           and Resources 479
Chapter 14:Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and
           Communication  519
vi   Contents


     Part V:    Closing 535
     Chapter 15: Closing the Project 537
     Appendix A:Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises  549
     Appendix B:Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review
                Questions  587
     Glossary 637

     Index 651
About the Author
                              Dr. Paul Sanghera is a leading expert in proj-
                              ect management. He is a scientist, engineer,
                              teacher, manager, and author. He has years of
                              diverse hands-on project management expe-
                              rience, both in academic research labs--from
                              Cornell to CERN--and in the high-tech com-
                              puter industry--from Novell to Netscape to
                              MP3. Having worked in various roles, includ-
                              ing project manager, director of project man-
                              agement, director of software development,
                              software developer, teacher and trainer, and sci-
                              entist, Dr. Sanghera has developed a broad and
                              deep comprehension of the global principles of
                              project management applicable to all areas. In
addition to authoring or coauthoring more than 150 science research papers
published in American, Canadian, European, and other international research
journals, Dr. Sanghera has authored several books in science, technology, and
project management.
Introduction
    "Begin at the beginning, and go on till you come to the end: then stop."
                       --Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll

The primary purpose of this book is to help you pass the Project Management
Professional (PMP) exam administered by the Project Management Institute
(PMI). Because the book has a laser-sharp focus on the exam objectives,
expert project managers and project team members who want to pass the
PMP exam can use this book to ensure that they do not miss any objectives.
Yet this is not an exam-cram book. The chapters and the sections within each
chapter are presented in a logical learning sequence. A topic in a chapter and
the chapter only depend upon the previously covered topics and chapters, and
there is no hopping from topic to topic. The concepts and topics, both simple
and complex, are clearly explained when they appear for the first time. No
prior knowledge of project management is assumed. This facilitates stepwise
learning, prevents confusion, and makes this book useful also for beginners
who want to get up to speed quickly to pass the PMP exam, even if they are
new to the discipline of project management. The presentation of material in
such a fashion enables the book to help a wider audience, as noted next.


Who This Book Is For
With its focus on the PMP exam topics, this book is designed to serve the
following audiences:

      *   Project management practitioners who want to prepare
          for the PMP exam
      *   Entry-level project managers and project team members
          who want to prepare for the PMP exam
      *   Beginners who want to join the field of project manage-
          ment, take the PMP exam, or both
x   Introduction


          *    Project managers who want a book to use as a quick and
               easy reference to the discipline of project management
          *    Instructors and trainers who want a textbook for a
               course on introductory project management for both
               exam and non-exam classes

    How This Book Is Organized
    This book tells the story of project management in a cohesive and concise yet
    comprehensive fashion. The book is written to the most current version of
    the PMP exam based on the sixth edition of A Guide to the Project Management
    Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide) by PMI. The discipline of project manage-
    ment, according to the PMBOK Guide, contains ten knowledge areas, such
    as cost management and quality management, and five process groups: initi-
    ating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing. There are
    two obvious approaches to presenting this project management content: 1)
    in order of knowledge areas, a rather theoretical approach, or 2) in order of
    process groups, from initiating to closing the project, a practical approach that
    is closer to the lifecycle of a project in the real world.
    The PMBOK Guide and almost all project management exam books are orga-
    nized along the knowledge areas. However, the exam objectives published by
    PMI, referred to as tasks in the exam specifications, are organized in order
    of the process groups. This poses a problem for the reader preparing for
    the exam based on exam objectives. For example, one exam book referred
    to eleven chapters for one exam objective in its exam readiness checklist.
    This book solves that problem by presenting the material in order of process
    groups: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing.
    This order of presentation is also consistent with the lifecycle of a project,
    and therefore facilitates natural learning by connecting the material to real-
    world experience. We have been taking this approach since the publication
    of the first edition of PMP in Depth in 2006. We should mention that although
    the main guide in the PMBOK Guide, Sixth Edition is still organized along the
    knowledge areas, the standard is to present in order of the process groups.


    How Each Chapter Is Organized
    With the exception of Chapter 1, which is on the project management frame-
    work, each chapter begins with a list of the exam objectives on which the
    chapter is focused. These objectives are officially called tasks by PMI, and these
    tasks are organized into domains, which are essentially the process groups. I
    have followed exactly the order of the domains published by PMI, but I have
    shuffled around a few objectives to keep the topics and subject matter in line
    with sequential learning and to avoid hopping from topic to topic.
                                                                  Introduction    xi



The first section in each chapter is an introduction in which I establish three
underlying concepts or topics that will be explored in the chapter. Each chap-
ter has the following features:

      *   Exam Objectives. All exam objectives covered in the
          chapter are fully explained at the beginning of the chapter.
      *   Big Picture. Each chapter begins by introducing the big
          picture of the topics covered in the chapter. This pre-
          pares the reader for a smooth dive into the details, which
          follow.
      *   Study Checkpoints. Each chapter in its body pres-
          ents Study Checkpoints, which are exercises to ensure
          that you get the crucial points in the covered material.
          The solutions to Study Checkpoints are presented in
          Appendix A.
      *   Notes, Tips, and Cautions. As you read through a
          chapter, you will find Notes that present additional help-
          ful material related to the topic being described, Tips that
          provide additional real-world insight into the topic being
          discussed, and Cautions on the points that would be easy
          to trip on for some.
      *   Summary. The "Summary" section of each chapter pro-
          vides the big, unified picture while reviewing the impor-
          tant concepts in the chapter in a very concise way.
      *   Exam's Eye View. The "Exam's Eye View" section
          highlights the important points in the chapter from
          the perspective of the exam: the things that you must
          comprehend, the things that you should watch out for
          because they might not seem to fit in with the ordinary
          order of things, and the facts that you should memorize
          for the exam.
      *   Review Questions. Each chapter ends with a "Review
          Questions" section that has a two-pronged purpose: to
          help you test your knowledge of the material presented
          in the chapter and to help you evaluate your ability to
          answer the exam questions based on the exam objectives
          covered in the chapter. The answers to the review ques-
          tions are presented in Appendix B.
xii   Introduction



      About the PMP Exam
      This book covers the material for the PMP exam. Passing this exam is neces-
      sary to obtain PMP certification.
      To be eligible to take the PMP exam, you must meet a set of minimum require-
      ments. A summary of these requirements and other details is shown in the
      following table.

      The PMP Exam at a Glance

      Exam Detail                                 PMP
      Number of questions                         Scoreable: 175
                                                  Pretest: 25
      Maximum time allowed                        4 hours
      Question types                              Multiple choice
      Minimum educational background              Category 1: Bachelor's degree
                                                  Category 2: High school diploma or equivalence
      Minimum project management                  Category 1: 4,500 hours
      experience                                  Category 2: 7,500 hours
      Minimum formal project management           Category 1: 35 contact hours
      education                                   Category 2: 35 contact hours
      Exam fee (given in U.S. dollars--may vary   Member: $405
      by country)                                 Non-member: $555

      As mentioned previously, the PMP exam objectives are organized along the
      process groups (stages of the project lifecycle, as we call them in this book).
      These process groups are also called domains. The relative weight given to
      these domains in the PMP exam and the part of this book in which this is
      covered are listed in the following table.

      Proportion of Questions from Each Domain

      Domain #         Domain Name                                  Percentage Coverage in the
      Book Part #                                                   Exam
      1                Initiating the Project                       13
      2                Planning the Project                         24
      3                Executing the Project                        31
      4                Monitoring and Controlling the Project       25
      5                Closing the Project                          7
                       Total                                        100
                                                                           Introduction       xiii




Note For the most up-to-date and detailed information, visit the PMI website at www.pmi.org
or read the latest version of the PMP Certification Handbook by PMI.


The following are a few tips that you can use during the exam:

       *    PMBOK has a very formal way of naming processes,
            process groups, knowledge areas, and documents. Know
            those formal names well. However, just like in real-life
            project management, do not expect that the exam will
            always refer to these items in a formal way. To help you
            with this issue, this book refers to these names in both
            formal and informal ways. For example, performing qual-
            ity control (informal) means the Control Quality process
            (formal), scope plan (informal) means project scope man-
            agement plan (formal), and initiating (or initiation) means
            the Initiating process group.
       *    The questions in the PMP exam can be wordy and might
            include unnecessary information to distract you from the
            relevant facts. So, you need to read the questions care-
            fully and patiently and figure out what counts and what
            does not.
       *    Get comfortable with the idea that there will be some
            questions that you will not be able to answer correctly. In
            such a situation, just believe in yourself and your experi-
            ence, consider the PMI's way of looking at project man-
            agement, and select the best answer accordingly. You
            may have the option to leave these questions for a pos-
            sible review later if you have time. (Read the instructions
            before starting the exam to find out.) Key point: Move on
            without getting frustrated.
       *    There will be tricky questions to weed out candidates
            who might have project management experience but do
            not have an in-depth understanding of the discipline of
            project management from the perspective of PMBOK, as
            covered in this book.
       *    There will be questions for which you will need to choose
            between an innocent way of skipping the formal process
            to save time and following the formal project manage-
            ment process. In almost all cases, the correct answer will
            be to follow the process.
xiv   Introduction


            *   There will be questions for which you will need to
                choose between facing the problem head-on or taking
                an easy way out, such as dodging a thorny issue, ignoring
                a challenging problem, or postponing a difficult decision.
                Almost always, the correct answer is to meet the prob-
                lem head-on in a professional manner.
            *   To answer some questions correctly, understand that
                in the world of project management as seen from the
                perspective of PMBOK, project managers communicate
                directly and clearly and do not say things between the
                lines. For example, if you have a problem with a team
                member, you talk to the team member face-to-face rather
                than going to the member's manager, which you might
                need to do eventually if you can't solve the problem by
                dealing directly with the team member.
            *   Understand clearly the roles of the key stakeholders, such
                as the project manager, project sponsor, and customer.
                Especially understand your responsibilities as a project
                manager and the skills you are supposed have and use.
                You need to be proactive to make decisions and man-
                age the project, influence the factors that contribute to
                changes rather than waiting for the changes to occur, and
                have up-to-date information about the project.
            *   Know the details of the input, output, and tools and tech-
                niques for each process, not just the names. Here is an
                example: It's not enough to remember that the project
                management plan is an input to a process. You should
                know the project management plan is an input because it
                contains such and such subsidiary plans from which such
                and such information is used in this process.
      Best wishes for the exam; go for it!
                                                        --Paul Sanghera, Ph.D.
                                                                   PA R T


                                                                      I

Initiating the
Project
Welcome to the world of project management. Here is project management
for you in five concepts: initiate, plan, execute, monitor and control, and close.
The rest is just details. In order to optimize your learning about initiating a
project, you will want to know what a project is and where it comes come
from, and you will want to have an overview--a bird's-eye view--of the field
of project management. This is presented in Chapter 1. In Chapter 2, you
will learn about the environment in which the project is performed and also
about the skills necessary for a project manager. In the same chapter, the
development of two business documents necessary for initiating a project is
also discussed.
Finally, in Chapter 3, you will learn how a project is actually initiated.
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                             1

Project
Management
Framework
What do the Eiffel Tower, the Internet, and this book have in common?
Projects! All three of them are outcomes of projects. Even given all the
required material and knowledge, how do people really build immense and
complex structures or systems, such as the Eiffel Tower of Paris, the Taj Mahal
of Agra, or the Internet and the World Wide Web of the Information Age?
The answer is again projects. Through projects, it is possible to build small
and big and simple and complex things in an effective and efficient manner.
All projects need to be managed. A so-called unmanaged project is simply a
poorly managed project that is destined to fail. Therefore, the importance of
project management cannot be overstated.
We all know from experience that each project has (or should have) a
beginning and an end. Therefore, managing a project means managing the
lifecycle of the project, starting from the beginning (initiating) and going to the
end (closing); this is accomplished using processes, which constitute what are
called project management knowledge areas. Although you use your knowledge
in terms of processes to manage projects, the management will be greatly
influenced by the environment in which the project runs, such as the structure
and culture of the performing organization. Projects also originate from their
environments.
(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_1
4   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


    The goal of this chapter is to walk you through the framework of project
    management. To that end, we will explore three avenues: the project lifecycle,
    the project management knowledge areas, and the project in the context of
    programs, portfolios, and the organization's strategy. In the process of doing
    so, we will introduce some basic concepts of projects management.


    Basic Concepts in Project Management
    Each discipline of knowledge, from physics to biology and from computer
    science to poetry, builds upon some basic concepts. The terms that refer to
    or define these concepts make up the language of the discipline. The very
    basic terms in project management are described briefly in the following list:
          *   Project. A project is a work effort made over a finite
              period of time with a start and a finish to create a unique
              product, service, or result. Because a project has a start
              and an end, it is also called a temporary effort or endeavor.
          *   Project Phase. A project phase is a set of logically
              related activities that usually completes one or more
              major deliverables of the project. The phases are generally
              completed in sequence; however, an overlap is possible in
              some situations. Depending on its size and complexity, a
              project may have one or more phases.
          *   Project Lifecycle. It is the full project duration from
              beginning to end, including all project phases. A project
              has at least one phase. The lifecycle of a one-phase
              project is composed of five project stages: initiating,
              planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and
              closing. If a project has multiple phases, all of these stages
              are repeated in each phase.
          *   Process Groups. These are technical names for the
              project stages: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring
              and controlling, and closing.
          *   Organization. An organization is a group of individuals
              organized to work for some purpose or mission.
              Computer companies, energy companies (to whom you
              pay your electric bills), and cable companies are examples
              of organizations. An organization might offer products,
              such as books or donuts, or services, such as Internet
              access or online banking.
                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   5



*   Performing Organization. The performing organiza
    tion, also referred to as the project organization, is the
    organization that is performing the project.
*   Project Stakeholder. A project stakeholder is an
    individual or an organization that can affect or be affected
    by the project execution. A project can have a wide
    spectrum of stakeholders, from the project sponsor, to
    an environmental organization, to an ordinary citizen.
*   Process. In the context of projects, a process is a set of
    related tasks performed to manage a certain aspect of a
    project, such as cost, scope, or risk. Each process belongs
    to a knowledge area and corresponds to a process group.
*   Knowledge Area. A knowledge area in project manage
    ment is defined by the knowledge requirements related
    to managing a specific aspect of a project, such as cost,
    by using a set of processes. PMI recognizes a total of ten
    knowledge areas, such as cost management and human
    resource management.
*   Tailoring. Obviously, you don't apply all project
    management knowledge to a project. For a given project,
    with help from the project team, you select appropriate
    lifecycle phases and needed outputs, and to produce
    those outputs you choose the right processes, inputs, and
    tools and techniques. This method is called tailoring.
*   Project Management. Project management is the
    use of knowledge, skills, and tools to manage a project
    from start to finish with the goal of meeting the project
    requirements. It involves using the appropriate processes.
*   Phase Gate. This is a review at the end of each phase
    leading to the decision to continue to the next phase as
    planned, continue to the next phase with changed plan, or
    end the project.
6   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


    This is a minimal set of terms that you need to understand before you can
    start your exploration of the world of project management. More terms will
    be introduced as you continue exploring the discipline of project management
    in this book.
    Now that you understand these basic terms, you can ask a very basic question:
    What does it mean to manage a project? In other words, what's involved in
    managing a project?


    Understanding Projects
    Before delving into the details of project management, you need to understand
    what a project is, where it came from, and why. At any organization, there are
    many activities being executed every day. Most of these activities are organized
    into groups of interrelated activities. These groups fall into two categories:
    projects and operations. An operation is an ongoing and repetitive set of tasks,
    whereas a project has a lifecycle--a beginning and an end.


    What Is a Project?
    A project is a work effort made over a finite period of time with a start and
    a finish to create a unique product, service, or result. Because a project has
    a start and a finish, it is also called a temporary effort or endeavor. In other
    words, as the PMI defines it, "a project is a temporary endeavor undertaken
    to create a unique product, service, or result." So, a project has two defining
    characteristics: It is temporary, and it creates a unique product. Let's explore
    further these two defining concepts: temporary and unique.
    Temporary. The temporary nature of projects refers to the fact that each
    project has a definite beginning and a definite end. A project can reach its end
    in one of two possible ways:
          *   The project has met its objectives--that is, the planned
              unique product has been created.
          *   The project has been terminated before its successful
              completion for whatever reason.
    Note that the temporary nature of a project does not mean that the project
    would be of short duration, nor does it refer to the product it creates.
    Projects can create lasting products, such as the Taj Mahal, the Eiffel Tower,
    or the Internet.
                                                                     PMP (R) in Depth       7



The second defining characteristic of a project is that it must create a unique
product.
Unique product. The outcome of a project must be a unique product,
service, or result. How do a product, service, and result differ from each
other?
       *    Product. This is a tangible, quantifiable artifact that
            is either the end item or a component of it. The big-
            screen television in your living room, the Swiss watch on
            your wrist, and the wine bottle on your table are some
            examples of products.
       *    Service. Actually, when we say a project can create a
            service, we really mean the capability to perform a
            service. For example, a project that creates a website for
            a bank to offer online banking has created the capability
            to offer the online banking service.
       *    Result. This is usually the knowledge-related outcome
            of a project--for example, the results of an analysis
            performed in a research project.
In this book, quite often we will refer to product, service, or result as just
"product" or "project outcome" for brevity.


Caution! Not only organizations undertake projects. A project can also be undertaken by a
group of individuals or even a single individual.


Projects are organized to execute a set of activities that cannot be addressed
within the limits of the organization's ongoing normal operations. To clearly
identify whether an undertaking is a project, you must understand the
difference between a project and an operation.


Distinguishing Projects from Operations
An organization executes a multitude of activities as part of the work to
achieve objectives. Some of these activities are to support projects, and others
are to support what are called operations. An operation is a set of tasks that
does not qualify to be a project. In other words, an operation is a function that
performs ongoing tasks. It does not produce a unique (new) product, and it
does not have a preplanned beginning and end. For example, to put together a
data center is a project, but after you put it together, keeping it up and running
is an operation.
8   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


    It is important to understand that projects and operations share some
    characteristics, such as the following:
              *   Both require resources, including human resources, i.e.,
                  people.
              *   Both are constrained to limited, as opposed to unlimited,
                  resources.
              *   Both are managed--that is, planned, executed, and
                  controlled.
              *   Both have objectives and contribute to meeting the
                  company's strategic objectives.
              *   Both can have and share stakeholders.
    The distinctions between projects and operations can be made by sticking to
    the definition of a project--that it is temporary and unique. Operations are
    generally ongoing and repetitive. Although both projects and operations have
    objectives, a project ends when its objectives are met, whereas an operation
    continues contributing to objectives--and possibly to a new set of objectives
    in the event of a change in the organization's strategy.
    Projects can be performed at various levels of an organization; they vary in
    size and accordingly can involve just one person or a team. Table 1-1 presents
    some examples of projects.

    Table 1-1. Examples of Projects

    Project                                  Outcome (Product, Service, or Result)
    Constructing Eiffel Tower                Product
    Running presidential election campaign   Results: win or lose; Products: documents
    Developing a website to offer online     Service
    education
    Setting up a computer network in one     Service
    building
    Moving a computer network from one       Result: network is moved to another building
    building
    Study the genes of members of Congress Results (of the research); Product: research paper
    Book sold in a bookstore                 Product
    A software app like MS Word sold a CD Product
    and paid for once
    A software app integrated into the web   Service
    and paid for monthly
    Human Genome Project                     Result
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   9




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.1

   Identify each of the following items as a project or an operation.
       A.   A librarian performing her daily job responsibilities
       B.   A bookseller processing customer orders
       C.   A network administrator ensuring that the network stays up and
            running 24/7
       D.   Taking a course in molecular biology

A project can result in a product (or service) that is sustained by an operation.
For example, constructing the Eiffel Tower is a project, whereas managing it
for the tourists visiting it every day is an operation.
Now that we have a clear idea of what a project is, we have to wonder why
an organization would launch a specific project. So, let's ask a fundamental
question: Where do projects originally come from?


Origins of Projects: Where Do Projects Come
From?
Projects are originated by organizational leaders in response to one or more
situations the organization is facing. These situations, or factors acting on the
organization, may fall into one of the following four categories:
       1. Business/legal requirements. This category includes
          projects based on the need of meeting legal, regulatory,
          or social requirements. For example, consider a building
          owner authorizing a project to make the building
          accessible to physically disabled persons in order to meet
          the legal requirements for using the building for a specific
          business.
       2. Stakeholder requests or needs. This category
          includes projects based on satisfying stakeholder requests
          or needs. An example would be an environmental
          organization starting a project to raise awareness among
          politicians about the science behind global warming issues.
          Another example would be a company that undertakes a
          project to lessen the negative impact that its operations
          or products may have on the environment.
10   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


             3. Business or technological strategies. This category
                of factors would give rise to projects based on the need to
                implement or change business or technological strategies.
                For example, a web design company authorizes a project
                to automate certain aspects of maintaining websites to
                increase its efficiency and revenue. For another example,
                based on recent technological advances a taxi company
                starts a project to implement an automatic driving feature
                in some of its taxis.
             4. Products, processes, or services. This category of
                factors would give rise to projects based on the need to
                create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services.
                For example, a biotechnology company authorizes
                a project to produce and implement SOP (standard
                operating procedure) in all its labs.
     As a careful reader would note, these four categories of factors specified
     by PMI are not mutually exclusive. For example, the last category is at least
     partially redundant; a project in response to any of these categories may
     create a product or service. For this reason, or as a result of the project's
     objectives, the project may fall into more than one of these categories. For
     example, a car manufacturer's project to make electric cars using cutting-edge
     technology in response to environmentally aware customers' needs falls into
     all the last three categories: 2, 3, and 4.
     These categories of factors collectively are called the project initiation context.
     As illustrated in Figure 1-1, these factors are linked, on one hand, to the
     strategic objectives of the organization and influence its business strategy, and
     on the other hand are linked to the business value of the organization though
     projects. In short, an organization with a certain business value, responding
     to one or more of these factors, runs a project that produces some business
     value, thus adding to the previous business value of the organization. This is
     how projects bring about change--by driving the organization from a lower
     business-value state to a higher business-value state--and in this way help the
     organization to stay viable.


     Note The strategy of an organization is an action plan to achieve its business goals and
     objectives. It's also called the strategic plan or strategic business plan. The strategy determines
     the portfolio of projects and programs that the organization will execute.
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth         11




           KZ^                                            KZ
            K                                              ^



^Z                                                                    DZ
  Z                                       WZ
                                                                      ZZ
 /Z                                      /Z
 ZZZ                                      Z                           ZZ
                                                                     ZZZ




                                          WZ




                                      s


Figure 1-1. Origination of a project and its single most important outcome: business value
added to the organization


Caution! The factors discussed in this section influence not only the organization's current
business strategies but also its current operations because operations are there to serve business
strategies or objectives.


We will pick up this topic again in the next chapter to explore how, starting
from the initiation context discussed here, a project is actually started in an
organization.
Where there is a project, there is project management.


Understanding Project Management
In this book, we refer to project management as defined in the project
management standard by the Project Management Institute (PMI): "Project
management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to
project activities to meet the project requirements."
This standard, contained in the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK) Guide, presents, as PMI claims, "a subset of the project management
body of knowledge that is generally recognized as good practice." By generally
recognized, PMI means two things: 1) the presented knowledge is applicable to
most projects most of the time; and 2) there is consensus about its value and
12   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     usefulness. The good practice is the general consensus that the application of
     the presented knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project management
     processes can enhance the probability of project success.


     Note As a result of innovation and advances in science and technology, the body of knowledge
     in the project management profession is constantly changing, so the standard is updated
     accordingly every few years.


     In a poorly managed project, bad things happen, such as missed deadlines, cost
     overruns, and poor quality, all resulting in dissatisfied project stakeholders.
     This will essentially fail the project and hurt the organization's reputation
     and viability. However, effective project management helps to manage different
     project aspects, such as cost, scope, and stakeholders, making the project
     more predictable as it's being executed. This helps to identify and resolve
     problems and issues--as well as to identify and respond to risk--in a timely
     fashion, increasing the chances of project success. Moreover, with effective
     project management, you can clearly link the project result to the business
     goals of the organization, which will enable you to adjust the project plans
     in a changing business environment. This way, effective project management
     helps the organization persist in a fast-changing world by staying relevant and
     viable. In this book, project management means effective project management
     until mentioned otherwise.
     Projects are inseparable from project management. At initiating time, a project
     is just born, and it's brought up by a procedure called progressive elaboration
     through project management.


     Understanding Progressive Elaboration
     As the saying goes, Rome was not built in a day. Rest aside, the product of a
     project--even the project plan--is not built in a day either. Usually there is a
     concept first and a broad vision for the end product--that is, the outcome of
     the project. The clearer the vision you have of the unique product that you
     want from the project, the more accurate the project plan will be. So, you
     move toward the project plan in incremental steps as the ideas about the final
     product are refined and as you get more and more information about the
     requirements in a progressive fashion. This procedure of defining (or planning)
     a project is called progressive elaboration.
     Here is an example of progressive elaboration. You wake up one morning
     with an idea to close the digital gap in your community. Now, you have a
     concept of the final product (result) of your project: close the digital gap in
     your community. But what do you really mean by that? It might include many
                                                                       PMP (R) in Depth       13



things--building computers in an economical way and providing them at low
prices to those who don't have them, raising awareness of the necessity of
computer literacy, offering classes, and the like. Now, you are really working
to refine your idea of the final product. The second question is, how are you
going to do this? Here, you are referring to the project plan. You can see that
the project plan and its accuracy and details depend upon how refined the
idea of the final product is. The final product or objectives and the plan to
achieve them will be elaborated further in steps.


Tip Uncontrolled changes that make it into the project without being properly processed are
called scope creep. Do not confuse progressive elaboration with scope creep.


Progressive elaboration, in general, means developing something in
incremental steps. The project plan will be broadly defined to start and will
get more accurate, detailed, and explicit in an incremental fashion as better
understanding of the project deliverables and objectives develops. It involves
successive iterations of the planning process, which result in a more accurate
and complete plan.
Even after you have an approved final project plan and the project starts
executing, progressive elaboration continues to some extent. For example,
you will see later in this chapter that the execution and planning stages of
the project interact with each other. Based on project performance and
stakeholder requests, the project plan could change, even including project
scope.
Most of project management is done by performing a set of processes.


Understanding a Process
Processes are the heart of project management. In other words, processes
are atoms, the smallest functional units, of project management. If you want to
think of project management like a project management professional, think in
terms of processes. Almost everything in the world of project management is
done through processes.
What is a process, anyway? Back up a little and look around you; you will see
processes everywhere, not only in project management. For example, when
you make coffee in the morning, you go through a process. The water, the
coffee filter, and the roasted hazelnut coffee made by grinding golden-colored
beans are the input items to this process. The coffeemaker is the tool, and
how you make the coffee is the technique. A cup of freshly brewed hazelnut
coffee is the output item from this process. So, a process, in general, is a set of
14   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     interrelated activities performed to obtain a specified set of products, results,
     or services. A project management process, as explained in the example and
     in Figure 1-2, always consists of three parts: input, tools and techniques, and
     output. If you like this analogy, think of a process as a chemical reaction in
     which tools and techniques operate on input to produce an output. The term
     raw data in Figure 1-2 means that the input is processed to produce output.




     Figure 1-2. Three parts of a process: tools and techniques operating on input to produce
     output


     Of course, you can come up with examples of processes that you have used
     in your life without realizing it. In project management, you use processes
     to accomplish things, such as developing a project schedule, directing and
     managing the project work, and developing and managing the project team.


     Tip As a phase is the atom of a project, a process is the atom of project
     management.


     As illustrated in Figure 1-2, each process consists of three parts, described in
     the following list:
            *    Input. The input to a process consists of the raw data,
                 i.e., the data or information that is needed to start the
                 process and that will be processed into output. For
                 example, the project management plan is one of several
                 input items in the Develop Schedule process that will be
                 used to develop the schedule of a project.
            *    Tools and Techniques. Tools and techniques are the
                 methods used to operate on the input to transform it
                 into output. For example, a critical path method that
                 helps to develop a schedule is a tool used in the schedule
                 development process.
                                                                    PMP (R) in Depth       15



       *    Output. The output is the outcome or result of a
            process. Each process contains at least one output item;
            otherwise, there would be no point in performing a
            process. For example, an output item of the schedule
            development process is, well, the project schedule.
Now that you understand what a process is, you likely realize that you will
be using different processes at different stages (not phases) of a project, such
as planning and execution. Actually, the whole lifecycle of a project can be
understood in terms of five stages, with each stage corresponding to a group
of processes.


Caution An organizational operation may also have some kinds of processes, but that does
not make the operation a process.


The following are some characteristics of processes:
       1. Iterations. Some processes, such as Develop Project
          Charter and Close Project, are run only once or at
          predetermined points in the process, while others,
          such as Conduct Procurements and Acquire Resources,
          may be periodically run depending on the project size.
          Yet processes like Define Activities may be even more
          frequently performed.
       2. Process Interconnect. Processes are connected with
          other processes by input or output. The output of a
          process becomes an input (by itself or as a part of another
          input) to another process, or it's a terminal output; i.e., a
          project or phase deliverable.
       3. Overlapping. Some of the input items may appear in
          multiple projects. This is also true for tools or techniques.
          From this, you can see that projects may overlap in their
          activities.
Now that we have a very good basic idea of projects, we can take a tour of
the project lifecycle.


Understanding the Project Lifecycle
As you already know, each project has a beginning and an end. The timespan
from the project's beginning to its end is called the project lifecycle. If a project
has multiple phases, all the phases are completed during its lifecycle to complete
16   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     the project. Regardless of whether the project has multiple phases or just one
     phase, during this lifecycle the project is started, organized and prepared for,
     carried out (project work is performed), watched over, and closed. In the
     standard terminology, a project is initiated, planned, executed, monitored and
     controlled, and closed.


     Caution! Do not confuse project lifecycle with product lifecycle. A project is executed to create
     a product or products, which last after the project is finished. In general, the project lifecycle is
     contained within the lifecycle of each product it creates. For example, a project creates a product
     that lasts for a certain time after the project ends, and then it retires. As another example, a project
     is run to add features to a product that existed before the project was initiated and lasts after the
     project is completed.


     From initiation/authorization to completion/closure, a project goes through a
     whole lifecycle that includes defining the project objectives, planning the work
     to achieve those objectives, performing the work, monitoring and controlling
     the progress, and closing the project after receiving product acceptance.
     Figure 1-3 shows the different stages of the project lifecycle; the arrows
     indicate the flow of information.


                                                    /




                                                    W



                          DZZ
                                                                          
                          ZZ


                                                     Z


     Figure 1-3. Different stages in the lifecycle of a project. Each of these stages represents a
     process group.
                                                                               PMP (R) in Depth          17




Caution! I refer to the five process groups as five stages for the purpose of helping you
visualize a project. Technically, and in PMBOK, they are called process groups. However, be
prepared to recognize them regardless of how they are referred to in the exam; do not expect the
exam to always refer to a process group or a document by its formal technical name. This is also
true with the real world out there, where you will be performing projects.


The five stages, technically called process groups, of a project lifecycle are
described in the following list.
Initiating a Project. This stage defines and authorizes the project. The
project manager is named, and the project is officially launched through a signed
document called the project charter, a high-level document that contains items
such as the purpose of the project, product description, project objectives and
requirements, and a summary of the milestone schedule. The central purpose
of this stage is to align the project's purpose with the business needs and
the organization's business strategy on one hand and with the stakeholders'
expectations on the other.
It's a good policy to involve customers and other important stakeholders in the
initiating stage of the project. It will give them a feeling of shared ownership that
will greatly contribute to the success of the project by positively influencing
factors such as acceptance of deliverables and stakeholder satisfaction.


Note In the discipline of project management, like in many other disciplines, the term high-
level means lacking details or not referring to details. Keep this meaning in mind when you read
the terms in this book, such as high-level product description, high-level plan, and the like. Details
are usually worked out through a process called progressive elaboration.

Caution! The processes in the initiating process group, just like those in any other process
group, can also be used to initiate a phase of a project that has multiple phases.


The initiation of a project is presented, in detail, in Part I of this book.
After the project has been initiated, it needs planning.
Planning the Project. In this stage, you, the project manager, along with the
project management team, develop the project scope, define and refine the
project objectives, and develop activities to meet those objectives. You do this
by developing the project management plan, which is a collection of several
plans and other documents that constitute a course of action required to
achieve the objectives and meet the requirements of the project. The processes
18   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     used to perform this stage fall into a group called the planning process group.
     In this process group, some non-plan documents are also developed for the
     project.
     The approved scope plan, schedule plan, and cost plan are called the scope
     baseline, schedule baseline, and cost baseline, respectively. These three baselines
     together are called the project baseline or the performance measurement
     baseline (PMB). The project performance at any time is assessed by comparing
     the results from project execution against this performance measurement
     baseline. In other words, to see how the project is performing, you compare
     the actual project execution results against this baseline.


     Note The project management plan contains plans from various project management areas
     called subsidiary plans, such as a project scope management plan, a schedule management plan,
     and a quality management plan.


     The planning of a project is presented, in detail, in Part II of this book.
     You then execute the project as planned.
     Executing the Project. In this stage, you, the project manager, manage the
     execution of the project as planned in the project management plan. You
     coordinate all the activities being performed to achieve the project objectives
     and meet the project requirements. Of course, the main output of this project
     is the project deliverables. Approved changes, recommendations, and defect
     repairs are also implemented in this stage. The stakeholders can also suggest
     changes, which must go through an approval process before implementation.
     The project execution is performed using processes that fall into a group
     called the executing process group.
     So, the project work defined in the project management plan is executed by
     using the processes in the executing process group. The processes in this
     group are used to accomplish a three-pronged goal:
            *    Coordinate resources, including budget, team members,
                 and time used to perform the project activities.
            *    Integrate and manage the project activities being
                 performed.
            *    Ensure the implementation of the project scope and
                 approved changes.
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth        19



A lion's share of project resources is consumed in performing processes from
the executing process group.


Note Performing processes from the executing process group may also generate change
requests, which must be processed for approval in the monitor and control group.


The execution of a project is presented, in detail, in Part III of this book.
Where do the changes and recommendations implemented in this stage come
from? They arise from monitoring and controlling the project. In general, the
execution of the project needs to be monitored and controlled to ensure the
project stays on the planned track.
Monitoring and Controlling the Project. You monitor and control the
project throughout its lifecycle, including during the executing stage. The
purpose of monitoring and controlling is to make sure that the project stays on
track, i.e., is performed as planned, and, if it goes off track, to take action to bring
it back on track. To accomplish this, you continually perform the following steps:
       1. Collect the actual project performance data.
       2. Analyze it to compere the results against the project
          performance baseline to measure project deviation from
          the plan.
       3. Based on deviation, generate change requests, e.g.,
          recommend preventive and corrective actions, and
          process them for approval followed by implementation.
Change requests may also come directly from the stakeholders and should
also be properly evaluated and processed. You will do all this using the
processes that fall into the process group called the monitoring and controlling
process group.


Note Monitoring and controlling does not start only after the project begins execution. Rather,
the project needs to be monitored and controlled all the way from initiation through closing.


The monitoring and controlling of a project is presented, in detail, in Part IV
of this book.
Whether completed or terminated, each project needs to be closed properly.
20   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Closing the Project. In this stage, you verify that all the required project
     processes are complete, all project-related contracts are closed, the outcome
     of the project is turned over to another group, such as the maintenance or
     operations group, and you can bring the project to an end by disbanding the
     project team. Closing the project also includes conducting a project review
     for lessons learned. Don't forget the last--but not least--task of the closing
     stage: celebration. Terminated projects (that is, projects cancelled before
     completion) should also go through the closing stage. The processes used to
     perform the closing stage fall into the group called the closing process group.
     In a multi-phase project, each phase can and should be closed using the same
     process used to close the project.


     Caution! What we refer to as project stages here are not the project phases. A project phase
     is part of the whole project in which certain milestones or project deliverables are completed. All
     these stages, technically called process groups, can be applied to any phase of a project that is
     divided into multiple phases.

     Note The processes of the closing process group can be used to close a project, as well as to
     close a phase of a project.


     The closing of a project is presented, in detail, in Part V of this book.
     Each process is a two-dimensional entity. It belongs to a certain project stage
     (group) and to a specific process knowledge area.


     Understanding Project Management
     Knowledge Areas
     To manage projects, you use project management knowledge, which is
     categorized into multiple aspects; each category is called a project management
     knowledge area. For example, each project has a scope that needs to be
     managed, and the knowledge required to manage scope is in the knowledge
     area called project scope management. To perform the project work within the
     project scope, you need resources, which need to be managed; the knowledge
     area used to manage human resources is called resource management. You get
     the idea. Each process belongs to one of the ten knowledge areas discussed
     in the following list.
                                                                PMP (R) in Depth     21



Project integration management. The project is initiated, planned, and
executed in pieces using different knowledge areas, and all those pieces are
related to each other and need to come together. That is where integration
management comes in. For example, coordinating efforts to develop and
integrate different subsidiary plans into the project management plan needs
to be managed. In general, the integration management knowledge area offers
processes to define, identify, coordinate, and integrate various activities and
processes within each project management process group.
Project scope management. The primary purpose of project scope
management is to ensure that all the required work, and only the required
work, is performed to complete the project. Scoping a project is like drawing
boundaries around it between what is included and what is not. During scope
management, you develop the scope baseline, one of the three very important
project baselines, the other two being the schedule baseline and cost baseline.
The work included in the project scope needs to be scheduled.
Project schedule management. The primary purpose of project schedule
management is to develop and manage the project schedule so as to complete
the project in time as planned. It contains processes to generate information
needed to develop the schedule, a process to develop the schedule, and a
process to control the schedule. During schedule management, you develop
the schedule baseline, one of the three very important project baselines, the
other two being the scope baseline and the cost baseline.
Resources are needed to complete the project activities in the project
schedule.
Project resource management. The primary purpose of project resource
management is to identify, obtain, and manage the resources needed to
complete the project. The term resources refers to both human resources,
e.g., project team, and physical resources, e.g., material, equipment, facilities,
and infrastructure. This includes the processes to obtain, develop, and manage
the project team that will perform the project work.
All the project resources cost money.
Project cost management. The primary tasks of project cost management
are to estimate and control the project costs, and the primary goal is to
complete the project within the approved budget. During cost management,
you develop the cost baseline, one of the three very important project
baselines, the other two being the scope baseline and the schedule baseline.
We do all these and other project management tasks for the project
stakeholders.
22   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Project stakeholder management. The primary purpose of project
     stakeholder management is to identify project stakeholders and manage and
     monitor their engagement in the project. This involves analyzing their potential
     impact on and expectations from the project and accordingly developing a
     strategy to appropriately get them engaged in the project.
     Not only in project stakeholder management, but also in managing all aspects
     of the project, you need to communicate.
     Project communication management. It is absolutely imperative for the
     success of the project that project information is generated and distributed,
     i.e., communicated, in a timely fashion. Some would say that communication
     is the most important aspect of a project and the most important skill
     for a project manager to have. Without a doubt, it is a critically important
     component of project management and a common thread that runs through
     the project lifecycle.
     This process group offers three processes: plan communication to determine
     communication approach; manage communication to make it happen; and
     monitor communication to ensure it happened. The key to a project and the
     mantra of effective communication is the distribution of the right information
     to the right stakeholders at the right time by using the right communication
     methods to create the desired impact. To make that happen, you need be able
     to create, store, and retrieve information.
     Any project is complete only to the degree to which its objectives and
     requirements are met; this refers to the project quality, which needs to be
     managed, too.
     Project quality management. This process group offers three processes
     to manage quality: plan quality to determine the quality requirements
     and standards that are relevant to the project at hand; manage quality to
     ensure that the planned quality requirements and standards are applied; and
     control quality to verify that the project and its deliverables meet the quality
     requirements and conform to the quality standards.
     We make assumptions and estimates and face constraints. These other
     sources of uncertainty can give rise to risks, which must be managed.
                                                                  PMP (R) in Depth   23



Project risk management. A project risk is an event that, if it occurs, has
a positive or negative effect on meeting the project objectives. The primary
purpose of project risk management is to identify risks and respond to them
should they occur. To make that happen, this project group offers processes
to identify, analyze, plan and implement responses to, and monitor risks. It also
contains a process used to plan risk management.
There will be situations in which your organization does not have the expertise
to perform certain schedule activities in house. For this or other reasons, you
might want to acquire some items or services from an outside vendor. This
kind of acquisition is called procurement, and it also needs to be managed.
Project procurement management. The primary purpose of
procurement management is to manage the acquisition of products (that
is, products, services, or results) from outside the project team in order to
complete the project. The external vendor who offers the service is called the
seller. Procurement management includes the processes to plan, conduct, and
control procurements.
As you have seen, managing a project largely means performing a set of processes
at various stages of the project, such as initiating and planning. Accordingly,
processes are grouped corresponding to these stages, and these groups are
called process groups. Processes are also part of the knowledge required to
manage projects. Each of these processes belongs to one of the ten knowledge
areas identified in the PMBOK Guide, Sixth Edition. So, a process has a dual
membership--one in a process group, indicating at what stage of the project
the process is performed, and the other in a knowledge area, indicating what
aspect of the project is managed by using the process. Table 1-2 shows this
membership for all the processes identified in the PMBOK Guide.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.2

   What is the core difference between knowledge areas and process groups? Try to
   answer this question in one sentence.
                                                                                                                                         24
Table 1-2. Mapping Project Management Processes to Process Groups and Knowledge Areas

Process Groups =>     Initiating        Planning                  Executing             Monitoring and           Closing
Knowledge Areas                                                                         Controlling Process
                      Process Group     Process Group             Process Group                                  Process Group
                                                                                        Group
|| V
Integration           Develop           Develop Project           1.Direct and Manage   1. Monitor and Control   Close Project or
Management            Project Charter   Management Plan             Project Work           Project Work          Phase
                                                                  2. Manage Project     2. Perform Integrated
                                                                     Knowledge             Change Control
Scope Management      ---               1. Plan Project Scope     ---                   1.Validate Scope         ---
                                           Management                                   2. Control Scope
                                        2. Collect Requirements
                                        3. Define Scope
                                        4. Create Work
                                           Breakdown Structure
Schedule Management   ---               1. Plan Schedule          ---                   Control Schedule         ---
                                                                                                                                    Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework




                                           Management
                                        2. Define Activities
                                        3. Sequence Activities
                                        4. Estimate Activity
                                           Resources
                                        5. Estimate Activity
                                           Durations
                                        6. Develop Schedule
Resource Management ---             1. Develop Resource Plan   1. Acquire Resources   Control Resources
                                    2. Estimate Activity       2. Develop Team
                                       Resources               3. Manage Team
Cost Management      ---            1. Plan Cost Management    ---                    Control Costs           ---
                                    2. Estimate Costs
                                    3. Determine Budget
Stakeholder          Identify       Plan Stakeholder           Manage Stakeholder     Monitor Stakeholder     ---
Management           Stakeholders   Engagement                 Engagement             Engagement
Communications                      Plan Communications        Manage                 Monitor Communication   ---
Management                          Management                 Communication
Quality Management   ---            Plan Quality Management    Manage Quality         Control Quality         ---
Risk Management                     1. Plan Risk Management    Implement Risk         Monitor Risks           ---
                                    2. Identify Risks          Responses
                                    3. Perform Qualitative
                                       Risk Analysis
                                    4. Perform Quantitative
                                       Risk Analysis
                                    5. Plan Risk Responses
Procurement          ---            Plan Procurement           Conduct Procurements   Control Procurements
Management                          Management
                                                                                                                    PMP (R) in Depth
                                                                                                                      25
26   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework



     Note Not all the processes are used in all the projects. The project management team decides
     which processes need to be used in a given project.




                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.3

        In the following table, match each item in the first column with a corresponding item
        in the second column:

        Knowledge Area       Action
        A. Message            1. While developing the schedule, Lora realized that there was
                                 risk involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts into a
                                 note that she wrote on her computer.
        B. Scope              2. Manage interdependencies among different processes
                                 belonging to different knowledge areas.
        C. Cost               3. Ensure the project includes the work required to complete
                                 the project successfully and no extra work.
        D. Schedule           4. Plan the schedule and complete the project within the
                                 planned schedule.
        E. Quality            5. Plan the budget, track what you are spending, and complete
                                 the project within budget.
        F. Risk               6. Ensure that you develop the right product that will satisfy
                                 the needs for which the project was undertaken.
        G. Procurement        7. Obtain the team to do the project work, and lead and
                                 motivate the team to keep working in the right direction in
                                 an efficient and effective way.
        H. Resources          8. Generate and distribute the required project information
                                 to the right stakeholders at the right time by using the right
                                 method.
        I. Communication      9. Plan for uncertain events that could happen and deal with
                                 them when they do happen in such a way that the possible
                                 benefit is maximized and damage is minimized.
        J. Integration       10. Identify the project work that needs to be contracted out
                                 of the performing organization and contract it out.



     Once you enter the field of project management, you will immediately run
     into two neighbors of a project: the program and the portfolio. Your project
     may be standalone or part of a program, or belong to a portfolio.
                                                             PMP (R) in Depth     27




Triangular Relationship: Project, Program, and
Portfolio
As a project manager, you should know the basic concepts of programs and
portfolios and how they are related to each other and to projects. The real
action to obtain the goals and objectives of an organization always happens
at the project level, but for good reasons a project may be run as part of
a program or portfolio; the two structures are described in the following
paragraphs.
Program. A program may be defined as a set of interrelated projects all
working toward the same set of objectives. These projects are put into a
program to reap the benefits of managing them in a coordinated way
that would not be available by managing them individually. For example, a
publication company may put several science book development projects into
one program, and a set of web-development projects related to marketing,
sales, and learning into another program.
A program may also be a part of a higher-level program. Both projects and
subprograms within a program are referred to as program components.
Just as a project is managed by a project manager, a program is managed
by a program manager, who oversees program components and manages
project-level aspects. Program management focuses on optimally managing
the interdependencies among the projects in the program in order to keep
the program and project goals and objectives aligned with the strategic goals
and objectives of the organization. Program managers also make sure that
both program benefits and project benefits are realized. In addition, a program
manager's responsibilities include:
      *   Making sure that the program scope flows appropriately
          into program components and managing interdependencies
          among the program components to best meet program
          objectives, and accordingly allotting the budget to the
          program components.
      *   Resolving resource conflict and constraints that affect
          the program components and managing change requests
          about the shared governance framework.
      *   Resolving program-level issues between component
          projects and also resolving constraints and conflicts that
          affect projects within the program.
      *   Managing program risks that may impact program
          components.
28   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Portfolio. A portfolio is a higher-level structure that may contain projects,
     programs, subportfolios, and operations and is managed by a portfolio
     manager. These components are put together in a portfolio to facilitate
     effective management in order to implement the strategic business plan of
     the organization.


     Caution! The portfolio components, programs, or projects may or may not be interdependent
     or directly related.


     Portfolio management is the centralized management of one or more
     portfolios in which portfolio components are managed at the portfolio level
     to achieve specific strategic business objectives. A portfolio is an interface of
     a firm's projects and programs to its strategy. Portfolio management focuses
     on making sure that programs and projects are prioritized for resources to
     serve the organization's strategy. Therefore, investment decisions are usually
     made at the portfolio level. One task of portfolio management is to select
     the optimal set of programs and projects to meet the strategic objectives,
     on one hand, and to increase the likelihood of realizing the desired return on
     investment, on the other hand. It also provides centralized management of the
     aggregate risk of all portfolio components.
     To understand the relationship of a portfolio with projects and programs,
     note the following:
             *    Even if an organization does not have any programs and
                  has only individual projects, all these projects can be
                  grouped into one or more portfolios.
             *    If an organization has programs and no individual projects
                  external to all programs, all these programs can be
                  grouped into one or more portfolios.
             *    If an organization has some programs and some individual
                  projects, all these programs and projects can be grouped
                  into one or more portfolios.

     Caution! Projects, programs, and portfolios have different lifecycles, focuses, and sets of
     objectives, and hence they have different sets of activities to meet those objectives and different
     sets of resulting benefits. However, they may share the same resources serving the same
     stakeholder. This underlies the importance of intraorganization coordination to avoid and resolve
     conflicts.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   29



Figure 1-4 shows the triangular relationship among portfolios, programs,
and projects; in the figure, an arrow represents containment. As the figure
illustrates, all portfolios are composed of programs, projects, or both. A
program consists of only projects and not portfolios. The figure also illustrates
that both a program and a portfolio can have projects. That means a project
may have membership in a portfolio either directly or through a program.
What is not shown in this simple figure is that a program may have subsidiary
programs and a portfolio may contain subsidiary portfolios and operations.


Triangular Relationship: Project, Program, and
Portfolio




Figure 1-4. Triangular relationship between projects, programs, and portfolios

As compared to projects and programs, a portfolio is closer to an organization's
business objectives, and therefore this is where most of the investment
decisions are made. If you want to learn about an organization's business
intent and direction (or strategy), look at its portfolio. It's also important to
note that a portfolio can include operational work as part of its structure.
30   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Table 1-3 presents a comparison between some characteristics of projects,
     programs, and portfolios.

     Table 1-3. Comparison between Projects, Programs, and Portfolios

     Characteristic   Project                   Program                     Portfolio
     Definition       Endeavor with             Group of related            Collection of projects,
                      beginning and end         projects and subsidiary     programs, subsidiary
                      to create a unique        programs managed            portfolios, and other
                      product, service, or      together to reap the        related work; managed
                      result.                   benefits not available      together to meet the
                                                from managing them          strategic objectives.
                                                individually.
     Management       Project manager           Program manager             Portfolio manager
                      manages the project,      manages the program         performs general
                      including project team,   by coordinating the         portfolio management
                      to lead the project to    program components'         that may include
                      success by meeting        activities to ensure the    managing or
                      project objectives.       delivery of planned         coordinating the
                                                program benefits.           portfolio management
                                                                            staff and also the
                                                                            program and project
                                                                            staff with reporting
                                                                            responsibility to
                                                                            portfolio.
     Scope            Project scope limited     A program's                 Portfolios have an
                      to meeting its            scope affects and           organizational scope to
                      objectives; developed     encompasses the             produce changes in the
                      throughout the            scopes of program           strategic objectives of
                      project lifecycle.        components aimed at         the organization.
                                                meeting the program
                                                benefits in the context
                                                of the strategic goals of
                                                the organization.
     Planning         Project manager, from     Program has a               Portfolio manager
                      high-level information,   high-level plan that        performs planning
                      develops detailed         includes tracking           at the portfolio
                      project plans by          the progress and            level, which includes
                      using progressive         interdependencies of        developing and
                      elaboration               program components;         executing necessary
                      throughout the            this plan also provides     processes, including
                      project lifecycle.        guidance to plan at the     communication in
                                                component level.            context of aggregate
                                                                            portfolio.
                                                                                             (continued)
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth      31



Table 1-3. (continued)

Characteristic    Project                   Program                  Portfolio
Change            Project manager           Program manager          Portfolio manager
                  expects change and        adapts change to         monitors changes in the
                  perform processes to      optimize the benefits    broader internal and
                  manage it.                from program             external environments
                                            components.              and responds to them
                                                                     to best serve the
                                                                     strategic plan of the
                                                                     organization.
Monitoring        Project manager           Program manager          Portfolio managers
                  monitors and controls     monitors the             monitor strategic
                  the project activities/   progress of program      changes, resource
                  processes to produce      components to make       allocation, performance
                  the planned products,     sure the overall goals   results, and risk at the
                  results, or services of   and benefits will be     portfolio level.
                  the project.              achieved within the
                                            planned budget and
                                            schedule.
Success           Success measured          Program success          Success relates to
                  generally by quality      measured by              the overall portfolio
                  of project and its        delivery of planned      performance, which
                  product, level of         program benefit and      is an aggregated
                  customer satisfaction,    the efficiency and       investment compared
                  and whether project       effectiveness of the     to the overall benefit
                  is completed within       delivery.                realized.
                  budget and on time.



                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.4

   Match each item in the first column of the following table with one or more suitable
   items in the second column.

   Entity                   May Contain
   A. Project               1. Operations
   B. Program               2. Programs
   C. Portfolio             3. Portfolios
                            4. Activities to create a well-defined unique product
                            5. Activities to create a well-defined unique product
32   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


        Throughout the book, you will be exploring the details of project
        management, and therefore getting introduced to some advanced
        concepts up front will make that journey more pleasant and smooth.


     Some Common Concepts
     Throughout this book, you will be encountering concepts such as probability,
     baseline, project team, and project management team. Those concepts are
     introduced in the following sections.


     Probability-Related Concepts
     The theory of probability has its early seventeenth-century roots in the
     investigations of games of chance, such as roulette and cards. Since then,
     a multitude of mathematicians and scientists have contributed to the
     development of the theory of probability. Today, the concepts of probability
     appear in almost every discipline, ranging from physics to project management.
     Risk (an important aspect of a project) and probability have the same origin:
     uncertainty. In project management, there is always an important question:
     What is the probability of this risk occurring? In the modern age, probability
     has already entered into folk psyche through phrases such as "What are the
     odds that this will happen?"
     Probability. Probability is defined as a chance that something will happen.
     For example, when you play the lottery and you wonder what the odds are
     that you will win, you are thinking of probability. The simplest example of
     probability is tossing a coin. The question is, when you toss a coin, what is the
     probability that the coin will land heads up? When you toss a coin, there are
     only two possibilities: It will land either heads up or tails up. Each possibility is
     equally likely if you are not cheating. Therefore, the probability that the coin
     will land heads up is 1 out of 2, or 50 percent, or 0.5. In general, if there are
     n possible outcomes of an event and each outcome is equally likely, then the
     probability of a specific outcome is 1/n.
     Another useful concept in probability is the combined probability of several
     events. For example, if you toss two coins, the probability that the first coin
     will land heads up and the second coin will land tails up is 0.5 x 0.5 = 0.25.
     In general, to calculate the combined probability, you multiply the individual
     probabilities. If the probability that an Event X will happen is A, the probability
     that Event Y will happen is B, and the probability that Event Z will happen is C,
     then the probability that all three events (X, Y, and Z) will happen is A x B x C.
                                                                                PMP (R) in Depth   33



To summarize, the probability that a number of independent events will occur
is calculated by multiplying the probabilities of occurrence of all the individual
events.
Random Variable. A random variable can acquire any value within a given
range or out of a set of values. For example, you can use a random variable
to represent the results of rolling a fair die, which has six sides numbered by
dots from 1 to 6. The possible outcome of rolling a die could be any number
from the set of outcomes: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.
Expected Value. This is the expected value of an outcome. As an example,
assume you get into a bet that you will win $10 if a coin toss results in heads,
and you will lose $5 if it results in tails. Given that the probability for heads
or tails is 0.5 for each, the expected value for the money that you will win is
$10 x 0.5 = $5, and the expected value for the money that you will lose is $5
x 0.5 = $2.50.
Variance. The variance of a random variable is the deviation from the expected
value. It is computed as the average squared deviation of each number from
its mean. For example, assume that the values of a random variable are 2, 4,
5, 7, and 2 in five measurements. The mean value for these measurements is
                                  ( 2 + 4 + 5 + 7 + 2) / 5 = 4

The variance of the spread of these values is
                 V = s 2 = e( 2 - 4 ) + ( 4 - 4 ) ( 7 - 4 ) ( 2 - 4 ) u / 5 = 3.4
                                     2           2         2         2
                           e                                           u

Standard Deviation. This is the square root of the variance--that is, . So,
in our example, the standard deviation is the square root of 3.4--that is, 1.84.
Algebraic Equations. Project/program management and some questions
in the CAPM, PMP, and PgMP exams will assume that you can do simple
mathematical calculations. You should also have a very simple understanding
of algebraic equations. You should be able to make simple manipulations, such
as the following:
                      CPI = EV/AC implies EV = CPI x AC
                      CV = EV-AC implies EV = AC + CV
34   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.5

        You are about to throw a quarter and a dime several times. What is the probability of
        the following happening?
           A.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try.
           B.   The dime will land tails up on the first try.
           C.   The quarter will land heads up and the dime will land tails up on
                the first try.
           D.   Both the quarter and the dime will land heads up on the first try.
           E.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try and also heads up
                on the second try.



     Global Project Variables
     There are some significant factors in projects and project management that
     vary their values throughout the project lifecycle. You must keep your eyes on
     these variables from the very beginning of the project:
           *    Cost and number of team members (staff). This
                is low in the beginning because the project is just in the
                preparation stage, reaches a maximum when the project
                is being executed--that is when most work is done--and
                drops rapidly when the project draws to a close because
                most of the work has already have done.
           *    Ability to influence the characteristics of the
                project product. Your or any other stakeholder's
                ability to influence the project product characteristics
                without significantly changing the cost is the highest in
                the beginning because not much has been done yet in any
                direction. However, this ability gradually decreases as the
                project progresses because we have already invested in a
                given direction.
           *    Risk and uncertainty. This is highest in the beginning
                because there are plenty of unknowns and assumptions.
                It decreases as the project progresses as unknowns start
                disappearing and details start appearing as a result of
                progressive elaboration. This is true about both risk and
                uncertainty, as risks arise from uncertainty, which at least
                partially arises from assumptions.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   35




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.6

   In the following table, match each item in the first column to the corresponding item
   in the second column.

   Project Variable                      Value
   A. Level of staff                     1. Highest in the beginning and end of the
                                            project and lowest when the project is
                                            being executed
   B. Risk                               2. Highest in the beginning and decreases as
                                            the project progresses
   C. Ability to influence the product    3. Low in the beginning, maximum when the
      without significantly impacting the    tasks of the project are being executed
      project cost                           product
   D. Cost                               4. Uniform throughout the project




Baseline
The project baseline is defined as the approved plan for certain aspects of
the project, such as the cost, schedule, and scope of the project. The project
performance is measured against this baseline. The project baseline is also
referred to in terms of its components--cost baseline, schedule baseline,
and scope baseline. How do you know how the project is performing? You
compare the performance against the baseline. Approved changes in cost,
schedule, and scope will also change the baseline.


Big Picture of Project Management
In this chapter, you have learned what project management is and how
project management is performed by applying knowledge and skills to project
activities in order to meet project objectives. Applying knowledge boils down
to performing processes. We have also learned that projects originate from
the need of achieving the organization's strategic objectives, and they may
come to you standalone or as parts of a program or a portfolio.
36   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Figure 1-5 shows the big picture of project origin and project management in
     terms of projects, processes, the project lifecycle in terms of project stages,
     and the project aspects managed by ten different knowledge areas. There are
     ten important aspects of projects, and each of these ten aspects is managed
     by using the corresponding knowledge area. For example, cost is managed by
     using the cost management knowledge area, and communication is managed
     by using the communication management knowledge area. So, project
     management is performed by applying processes from certain knowledge
     areas at certain stages of the project.
     The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
           *   A project, whether standalone or part of a program or
               a portfolio, is performed to contribute to meeting the
               strategic objectives of an organization.
           *   The project lifecycle consists of five stages, technically
               called process groups: initiating, planning, executing,
               monitoring and controlling, and closing. Depending on
               the project, these stages may repeat in different phases.
           *   The project processes that are performed to manage
               projects make up ten project management knowledge
               areas: integration management, scope management,
               time management, cost management, human resource
               management, communication management, stakeholder
               management, quality management, risk management, and
               procurement management.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth      37




Figure 1-5. The big picture of project management: the aspects of a project that need to be
managed at different stages of the project lifecycle by using processes

In a nutshell, project management and the processes performed in project
management have two dimensions: knowledge and process group. This chapter
has presented a big picture of project management from a more theoretical
perspective.


Summary
The business activities inside an organization are generally organized into
groups, which fall into two categories--operations and projects. Operations
usually consist of ongoing routine work, whereas a project has a goal to generate
a unique product, service, or result in a finite time-- that is, it has a planned
38   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     beginning and a planned end. Organizations launch projects for different reasons,
     such as to meet a business or legal requirement or to take on an opportunity
     offered by the market. However, the underlying motivation behind taking on
     these opportunities is the business strategy of the organization. A project, like
     anything else in an organization, needs to be managed. Project management is
     the application of knowledge and skills to project activities in order to meet
     the project objectives. It involves performing a set of processes distributed over
     ten knowledge areas of project management: communication management,
     stakeholder management, cost management, human resource management,
     integration management, procurement management, quality management, risk
     management, scope management, and schedule management. Each process is
     two-dimensional: it is a part of a knowledge area and also has a membership in
     one of five process groups: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring/controlling,
     and closing. The process groups represent different stages of a project lifecycle.
     A successful project completion adds to the organization's business value, and
     in this way changes the organization's business-value state to a higher level.
     A project can be standalone or belong to either of two higher-lever entities:
     programs and portfolios. A program is a collection of interrelated projects
     and subsidiary programs and is performed to reap benefits that would not
     be available if project were managed individually. Programs have a closer view
     of the company's business strategy or strategic objectives than the projects.
     A structure that is even closer to the company's strategy is the portfolio,
     which, in general, is a collection of projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios,
     and operations. A portfolio is a direct interface to the organization's business
     strategy.
     Road Ahead. In this chapter, we explored the basic framework of projects
     and project management. Projects are born and managed in an environment
     constituted by factors within the performing organization and the outside
     world. We will explore that environment in the next chapter.
                                                                           PMP (R) in Depth    39




Exam's Eye View
Comprehend

*The way PMI views it: The discipline of project management is constituted by ten
 knowledge areas: scope management, cost management, human resource management,
 quality management, risk management, schedule management, procurement management,
 communication management, stakeholder management, and integration management.
*Depending upon which stage of the project lifecycle they are executed in, the processes
 are grouped into five process groups: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and
 controlling, and closing.
*A process belongs to exactly one knowledge area and one process group.
*The same input may appear in more than one process. This is also true for tools and
 techniques.
*An output from one project either becomes an input to another process or is a terminal
 output; i.e., a project or phase deliverable.
*You do not have to perform all the processes in a project, and a process may be
 performed several times.
*Projects bring change to a company by adding to the company's business value, and in this
 way raise its business-value state to a higher level.

Look Out

*For a work effort to be qualified as a project, it must be temporary (that is, have a start
 and a finish), and the outcome must be a unique product, result, or service. Routine
 ongoing work is an operation, not a project.
*A project may vary in size, it may be a few days long or a few months long, and it may
 involve one person or quite a few individuals.
*A big project is not called a program, but a megaproject.
*A project may or may not be a part of a program or a portfolio, but a program always
 consists of projects or subsidiary programs, or both.
*A program may contain a subsidiary program, and a portfolio may contain a subsidiary
 portfolio and operation too.

Memorize

*The ten knowledge areas and five process groups listed under the "Comprehend" section
 of this table.
*Process groups are not project phases. A phase contains all process groups.
*Organizations start projects in response to the factors acting on them, which can be
 categorized into four groups: business or legal requirements; stakeholder requests or
 needs; business or technological strategies; and products, processes, or services.
40   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


     Review Questions
          1. Which of the following are the essential characteristics
             that make a group of activities a project?
             A. It takes multiple individuals to perform these activi-
                ties, and it creates a new product.
             B. The work is managed by a project manager.
             C. The group has a plan and a budget.
             D. The group has a start date and a finish date, and its
                outcome will be a new product.
          2. Which of the following is a project?
             A. Running a donut shop
             B. Building another library in your area, which might
                take a long time
             C. Keeping a network up and running in a university
                department
             D. Running a warehouse
          3. Which of the following are the process groups?
             A. Starting, planning, executing, monitoring and control-
                ling, and closing
             B. Initiating, organizing and preparing, executing, moni-
                toring and controlling, and closing
             C. Initiating, planning, implementing, monitoring and
                controlling, and closing
             D. Initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and control-
                ling, and closing
          4. Which of the following is not a project management
             knowledge area?
             A. Project procurement management
             B. Project risk management
             C. Project quality management
             D. Project team management
                                                       PMP (R) in Depth   41



5. Which of the following is the best definition of progressive
   elaboration?
    A. Taking the project from concept to project manage-
       ment plan
    B. Taking the project from conception to completion
    C. Taking the project from initiating to closing
    D. Decomposing the project objectives into smaller,
       more manageable work pieces
6. Your project depends on two business partners, On The
   Fly Inc. (OTF) and The Sure Thing Inc. (ST), delivering
   their products to you on time. The chances are three out
   of four that OTF will make the delivery in time and two
   out of three that ST will not make the delivery on time.
   The probability that OTF and ST will both deliver on time
   is equal to:
    A. 0.25
    B. 0.5
    C. 5/7
    D. 4/7
7. Both projects and operations share all the following
   characteristics except:
    A. Performed by individuals
    B. Planned, executed, monitored, controlled, and closed
       in a preplanned way
    C. Limited by constraints
    D. Performed to achieve the strategic objectives of the
       organization
42   Chapter 1 | Project Management Framework


          8. You are being interviewed by a functional manager,
             who says, "We have this huge undertaking of launching
             an online education website that contains different
             components, such as designing the website, developing the
             content, developing the administrative system including
             registration and payment, marketing the courses on the
             website, integrating different components of the website,
             and finally going live. Each component is functionally
             complex and large enough that it will be better served
             under a different management." The manager is most
             likely describing a:
              A. Project
              B. Program
              C. Operation
              D. Portfolio
          9. Your company runs a website that makes digital music
             downloads available to end users. You have been assigned
             a project that involves adding parental guidance warnings
             to various downloads. This project originated due to
             which category of factors?
              A. Social, regulatory, or legal requirements
              B. Stakeholder requests or needs
              C. Products, processes, or services
              D. Business or technological strategies
         10. Select each of the following that is a project management
             knowledge area.
              A. Project integration management
              B. Project scope management
              C. Project communication management
              D. Project time management
         11. What is not true about the project management
             processes?
              A. Each process must be performed at least once in a
                 project.
              B. A process belongs to a knowledge area and also to a
                 process group.
                                                       PMP (R) in Depth   43



     C. A process can be performed more than once in the
        same project.
     D. A process is performed to accomplish a specific task
        of process management.
12. What is not true about the project management
    processes?
     A. The same document may be an input to more than
        one process.
     B. The same tool or technique may be used in more
        than one process.
     C. The output of one process cannot be an input to
        another process.
     D. It's possible that a process will be executed only once
        in project and multiple times in another project.
13. As you have decided to outsource a piece of your project,
    you will conduct procurements using a process belonging
    to which process group?
     A. Executing
     B. Planning
     C. Monitoring and Controlling
     D. Initiating
                                                                     CHAPTER


                                                                             2

Project
Environment
PMP Exam Objectives                 What It Really Means
1.1 Perform project assessment      Perform project assessment based upon available
1.7 Conduct benefit analysis        information, lessons learned from previous projects,
                                    and meetings with relevant stakeholders in order
                                    to support the evaluation of the feasibility of new
                                    products or services within the given assumptions
                                    and/or constraints.
                                    Conduct benefit analysis with relevant stakeholders
                                    to validate project's alignment with organizational
                                    strategy and expected business value.
                                    You must master the development of two business
                                    documents--the project business case and the
                                    project benefit management plan, discussed in this
                                    chapter and in the origin of projects part of Chapter 1.
                                    Internalize all the material discussed in Chapters 1
                                    and 2, as the exam assumes that you already know
                                    these basic concepts.


Although you use your knowledge in terms of processes to manage projects,
the management will be greatly influenced by the environment in which the
project runs, such as the structure and culture of the performing organization.
Projects also originate from their environments.


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_2
46   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     In the previous chapter, you learned how the five process groups (which we
     also referred to, in this book, as different stages in the project lifecycle) and the
     ten project management knowledge areas constitute the project management
     framework. The actual implementation of project management is greatly
     influenced by the facts on the ground--where the rubber hits the road. In
     other words, a given project is performed in a certain environment; e.g., it runs
     in an organization with its own structure and culture, in a certain location with
     its own culture and laws. This part of the environment is called the enterprise
     environment factors (EEF). Now, the organization has some assets, such as
     knowledge, policy and procedures, and processes, to start the project and
     support it through its lifecycle. This part of the project environment is called
     the organizational process assets (OPA). In addition to these two components,
     we will add project stakeholders to the environment to complete the story.
     This environment influences the project and therefore impacts it. In fact,
     project is born in this environment and goes through it for its entire lifecycle.
     As they say in physics, action and reaction are equal and opposite. As a project
     is being influenced and impacted by its environment, it or its outcome influence
     and impact back some element of the environment. For example, a successful
     project can change the business-value state of the organization to a higher
     level, and a project aimed at opposing a cultural trend or creating a new trend
     can impact the culture of a society.
     The goal in this chapter is to explore how project environment can influence
     the project and hence project management. We will build this chapter
     around three basic concepts: influence, organizational systems, and project
     stakeholders.


     Caution! You will hear an earful about two concepts, influence and impact, in this book and
     in project management in general. So, it's important to get them right. Think of influence like a
     force, and when a force is applied to anything, it has an impact on that thing. The magnitude of the
     impact may vary depending on the situation.




     Project Environment: Big Picture
     As explained in Chapter 1, a project originates in response to a situation in
     order to fulfill the business need of an organization according to its strategy.
     The organization and its internal and external environments, e.g., EEF and OPA,
     are already there and are where the project is born, as illustrated in Figure 2-1.
     The business need assessment leads to producing the two project management
     documents--i.e., the project business case and the benefit management plan,
     which includes project objectives and success measures--which leads to
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth      47



producing the project charter document. The project charter authorizes the
project and fully activates the environment to start operating on the project.
As the project environment does influence--and a result positively and
negatively impacts--the project, you must implement project management
accordingly to lead the project to success. As illustrated in Figure 2-1,
the main elements that constitute the project environment are enterprise
environment factors, organizational assets, and project stakeholders.

                     
                    D
                     W
                                                          WZ
                                                            Z


      E                             WZ                                  WZ
                                                                        


                   WZ^                                                              WZ
                                                                                    Z
                     D


                                                                       
      KZ
      WZ
                                         WZ                            Z
                                                                       &Z

                                                                Z


                                       WZ
                                      ^Z

Figure 2-1. The big picture of the project environment: organizational structure, enterprise
environment factors, organizational assets, and project stakeholders contribute to the
environment that influences a project


Enterprise Environment Factors (EEFs). Enterprise environment factors
are factors that are related to the environment either internal or external
to the performing organization and that can influence and potentially impact
the project. Some examples are the organization structure and culture and
any city culture conditions external to the organization. The EEFs are from
external to the project.
48   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Organizational Project Assets (OPAs). These are the processes or
     process-related assets of the project-performing organization that can be
     used to help the project succeed. Procedures, templates, and lessons learned
     database developed from previous projects are some examples. The OPAs are
     internal to the organization and external to the project.
     Project Stakeholders. Stakeholders can be both internal and external to
     the organization and the project. The project team and project sponsor in
     the organization are examples of internal stakeholders, and customers the
     external.
     Note that, understandably, the project environment is largely created by the
     performing organization. For presentation convenience, we will start with
     EEFs and OPAs. Let's explore the enterprise environmental factors along with
     the organizational process assets in some detail.


     Identifying Environmental Factors and Process
     Assets and Their Influence on Process
     While exploring the general environment of the performing organization,
     you should identify the environmental factors and process assets that will
     influence your project. Some of these factors and assets can be used to help
     the project; others may have a negative influence. However, in either case, you
     need to manage them.


     Enterprise Environmental Factors
     Enterprise environmental factors are the factors that are related to the
     environment either internal or external to the performing organization and
     that can potentially influence and hence impact the project. They may originate
     from within the performing organization, from outside of the organization, or
     from both. These factors may have a positive or negative influence on the
     project; e.g., some factors may facilitate the project and some others may give
     rise to constraints. Some examples of organizational environmental factors
     are presented in Table 2-1.
                                                                                  PMP (R) in Depth       49



Table 2-1. Some Examples of the Organizational Enterprise Environmental Factor Types

EEF Type                  Examples                                                  Internal
Organization              Vision, mission, values, beliefs, leadership style, Internal
structure, governance,    management style, code of conduct, cultural norms
and culture
Infrastructure            Facilities and equipment to do the project;               Internal
                          telecommuting support; computer hardware to
                          run communication software and other project-
                          related applications
Information               Project management information systems such as            Internal
technology software       software tools for scheduling tasks and meetings
Employee capability       Competencies, human resources department,                 Internal
                          relevant skills, and specialized knowledge
Resource availability     Constraints on contracting and purchasing,                Internal
                          approved list of procurement providers, work
                          authorization system
Geographic                 Work location, collaboration software, video       Internal
distribution of facilities conferencing tools, distributed computing software
and resources              like cloud computing
Physical environmental Weather, transportation, housing                             External
factors
Social and cultural       Political climate, religious and cultural traditions,     External
factors                   ethics
Legal restrictions and    Country or city laws related to safety and security External
requirements              regulations
Government or             Regulatory agency regulations about production            External
industry standards        and environment, product standards, quality
                          standards
Commercial databases Standardized cost-estimating data, risk databases,             External
                     benchmarking data
Academic research         Industry studies, research publications                   External
Marketplace               Trademarks, brand recognition, market shares,             External
conditions                information about competitors



Caution! When identifying internal and external factors, it is important to consider the
context of the factor. For example, the culture of the city where the performing firm is located is an
external environmental factor, while the firm's culture is an internal factor.
50   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Identifying the environmental factors is only part of the job, as you must
     effectively use the positive factors to help the project and try to take action
     to minimize the effect of negative factors on the project. Note that the
     environmental factors can be internal to the performing organization, such
     as the organization's culture, or external to the organization, such as market
     conditions. However, the organizational process assets are internal only.


     Organizational Process Assets
     These are the processes or process-related assets from the organization that
     can be used to help the project get going and succeed. The organizational
     process assets are typically grouped into two categories: processes and
     procedures for conducting work, and a corporate knowledge database for
     storing and retrieving information. For example, the performing organization
     might have its own guidelines, policies, and procedures whose effect on the
     project you must consider while developing the project charter and other
     project documents that will follow. Another example of an organization's
     process assets is the knowledge and learning acquired from previous projects.
     The following list contains some items from both categories: processes and
     procedures and the knowledge database.
     Processes, Procedures, and Policies. This category includes processes,
     procedures, policies, and other guidelines and requirements. In the following,
     we present some types and examples:
           *   Standardized Processes and Procedures. Examples
               are organizational-level policies, such as health and safety
               policies, ethics policies, project management policies, and
               quality policies and procedures, such as quality checklists
               and auditing processes.
           *   Standard Guidelines and Criteria. Examples are as
               follows:
               *    Project closure guidelines, project acceptance
                    criteria, proposal evaluation criteria, performance
                    measurement criteria, and so on
               *    Guidelines and criteria for tailoring the standardized
                    organizational processes for the purpose of the
                    project
           *   Templates. Examples are templates to support some
               project management tasks, such as a list of standard risks
               to look for, project schedule network diagrams, and the
               work breakdown structure.
                                                                      PMP (R) in Depth       51



       *    Requirements. Examples include the following:
            *    Communication requirements, hiring requirements,
                 and safety and security requirements
            *    Guidelines and requirements for project closure,
                 such as final mandatory project audits and product
                 acceptance criteria
You need to follow these guidelines and accommodate the requirements
while working out the details of the project management processes that you
will perform.
As is clear from the few examples presented here, you will be using these
process assets throughout the project lifecycle. Accordingly, these will get
more coverage in the upcoming chapters of the book.


Tip Processes and procedures come from outside of the project--e.g. the project
management office (PMO) or some other office within the organization--and you can't update
them; while knowledge databases also come from outside the project, but you can and should
update--i.e., add to--them.


Knowledge Database Repository. This category includes databases that
allow you to do two things: 1) retrieve information to use for your project;
and 2) store information from your project as it proceeds for use in this and
future projects. Here are some items in this category:
       *    Project Files. The documents and other files produced
            in the project, such as the project charter and scope
            statement.
       *    Measurement Database. An example is a database for
            the performance measurements.
       *    Historical Information and Lessons Learned.
            Archives of files from previous projects, including lessons
            learned from the projects.
       *    Issue and Defect Management. A database that
            allows the managing of issues and defects, such as logging,
            controlling, and resolving an issue or defect. You can
            also find the status of the issue or the defect from this
            database.
52   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


            *    Financial Database. The financial information related
                 to the project, such as budget, work hours, and cost
                 overruns.
            *    Configuration Management Database. Contains
                 the change history: different versions and baselines for
                 the company standards, policies, and archived project
                 documents.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.1

        Q1. From the organization's perspective, what is the core difference between
        enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets?
        Q2. In the following table, match each item in the first column to items in the second
        column.

        Factor and Asset Categories            Factor or Asset Examples
        Internal factor                        A.Company's email system
                                               B.Checklist
        External factor                        C.City laws where company is
        Processes and procedures               D.Configuration management system
                                               E. An approved external provider
        Knowledge databases                    F. Commercial Risk database
                                               G. Interest rate
                                               H.Configuration repository from past
                                                 project of the company



     In a nutshell, enterprise environmental factors and organizational process
     assets contribute to the project environment along with project stakeholders,
     and this environment influences and impacts the project. One very important
     internal EEF is the organizational culture and structure, which we will discuss
     in more detail.


     Note Enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets are common
     inputs to many project management processes. Sometimes they can also appear as an output
     from a process, such as archived documents and lessons learned.
                                                               PMP (R) in Depth   53




Understanding the Organizational Culture and
Its Influence on Projects
Each organization often develops its own unique culture that depends on
many factors, such as the application area of the organization and the general
management philosophy implemented in the organization. The organizational
culture includes the following elements:
      *   Work Environment. The organizational culture reflects
          work ethics and work hours. For example, do the employees
          work strictly from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., or do they work
          late into the night and on weekends, or are employees
          allowed to work from home?
      *   Management Style. The organizational culture also
          reflects authority relationships. Do the managers manage
          by authority or by leadership? How much feedback is taken
          from the employees in making management decisions? How
          do the employees view the authority of the management?
      *   Policies. The organizational policies, methods, and procedures
          also reflect the organizational culture.
      *   Values and Vision. A significant part of organizational
          culture lives in the set of values, norms, beliefs, and
          expectations shared within the organization. This may
          be impacted by the organization's mission and vision.
          For example, a nonprofit organization will have different
          values than a for-profit organization. Furthermore, one
          organization may encourage an entrepreneurial approach,
          while another organization may be rigidly hierarchical and
          may take an authoritarian approach in making decisions
          on what to do and what not to do.
Organizational culture has an influence on multiple aspects of a project,
including the following:
      *   Project Selection. The organizational culture will creep
          into the selection criteria for projects and programs.
          For example, a rigidly hierarchical and authoritarian
          organization may not be very adaptive to programs and
          projects with high risk.
      *   Project Management Style. The project manager
          should adapt the management style to the organizational
          culture. For example, an authoritarian style may run
          into problems in an entrepreneurial organization with a
          participative culture.
54   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


            *    Team Performance Assessments. While making team
                 performance assessments, the project manager should
                 keep in mind the established norms and expectations
                 within the organization.
            *    Project Policies and Procedures. The project policies
                 and procedures will be influenced by the organizational
                 policies and procedures because they should be consistent
                 with each other.
     While it is itself a contribution to the organizational system, the culture of an
     organization is greatly influenced by its structure.


     Understanding the Organizational Structures
     and Their Influence on Projects
     From the perspective of a project, organizational structures can be divided
     into three groups: project friendly, not project friendly, and a spectrum of types
     in between. Project-friendly organizations are project-oriented organizations,
     and those with PMOs have high project resource availability and employ
     fulltime project managers with almost full authority. On the other hand, non-
     project friendly organizations, such as functional--also called centralized--
     organizations have little to no project resource availability, and they only
     hire part-time project managers with little to no authority. Project-friendly
     organizations may be further grouped into two subcategories--those that
     derive their revenue primarily from performing projects for others and those
     that do in-house projects to deliver products or services for customers.
     Project-friendly organizations are well aware of the importance of project
     management and generally have systems available to support project
     management. Non-project friendly organizations generally have a low
     appreciation for and understanding of the importance of project management
     and often lack systems to support project management. By systems, I mean
     tools and facilities specialized or suitable for performing project management
     effectively, such as project management information systems.


     Caution! In the case of project resources, the key word here is availability: in-house, easily
     accessible online, or in any other form.


     To do your job efficiently and effectively, you must figure out what kind of
     organizational structure you are working in. An effective project manager
     understands the organizational structure and leverages it for the success of
     the project. The exact structure of any organization results from an interplay
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   55



among a multitude of variables and is unique. However, here, in the context of a
project, we will discuss a few organization types as defined by their structures:
functional organizations, project-oriented organizations, matrix organizations,
and more.


Functional Organizations
A functional organization has a traditional organizational structure in which
each functional department, such as engineering, marketing, and sales, is a
separate entity. A typical functional structure is shown in Figure 2-2, where
each member of each department (staff ) reports to the functional manager of
that department, and the functional manager in turn reports to an executive,
such as the chief executive officer (CEO). Depending on the size of the
organization, there could be a hierarchy within the functional managers--for
example, directors of engineering, QA, and IT operations reporting to the vice
president (VP) of engineering, who in turn reports to the CEO.
The scope of a project in a functional organization is usually limited to the
boundaries of the functional department. Therefore, each department runs
its projects largely independent of other departments. When communication
needs to occur between two departments, it is carried out through the
hierarchy of functional managers.




Figure 2-2. A simple example of the structure of a functional organization
56   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     All the managerial power, or authority, in a functional organization is vested
     in the functional managers, who generally control the team members'
     performance evaluations, salary, bonuses, hiring, and firing. With their role
     limited to coordinating the project activities, project managers are held
     responsible for the project results even though they have little say over
     resource assignments or holding team members accountable for their
     work. As a result, being project manager in a functional organization can be
     challenging and sometimes frustrating. You, as a project manager in a functional
     organization, can benefit greatly from your good relationships with functional
     managers and team members. Networking and leadership are the keys to your
     success in a functional organization.
     A project manager in a functional organization has the following attributes:
           *    The project manager's role and the project team are
                part-time
           *    There is little or no authority over anything: resource
                assignments, team members, and the like.
           *    The project manager reports directly to a functional
                manager.
           *    There is little or no administrative staff to help the project
                manager with the project.
           *    Little or no project resources are available.


     Note In functional organizations, project management might be conducted under other
     names, such as project coordinator or team leader.


     On the other end of the spectrum is the project-oriented organization.


     Project-oriented Organizations
     A project-oriented organization's structure is largely organized around projects.
     Most of the organization's resources are devoted to projects. An ideal simple
     structure example for a project-oriented organization is shown in Figure 2-3,
     where project team members report directly to the project manager, who has
     a great deal of independence and authority. Along with responsibility comes
     a high level of autonomy over the projects. The project managers are happy
     campers in a projectized organization. Functional organizations and project-
     oriented organizations are on opposite ends of the spectrum as far as a
     project manager's authority and project resource availability.
                                                                       PMP (R) in Depth   57



A project manager in a projectized organization has the following attributes:
       *    The project manager is fulltime.
       *    The project manager has full authority over the project
            team.
       *    There is fulltime administrative staff to help with the
            project.




Figure 2-3. A simple example of the structure of a projectized organization


A project management office (PMO) is another organizational structure,
discussed at the end of this section, in which project managers are fulltime
with high authority and high availability of project resources.
On the scale of project friendliness, next to project-oriented organizations
and PMOs are matrix organizations.


Matrix Organizations
A matrix organization is organized into functional departments, but a project
is run by a team that may have members coming from different functional
departments. As shown in a simple example in Figure 2-4, the project would
be managed by a project manager belonging to the functional department of
58   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     project management. Of course, project team members would come from
     other departments. On the spectrum of a project manager's authority, full- or
     part-time employment, and project resource availability, matrix organizations
     come in next to project-oriented organizations and PMOs. Matrix organizations
     are generally categorized into a strong matrix, which is closer to a project-
     oriented structure; a weak matrix, which is closer to a functional structure;
     and a balanced matrix, which is in between strong and weak.




     Figure 2-4. A simple example of the structure of a matrix organization

     We have explored three of the main organizational structures. In the real
     world, some organizations use a hybrid (mix) of these structures to meet their
     varied needs. For example, a functional organization may run a specific project
     just like it would be run in a projectized organization. Such organizations are
     called, well, hybrid organizations.


     Hybrid Organization
     A hybrid organization is a type of organization that contains elements of
     multiple other organizational structures, such as functional, matrix, and
     projectized. For example, consider an organization that has a traditional
     functional departmental structure but launches some projects within a single
     department and some interdepartmentally; some of the project managers are
     fulltime and some part-time, with varying authority. So, what you've got here
     is a hybrid organization.
                                                                           PMP (R) in Depth     59



Tables 2-2 and 2-3 summarize the influences of the different organizational
structures on projects.

Table 2-2. Influences of the Organizational Structures on Projects

Project Characteristic   Functional        Project-oriented        PMO           Hybrid
Group arranged by        Job function      Project                 Mixed         Mixed
Project manager's        None to little    High to almost full     High to       Mixed
authority                                                          almost full
Project manager's role   Part-time         Part-time to fulltime   Fulltime      Mixed
Project management       Part-time         Part-time to fulltime   Fulltime      Mixed
administrative staff
Project budget           Functional        Project manager         Project       Mixed
controlled by            manager                                   manager
Resource availability    None to little    High to almost full     High to       Mixed
                                                                   almost full



Note In a weak matrix, the role of a project manager is more of a coordinator or an expediter
like that in functional organizations, and in a strong matrix, the project manager may have
considerable authority close to that in a project-oriented organization.



Table 2-3. Influences of the Matrix Organizational Structure on Projects

Project Characteristic Weak                      Balanced                     Strong
Work groups              Job function            Job function                 Job function
arranged by
Project manager's        Low                     Low to moderate              Moderate to
authority                                                                     high
Project manager's role   Part-time               Part-time                    Fulltime
Project management       Part-time               Part-time                    Fulltime
administrative staff
Project budget           Functional manager      Functional manager,      Project
controlled by                                    project manager, or both manager
Resource availability    Low                     Low to moderate              Moderate to
                                                                              high
60   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Multi-Divisional, Organic, and Virtual Organizations
     There are three more organizational structures whose influence we will
     discuss in the following paragraphs.
     Multi-Divisional. In this kind of structure, work groups or divisions are
     organized by product, production processes, portfolio, program, geographic
     region, or customer type. Each division functions like a department in a
     functional organization, and the influence of this structure on a project is
     identical to that in a functional organization: part-time project manager with
     no or little authority and no or little project resource availability, etc.
     Organic. In this flexible organization structure, also called simple or flat,
     there are minimal boundaries. For example, startup companies often have this
     kind of structure. In this structure there are part-time project managers with
     no or little authority and no or little project resource availability. The projects
     are started by functional managers with part-time project management
     administrative staff.
     Virtual. Welcome to the Information Age, and thanks to the internet or
     web technologies, we now have all kinds of virtual organizations and virtual
     projects in action. In this structure, where individuals and groups are connected
     through the web, we have fulltime or part-time project managers with low to
     moderate authority and low to moderate project resource availability. The
     projects may be started by functional managers or project managers with
     fulltime or part-time project management administrative staff.


     Project Management Office (PMO)
     The project management office (PMO) refers to an entity in an organization
     that is responsible for providing centralized support, control, or directives
     for projects in the organization. The actual structure and function of a PMO
     depends on the organization's needs.
     The supportive PMO type provides templates, and information about access,
     best practices, lessons learned from past projects, and training. In this type of
     structure, PMOs have a low degree of control and influene over the project.
     On the control and influence scale, the next PMO type is the controlling type,
     where in addition to providing support, it requires compliance, including the
     following:
           1. Use of specific templates, forms, and tools
           2. Adoption of project management frameworks or
              methodologies
           3. Conformance to a given governance framework
                                                                PMP (R) in Depth      61



This type provides PMOs with moderate control over projects.
The maximum control and influence over projects is exercised by PMOs of
the directive type, where the PMO directly manages projects with full control.
As a PMO has a higher-level view of and data from all projects, it can help
align the project objectives with the organization's strategy and in this way
deliver added business value for the organization. A PMO can provide a
measurement system at the organizational level by integrating project data
with information from the organization strategy, and in this way act as a liaison
between portfolio, programs, and project.
As already discussed in this chapter, the organizational structure at least
partially determines or reflects the management structure, governance
structure, and culture of the organization. Organization structure, governance
structure, management structure, and culture are very significant factors in
composing the organization system, which has a tremendous influence over
projects. They are very important components of enterprise environmental
factors.
In addition to enterprise environmental factors and organizational process
assets, project stakeholders have tremendous influence--hence, impact--on
projects.
So, who are project stakeholders? Let's meet them.


Introducing the Project Stakeholders
Right from the day you assume responsibility for managing a project, you start
meeting a very special class of people called the project stakeholders. It is very
important for the success of the project that you identify these individuals and
communicate with them effectively throughout the project.


Identifying Project Stakeholders
Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations whose interests are
affected (positively or negatively) by the project execution and completion. As
they say in physics, action and reaction are equal and opposite; if a project is
going to influence and hence impact stakeholders, they are going to impact the
project back. Let's consider, for simplicity, only two cases: a project stakeholder
has something to gain from the project or lose to the project. Accordingly,
these stakeholders fall into two categories--positive stakeholders, who will
normally benefit from the success of the project, and negative stakeholders,
who will see some kind of disadvantage coming from the project. The
implications obviously are that the positive stakeholders would like to see
the project succeed, and the negative stakeholders' interests would be better
62   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     served if the project were delayed or cancelled altogether. For example, your
     city mayor might be a positive stakeholder in a project to open a Walmart
     store in your neighborhood because it brings business to the city, whereas
     some local business leaders might look at it as a threat to local businesses and
     thereby may act as negative stakeholders.


     Caution! Stakeholders can be grouped into more than two categories, as we will do in
     a separate chapter, but here for the sake of simplicity we broadly divide them into two groups:
     positive and negative.


     Negative stakeholders are often overlooked by the project manager and
     the project team, which increases project risk. Ignoring positive or negative
     project stakeholders will have a damaging impact on the project. Therefore,
     it's important that you, the project manager, start identifying the project
     stakeholders early on in the project. The different project stakeholders can
     have different and conflicting expectations, which you need to analyze and
     manage. We will explore that and much more about stakeholders in the
     upcoming chapters. But for now, while noting that identifying all the project
     stakeholders might be a difficult task, let's meet some obvious stakeholders:
            *    Project Management Office (PMO). If your organization
                 has a PMO and it is directly or indirectly involved in the
                 project, then the PMO is a stakeholder in that project.
            *    Project Team. Project team broadly includes project
                 management team and individuals who perform the work of
                 the project to produce the project outcome. This team may
                 consist of individuals from different groups and departments
                 with different subject-matter expertise and skills.
            *    Program Manager. If your project is part of a program,
                 then the program manager is certainly a stakeholder in
                 your project.
            *    Portfolio Managers and Portfolio Review Board.
                 A portfolio manager is an individual who performs high-
                 level management, or governance, of a set of projects
                 and programs and interfaces between the projects/
                 programs and the business strategy of the organization
                 for which the projects and programs are being run. The
                 portfolio review board is a committee that selects and
                 rejects projects by reviewing them for factors such as the
                 project value, return on investment, and risks involved in
                 performing the project.
                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   63



*   Functional Managers. These are individuals who play
    management roles within administrative or functional
    areas of the organization. For example, the VP of
    marketing is a functional manager, and so is the director
    of engineering. The level of authority depends on their
    position in the hierarchy and also the organizational
    structure. For example, if you are using resources that
    are under a functional manager, that functional manager
    is a stakeholder in your project.
*   Operational Management. These are the individuals
    who play management roles in the operational areas of
    the organization. For example, the director of IT, who
    is responsible for maintaining the computer network
    that your team is using, is a stakeholder in your project.
    Depending on your project, you might be handing over
    the product of the project to an operations group that
    will be responsible for providing long-term support for it.
*   Sellers and Business Partners. Business partners are
    entities external to the performing organization, such as
    contractors and suppliers, that enter into a contractual
    agreement with the performing organization to provide
    certain components for the project. These components
    are the products, services, or results that you procure.
    Business partners are the external organizations that
    fill a specific role for the project, such as installing the
    product of the project, providing training and support for
    the product, or providing specialized expertise for the
    project. Business partners are different from vendors in
    that they have a special ongoing relationship with the
    organization, which often is attained by satisfying some
    requirements, such as a certification.
*   Customer/User. In general, customers are the entities
    that will acquire the project's outcome, such as a product,
    and users are the entities that will use the product. In
    some cases customers and users may be the same entity,
    and in other cases there may be a whole chain (with
    different layers) of customers and users. For example,
    a textbook produced by a project run by a publisher is
    recommended by instructors, bought by bookstores, and
    used by students.
64   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


           *   Project Sponsor. This is the individual or group that
               provides financial resources for the project. A sponsor
               has a major stake in the project and may perform an
               active role in the project team from time to time. The
               following are some of the functions of a sponsor:
               *    The sponsor champions the project when it's
                    conceived. This includes gathering support for the
                    project by performing actions such as acting as the
                    project spokesperson to higher-level management
                    and by spelling out the benefits of the project.
               *    The sponsor leads the project through the selection
                    process until the project is finally authorized, at
                    which point the leadership role goes to the project
                    manager.
               *    The sponsor plays an important role in developing
                    the initial project scope and charter.
               *    The sponsor serves as an authority and a catalyst
                    for issues beyond the control of project managers,
                    such as authorizing critical changes and other yes/no
                    decisions.
     In addition to these key stakeholders, who are easy to identify, there can be
     a number of other stakeholders who might be more difficult to identify both
     inside and outside of your organization. Depending upon the project, these
     might include investors, sellers, contractors, family members of the project
     team members, government agencies, media outlets, lobbying organizations,
     individual citizens, and society at large. Have I left anyone out?
     While dealing with the stakeholders, the keyword is influence. Watch out for
     influencers who are not direct customers or users of the product or service
     that will come from the project, but who can influence the course of the
     project due to their positions in the customer organization or performing
     organization. The influence can be positive or negative--that is, for or against
     the project.


     Caution! Do not confuse the project management team with the project
     team. The project management team consists of individuals involved in the
     project management tasks. It is a subset of the project team, which includes
     members of the project management team and also other members, such as
     those who perform the actual work of the project.
                                                                     PMP (R) in Depth       65



So, not only are stakeholders affected positively and negatively by the project,
but the project can also be impacted positively or negatively by them. It is
critical for the success of the project that you identify positive, negative, and
other types of stakeholders early on in the project, understand and analyze
their varying and conflicting expectations, and manage those expectations
throughout the project. We will return to this topic further on in the book.
Hold on; when we were identifying project stakeholders, did somebody say
project manager?


Identifying the Stakeholder Within: Project
Manager
Of course you, the project manager, are one very special project stakeholder
with a crucial stake: the project success The job role of a project manager is
extremely challenging and therefore exciting. In general, the role of a project
manager is to lead the project team to meet the project objectives aligned
with the company's strategic objectives. Depending on the company, you may
be involved even before the project initiation stage in project-defining and
-justification activities in the context of the company's objectives.


Tip Depending on the nature of the project and the company's needs, the project manager's
role may be tailored, just like the processes to be run in the project.


You fulfill your role by aligning the project objectives with the company's
objectives, showing the vision to the project team, coordinating various
project activities through communication, and leading the team in delivering
the product to meet project objectives. You work within what is called the
project manager's area (or sphere, as PMI calls it) of influence, which includes
the project team, offices and managers within the performing organization,
supplies, end users and customers, and other stakeholders. Depending on the
organizational structure of your organization, you may be interacting with
PMOs, project sponsor, functional managers, program manager, portfolio
manager, and possibly executives. Here, networking, formal and informal
relation building, and communication skills are critical.
The importance of communication in project management cannot be
overemphasized. Even a well-scheduled and well-funded project can fail
in the hands of a hardworking team of experts due to the lack of proper
communication. As a project manager, you might be dealing with a wide
functional variety of individuals, ranging from executives, to marketing personnel,
66   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     to technologists. You should be able to wear different communication hats
     depending upon whom you are communicating with. For example, you will not
     be using unnecessary technical jargon to talk to executives or marketing folks,
     and you will not speak marketing lingo to the software developers. You will be
     speaking to different stakeholders in their language, while filling the language
     gap between different functional groups, and in that way you will eliminate
     misunderstandings that result from miscommunication. The key point is that
     you put on the appropriate communication hat depending on which individual
     or group you are communicating with. Be able to switch communication hats
     quickly and avoid technical jargon and acronyms that are not understood by
     the person or group with whom you are communicating. The goal is clarity of
     language to convey the message accurately and effectively.
     You will be communicating throughout the project. So, for a given project, you
     must develop a communication strategy that addresses the following issues:
           *   What needs to be communicated?
           *   With whom do you want to communicate? You might need
               to communicate different items to different individuals or
               groups.
           *   How do you want to communicate--that is, what is
               the medium of communication? Again, this might differ
               depending on whom you are communicating with.
           *   What is the expected and real outcome of your communi-
               cation? You need to monitor your communication and its
               results to see what works and what does not so you can
               learn and improve.
     Communication is also an ingredient for many other skills, such as negotiation
     and problem solving. We have two complete knowledge areas concerning
     this in project management, one for communication management and one
     for stakeholder management, and we will be covering them in the upcoming
     chapters. But, from the discussion so far in this and previous sections, it is
     clear that it takes more than just knowledge of project management to be an
     effective project manager. Even in the very definition of project manager, there
     appears the phrase: "lead the project team." So, leadership skills are obviously
     necessary. PMI defines the project manager competencies by what it calls the
     PMI talent triangle.
     From the material covered so far in this book, you know a project manager
     1) should know project management, obviously; 2) leads the project team;
     and 3) should align the project objectives with the organization's strategic
     and business objectives. The corresponding competencies or talents may
     be termed as 1) technical project management skills; 2) leadership skills; or
     3) strategic and business management skills, respectively. Well, we have just
     defined the PMI talent triangle, shown is Figure 2-5 and further discussed next.
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth   67




                                        d
                                         WZ
                                       D




                   ^
                                                             >
                   D


Figure 2-5. PMI talent triangle: combination of 1) technical project management skills;
2) leadership skills; and 3) strategic and business management skills


Technical Project Management Skills
In general, technical skills refer to the knowledge and ability to perform
specific tasks in a specific field. The keyword here is practical or hands on
as opposed to just theoretical knowledge only. Technical tasks are usually
performed in fields such as mechanics, IT, and mathematics and science. As
project management covers almost any field including these as its application
areas, project management is also considered a technical field.
The technical project management skill, in general, refers to the ability to
effectively apply project management knowledge to deliver the planned project
objectives. Some top technical project management skills are discussed here:
       1. Manage Project Elements. These skills refer to the
          general ability to effectively manage different project
          components, such as cost, resources, risks, and schedule.
       2. Plan and Prioritize. These are the skills needed to plan
          thoroughly and prioritize things in context of project
          objectives and stakeholder needs.
       3. Tailoring. This is the ability to tailor tools, techniques,
          and methods to the needs of the project at hand.
       4. Focus on Critical Elements. These skills refer to the
          ability to focus on the critical elements of each project:
          critical success factors, schedule, some selected most-
          relevant financial reports, and issue log.
68   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Strategic and Business Management Skills
     Strategic and business management skills refer to having a high-level view of
     the company, with an understanding of its strategic and business objectives,
     and the ability to effectively use this understanding to perform certain tasks.
     These tasks include negotiating, implementing decisions, and performing other
     tasks, all with one goal in mind: the alignment of the project outcome with the
     company's strategic objectives. You are not expected to be a business expert,
     but the more you know, the better it would be. Furthermore, you can get
     help from business experts in the company, including operation managers. You
     should have at least enough business knowledge to perform the three levels
     of a task: organization level, project level, and alignment level.
     Organization Level. These strategic and business management skills refer
     to the ability to know and explain the organization's mission, strategy, goals
     and objectives, and product and services. You should also know and be able
     to explain the following:
           1. What is the market condition of the business the company
              is in? How big is the market, and is it expanding or going
              downhill? Who are the customers, and what would be
              the right time to market the project's product? And so
              forth.
           2. What are the different aspects of the company's business
              operation, such as type of operation, technology being
              used, and so on.
           3. What are competitor companies and what is their position
              in the market?
     Project Level. These strategic and business management skills refer to
     knowing and being able to explain the project being managed. Moreover, with
     help from the project sponsor and business experts, you, working with the
     project team, should be able to develop the project delivery strategy in light
     of the organization's strategy. Once the project strategy is in hand, you should
     be able to implement it in such a way that the project adds maximum business
     value to the organization.
     Alignment Level. These skills refer to the ability to align the project
     objectives and deliverables with the organization's strategy. This is another
     way of saying what we said in the previous paragraph: you will implement
     the project strategy to add maximum business value to the organization. In
     practice, it's done by setting your priorities correctly and being tactical in
     order to deliver the project outcome in light of the organization's strategy.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth       69



In a nutshell, strategic and business management skills are the abilities to
understand organization strategy, draw a project-delivery strategy from it,
and align the project strategy with the organization's strategy, as illustrated
in Figure 2-6.


                                                              WZ
                  KZ
                                                             
                   ^
                                                             ^




                                        



Figure 2-6. Strategic and business management skills: understand organization strategy, draw
project delivery strategy from it, and align project strategy with organization's strategy


Leadership Skills
Leadership. In a traditional organizational structure such as a functional
structure, project managers do not have formal authority over the project
team members who perform the team work. So, you have no other choice than
to manage by leadership and not by authority or power. The good news is that
managing by leadership is overall more effective and productive than managing
by authority anyway. A project team is generally a group of individuals coming
together for the lifetime of the project, possibly from different functional
groups and likely with different skills and experience. They need a leader to
show them the vision and to excite, inspire, motivate, guide, and direct them
toward the goals and objectives of the project. You, the project manager, are
that leader, no matter what the organization's structure.
Leadership includes a plethora of capabilities or skills that are learned and
developed by practicing them; e.g., communication, negotiation, critical
thinking, problem solving, and interpersonal. Interpersonal skills are very
important because you practice leadership by dealing with people; in project
management, mostly with project stakeholders. In dealing with people, the
following are some of the qualities that good leaders generally exhibit:
70   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Visionary. Visualize the product and how it fits into the big picture of the
     organization's strategy, and be able to translate this vision for the team. Have a
     holistic big-picture view of the project, accounting for all internal and external
     factors.
     Team Builder. The ability to build an effective team using a fun attitude,
     sense of humor, positive and optimistic approach, and other appropriate
     personality traits.
     Positive and Optimistic. While being aware of weaknesses and the negative
     side of things and working to correct them is god, always exhibit a positive and
     optimistic attitude when dealing with people.
     Social Personality Traits. Be respectful; kind, courteous, and friendly;
     honest and trustworthy; and ethical when dealing with people. Show respect
     or sensitivity to other cultures, lifestyles, and ways of thinking.
     Collaborative and Conflict Resolver. Adopt a collaborative, as opposed
     to confrontational, approach to dealing with people, managing relationships,
     and resolving conflicts.
     Effective Communicator. Listening and showing interest by asking
     questions; giving and accepting feedback; and managing expectations are some
     important components of communication exhibited by a good leader.
     Pro-integrity. Exhibit professionalism with integrity; give credit where it
     belongs.
     Hands-on Skills. Critical and analytical thinker; problem-solver; action and
     results oriented.


     Tip Research shows that project managers, on average, spend 90 percent of their time on
     the job communicating.


     Some of the skills mentioned or discussed here, such as communication, team
     building, and conflict resolution, will be further elaborated later in the book.
     However, negotiation, influencing, and problem-solving skills warrant more
     discussion here.


     Three Skills: Negotiation, Influencing, and Problem
     Solving
     Three skills, which are implicit parts of the PMI talent triangle, are worth an
     explicit discussion: negotiation, problem solving, and influencing.
                                                            PMP (R) in Depth     71



Negotiation. A negotiation is give and take, with the goal of generating
a win-win outcome for both parties whenever possible. For example, you
might need to negotiate at any stage of the project lifecycle. Here are some
examples of negotiations:
      *    Negotiating with stakeholders regarding expectations
           during project planning. For example, the suggested
           deadline for the project schedule might not be practical,
           or you might need a certain type or quantity of resources
           to make it happen.
      *    Negotiating with functional managers to obtain human
           resources, such as software developers and big data
           experts
      *    Negotiating with team members for specific job
           assignments and possibly when doing conflict resolution
           among the team members
      *    Negotiating changes to the project schedule, budget, or
           both because a stakeholder proposed changes to the
           project objectives
      *    Negotiating with external vendors in procurement.
           However, in contract negotiations, representatives from
           the legal department might be involved.
The ability to influence helps negotiations.
Influencing. Influencing means getting individuals or groups to do what you
want them to do without necessarily having formal authority to mandate an
outcome from them. This is becoming an increasingly essential management
skill in today's information economy. To exercise influence, you must
understand the formal and informal structures of your organization. Again,
you might need to use influence when you are dealing with any aspect of the
project--for example, controlling changes to the project, negotiating schedule
or resource assignments, resolving conflicts, and the like.
Sometimes you will be negotiating to solve a problem.
72   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Problem Solving. Project-related problems might occur among stakeholders
     (including team members) or with projects. Either way, they are there to
     damage the project. Your task is twofold--identify the problem early enough
     and solve it. In doing this, you will be using critical thinking with both logical and
     quantitative approaches. Here is the general technique for accomplishing this:
            1. Identify the Problem. Look for early warning signs
               by paying close attention to the formal progress reports
               and to what team members say and do regarding the
               project. Once you identify a potential problem, do your
               homework. Understand and identify the problem clearly
               by collecting more information without passing judgment.
            2. Identify the Root Cause. Analyze information about
               the problem to discover its root cause or causes.
            3. Generate Possible Solutions. Once the root cause or
               causes are clearly identified, work with the appropriate
               stakeholders, such as project team members, to explore
               multiple (alternative) solutions.
            4. Evaluate. Assess the multiple solutions and choose best
               one to implement.
            5. Implement. Apply the chosen solution.
            6. Verify. Assess and verify the effectiveness of the
               implemented solution.
            7. Repeat. Depending on the results of verification, you
               may have to start again at any of the preceding steps.
     The key point throughout the problem-solving process is to focus on the
     problem, not on the individuals, with the goal of finding the solution in order
     to help the project succeed. There should be no finger pointing.
     As one of the three sides of the project manager's talent triangle, strategic
     and business management skills ensure that the project manager is able to
     participate in pre-initiation activities, such as defining the project--including
     its objectives and success criterion--and a making business case for the
     project, which leads to project selection.
                                                             PMP (R) in Depth    73




Project Management Business Documents and
Project Selection
In the previous chapter, we discussed how projects originate from their
project initiation context; i.e., the need to
      1. meet legal, regulatory, or social requirements;
      2. satisfy stakeholder requests or needs;
      3. implement or change business or technological strategies;
         or
      4. create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services.
This context triggers the process of creating two project management business
documents: 1) project business case; and 2) project benefit management plan.


Project Business Case
This document makes the case for the would-be project from a business
perspective by providing necessary information that can be used to assess
whether or not the expected project outcome is worth the required
investment. It includes the business need, project objectives, and success
criterion. The exact form and content may depend on the company, but the
following standard components are usually there in this document.
Business Need. As previously mentioned, the creation process of the
project business case document is trigged by some business need identified
in the project initiation context. This document contains the summary of
business assessment, which states the business problem or opportunity
that is warranting action; what business value this action would add to the
organization; what the scope is of the effort; and which stakeholders would be
affected by this effort.
For example, think of a new technology that presents an opportunity for a
company to expand its business.
Business needs present a situation that needs to be analyzed.
Business Analysis of the Situation. This analysis starts by identifying the
origins of the business problem or opportunity at hand and the strategic
objective and goals of the organization. Then, a gap analysis is performed
by comparing project requirements with the present capabilities of the
organization. The project risks and critical factors to be considered in
evaluating success are also laid out.
74   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     With all this information, the obvious question the document addresses
     is what to do about the problem or opportunity. It may propose different
     solutions and then propose criterion by which to evaluate these different
     ways to help you make the decision--the decision criterion. For example, to
     address the problem, if it proposes the solutions A, B, and C, for each of A, B,
     and C, it answers the question: To address to the problem, what is required,
     i.e., bare minimum, that would be needed to be done; what is only desired but
     not required; and what is optional, i.e., not essential? The answers to these
     questions will help you decide which path should be taken to respond to the
     problem or opportunity.
     The business case also records the different ways to respond to the problem
     or opportunity.
     Option: What to Do? These are different solutions or alternative ways to
     address the problem or opportunity. The very basic set of options a business
     case could address is as follows: do nothing, i.e., no project; do minimum; do
     more than the minimum. Then, there would be alternative ways of doing the
     chosen option.
     Recommendation: What Path to Take? This component of the business
     case recommends one of the options considered in the document, citing the
     option analysis results. For the option, it also includes constraints, dependencies,
     and assumptions and risks, along with the factors to be used to measure the
     project success. Furthermore, the milestones and roles and responsibilities of
     the project are laid out.
     Evaluation: How to Measure the Benefits? This component describes the
     plan of how the benefits delivered by the project will be measured throughout
     the project lifecycle.
     In summary, the business case presents and analyzes a problem or an
     opportunity in the context of the organization's strategy; proposes alternative
     courses of action and the criterion of how to select one of these; based on
     this criterion, recommends one; and states how to measure the benefits and
     success of the project that would come out of the recommended course of
     action.
     This sounds like lot to carry in one document, but remember that the business
     case is not a self-contained document. It depends upon or refers to other
     documents, such as business need assessment, project success measures, and
     project benefit management plan.


     Tip The business case document is used to authorize further project management activities,
     and usually the project sponsor is responsible for its development and maintenance throughout the
     project lifecycle in case the project is finally approved.
                                                                           PMP (R) in Depth        75




Project Benefit Management Plan
The project benefit management plan document describes what, when, and
how project benefits would be delivered and how they would be measured.
The key elements in the document answer some key questions such as:
        1. What are the project's target benefits and how well do
           they align with the organization's business strategy?
        2. What is the benefit delivery timeframe; e.g., sort
           terms, ongoing, phase by phase, or long term?
        3. Who is the benefit owner to record, report, and
           monitor the benefits as they materialize?
        4. What are the metrics to tag or mark the realization and
           measurement of each benefit?
        5. What are the key assumptions and risks regarding the
           benefit realizations?
This document defines the target benefits of a given project. But, in general, a
project benefit is any project outcome that delivers value to the organization
or to the stakeholders who are the planned beneficiary of the project. The
information from the business need assessment and business case documents is
used in developing the project benefit management plan document.


Caution! The project manager must keep the general management approach in harmony
with the theme of the business case and the project benefit management plan documents, which
are interdependent, are developed iteratively, and are maintained through the project lifecycle.


In addition to project benefits, the business case document also refers to
project success measures. In fact, all these documents and plans are being
developed to gear the project toward success. So, what is project success, and
how is it measured?

Project Success Measures
Before we can talk about measuring the project's success, we need to define
success. Although most project practitioners and researchers agree that
project success is defined and measured by the degree of meeting the project
objectives, different stakeholders can have different ideas about which factors
to count and with how much weight in measuring success: e.g., time, cost,
quality, alignment of result with organization's business strategy, etc. The
bottom line is that project success is defined and methods or metrics to
measure it are determined for every project uniquely.
76   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Obviously, the factors chosen to define success should be reliably measurable.
     For example, here are some financial factors that may be used to measure the
     success of a project:
           *   Return on Investment (ROI). The ROI is the percentage
               profit from the project.
               For example, if you spend $400,000 on the project,
               and the benefit for the first year is $500,000, then ROI
               equals ($500,000-$400,000)/$400,000, which equals
               25 percent.
           *   Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR). This value is obtained by
               dividing the benefit by the cost.
               The greater the value, the more attractive the project
               is. For example, if the projected cost of producing
               a product is $20,000, and you expect to sell it for
               $60,000, then the BCR is equal to $60,000/$20,000,
               which is equal to 3. For the benefit to exceed the cost,
               the BCR must be greater than 1.
           *   Present Value (PV) and Net Present Value (NPV).
               To understand these two concepts, you must understand
               that one dollar today can buy you more than what
               one dollar next year will be able to buy. (Think about
               inflation and return.) The issue arises because it takes
               time to complete a project, and even when a project is
               completed its benefits are reaped over a period of time,
               not immediately. In other words, the project is costing
               you today but will benefit you tomorrow. So, to make an
               accurate calculation for the profit, the cost and benefits
               must be converted to the same point in time. The NPV
               of a project is the present value of future cash inflows
               (benefits) minus the present value of current and future
               cash outflows (cost). For a project to be worthwhile
               economically, the NPV must be positive. As an example,
               assume you invest $300,000 today to build a house,
               which will be completed and sold after three years for
               $500,000. Also assume that real estate that is worth
               $400,000 today will be worth $500,000 after three years.
               So the present value of the cash inflow on your house is
               $400,000, and hence the NPV is the present value of the
               cash inflow minus the present value of the cash outflow,
               which equals $400,000-$300,000, which equals $100,000.
                                                               PMP (R) in Depth   77



      *   Payback Period (PBP). Payback period is defined as the
          duration of time required to recoup the original amount
          of investment. For example, a $15,000 investment made
          at the start of year 1 that returned $5,000 at the end of
          each year for the first three years would have a three-
          year payback period. The longer the payback period,
          the less desirable the investment is. This is because,
          as explained earlier, the value of the money unit--e.g.,
          dollars--decreases with time.
      *   Internal Return Rate (IRR). This is just another way
          of interpreting the benefit from the project. It looks at
          the cost of the project as the capital investment and
          translates the profit into the interest rate over the life
          of that investment. Calculations for IRR are outside of
          the scope of this book. Just understand that the greater
          the value for IRR, the more beneficial the project is.
          Technically, IRR is defined as the interest rate at which
          the net present value of all the cash flows (both positive
          and negative) from a project or investment equal zero.
Now, what is cash flow?
      *   Cash Flow (CF) and Discounted Cash Flow (DCF).
          Whereas cash refers to money, cash flow refers to both
          the money coming in and the money going out of an
          organization. Positive cash flow means more money
          is coming in than is going out. Cash inflow is benefit
          (income), and cash outflow is cost (expenses). The
          discounted cash flow refers to the amount that someone
          is willing to pay today in anticipation of receiving the cash
          flow in the future. DCF is calculated by taking the amount
          that you anticipate receiving in the future and discounting
          (converting) it back to today on the time scale. This
          conversion factors into the interest rate and opportunity
          cost between now (when you are spending cash) and the
          time when you will receive the cash back.
      *   Other examples of factors that may be used as success
          measures include other financial and non-financial project
          objectives; the business value added to the organization
          to change its state; and fulfilling the terms and conditions
          of a contract. The key point is that for each project,
          before the rubber hits the road, success must be defined,
          methods and factors to measure it be determined, and
          agreement among appropriate stakeholders be reached.
78   Chapter 2 | Project Environment



     Tip One of the most important technical aspects of project management is that you are able
     to measure items such as project benefits, project progress, and project success. So, for example,
     if your project is a 99 percent success, this success will not be a matter of opinion or perspective;
     rather, this success will be rock solid as it's measured.


     Well, we started with need assessment, looked at project management business
     documents--i.e., business case and project benefit management plans--and
     now know how to measure project benefits and project success. With all this
     data and information, are we ready for project authorization? Not quite yet.


     Project Authorization
     Figure 2-7 illustrates the procedure of project authorization, including need
     assessment, project management business documents--i.e., business case
     and project benefit management plans--and the project charter. As pointed
     out earlier, the business case document is used to authorize further project
     management activities. However, the project is formally authorized by a
     project charter document issued by the project sponsor, which allows the
     project manager to start using the organization's resources for the project.
     We will learn in the next chapter how to produce a project charter.


                       
                      D
                       W
                                                              WZ
                                                                Z


        E                              WZ                                    WZ
                                                                             

                                                                                                WZ
                     WZ^                                                                        Z
                       D

     Figure 2-7. Project selection procedure: project management activities are authorized
     based on project business case document, and project is authorized based on project charter
     document
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth    79



As part of the project selection procedure, various scoring models may be
used to choose between different courses of action as a response to the
problem or opportunity discussed in the "Project Business Case" section.
Similarly, various economic models may be applied to assess the project
benefits; quantities or factors like return on investment and benefit cost ratio,
discussed in the previous section, can be used. These models are out of the
scope of this book.
Two other simple tools that can be used during the project selection procedure
are opportunity cost and expert judgment.


Opportunity Cost
Opportunity cost refers to selecting one project over another due to the
scarcity of resources. In other words, by spending this dollar on this project,
you are passing on the opportunity to spend this dollar on another project.
How big an opportunity are you missing? The smaller the opportunity cost,
the better it is.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.2

   You have been offered a Project B that will earn you a profit of $100,000 in three
   months. You already have an offer of a Project A that will earn you a profit of $70,000
   in three months.
   You can only do one project during these three months, and the project requesters are
   unable to move the project durations.
   Q1. What is the opportunity cost of Project A?
   Q2. What is the opportunity cost of Project B?
   Q3. Just based on the opportunity cost, which project will you select?
   Q4. Describe what can change your decision based just on the opportunity cost.


Expert Judgment
Expert judgment is one of the techniques used in project management to
accomplish various tasks; for example, it's used to perform various project
management processes, as you will see in upcoming chapters. It may be
used during the project selection procedure. It refers to relying on expert
80   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     advice and using that advice as the only factor or as one of multiple factors
     to make a decision. This expert advice can come from one or more of the
     following sources:
             *    Senior management
             *    An appropriate unit within the organization
             *    Project stakeholders, including customers and sponsors
             *    Consultants
             *    Professional and technical associations
             *    Industry groups
             *    Subject-matter experts from within or outside the
                  performing organization
             *    The project management office (PMO)
     As previously mentioned, the use of expert judgment is not limited to project
     selection; it can be used in many processes, such as developing a project
     charter. Expert judgment can be obtained by using a suitable method, such as
     individual consultation, interview, survey, or panel group discussion.


     Caution! Keep in mind that expert judgment can be very subjective at times and might
     include political influence. An excellent salesperson or an executive with great influence can exploit
     this method successfully.



     Summary
     In any organization, a project is born out of the need to address a problem
     or an opportunity while staying in alignment with the organization's strategy.
     The project is born and performed in a certain environment constituted by
     three components: enterprise environmental factors (EEFs), organizational
     process assets (OPAs), and project stakeholders. The EEFs are environmental
     factors, which can be internal to the organization, such as organizational
     structure and culture, or external to the organization, such as the law of the
     land where the organization is located. However, the OPAs are only internal
     to the organization and are of two types: processes, policies and procedures;
     and knowledge database repositories. Project managers cannot change
     policy and procedures but can add to the knowledge databases. Enterprise
     environmental factors are related to how the performing organization does
     its business, whereas organizational process assets are specific to how the
     organization runs its projects.
                                                                           PMP (R) in Depth     81



Project environment influences and hence impacts the project. As a project is
being influenced and impacted by its environment, it or its outcome influence
and impact back some element of the environment. The goal of project
management is to manage the influence of the environment on the project in
such a way that the project influences back to change the business-value state
of the organization to a higher level.
The organization's business need triggers the process of creating two project
management business documents: 1) the project business case; and 2) the
project benefit management plan. The project sponsor authorizes the project
by signing the project charter, which is a document based on these two project
management business documents. So, how do we prepare the project charter
document?
Road Ahead. The project charter is produced in the initiating stage, the first
of the five stages or process groups of the project lifecycle that we explored in
Chapter 1. In the next chapter, you will learn the process of creating a project
charter as well as how to identify stakeholders in order to initiate the project.


Exam's Eye View
Comprehend

  *Project environment that influences projects largely constituted by enterprise
   environmental factors (EEFs) and organizational project assets (OPAs) in addition to
   the project stakeholders.
  *EEFs may be internal to the performing organization, such as the organizational
   structure and culture, or external, such as marketing conditions and legal restrictions,
   while OPAs are internal only, such as policies and procedures, and knowledge database
   repositories.
  *A project is run in an environment constituted by organizational structure,
   organizational culture, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational process
   assets.
  *The project manager's authority is none to little in a functional organization, low to
   high in a matrix organization, and high to almost full in a project-oriented organization.
  *Being an effective project manager takes more than just the knowledge of project
   management; it requires the PMI talent triangle: 1) technical project management skills;
   2) leadership skills; and 3) strategic and business management skills.
  *Strategic and business management skills are the abilities to understand the
   organization's strategy, draw a project delivery strategy from it, and align the project
   strategy with the organization's strategy.
82   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


     Look Out

      *The same item may have entry into different kinds of EEFs and OPAs; context is
       important. For example, the culture of a company is an internal EEF, while the culture of
       the country in which the company exists is an external EEF.
      *You can update, i.e., add to, a knowledge repository; as for the processes, policies, and
       procedures part of OPAs, you cannot update policy and procedures, but you can and
       will be updating some items such as the project plan.
      *Any individual or organization that is affected by a project and can influence, and hence
       impact, it is called a project stakeholder. Stakeholders certainly exist inside but can also
       exist outside of the performing organization.
      *You must identify both positive and negative stakeholders of your project, and you must
       not ignore the negative stakeholders.
      *Regardless of the structure of the performing organization, project managers are
       responsible for project results.
      *The project charter is the only document that is issued to authorize the project, while
       the business case document is only used to authorize the project management activities
       to continue until the project is finally authorized or disapproved.
     Memorize

      *Between EEFs and OPAs, items related to processes, policies, procedures, and
       knowledge databases, including lessons lessoned, are OPAs; the rest are EEFs.
      *The organizational structure table
      *Knowledge, performance, and personal abilities are the three kinds of characteristics
       that are necessary for a project manager to effectively manage projects.
      *In some organizational structures, such as functional organizations, project management
       might be conducted under other names, such as project coordinator or team leader.
      *PMI talent triangle: combination of 1) technical project management skills; 2) leadership
       skills; and 3) strategic and business management skills
      *The two project management business documents are 1) project business case; and
       2) project benefit management plan.
      * A project is authorized the project sponsor by issuing the project charter.
                                                        PMP (R) in Depth   83




Review Questions
   1. In which of the following organizational structures does
      the project manager have the greatest authority?
      A. Functional
      B. Project-oriented
      C. Matrix
      D. Virtual
   2. In which of the following organizational structures does
      the project manager have the lowest authority?
      A. Functional
      B. Project-oriented
      C. Matrix
      D. Virtual
   3. Check each that is the correct representation of PMI
      talent triangle:
      A. Leadership skills, strategic and business management
         skills, and IT part of project management skills
      B. Technical project management skills, leadership
         skills, and knowledge of business strategy of the
         organization
      C. Technical project management skills, leadership skills,
         and strategic and business management skills
      D. Strategic and business management skills, technical
         project management skills, and Knowledge of IT part
         of the company's business
   4. Strategic and business management skills include all of
      the following except:
      A. Understanding organization's business strategy
      B. Ability to draw project delivery strategy from
         organization's business strategy
      C. Ability to align project strategy with organization's
         strategy
      D. Ability to tailor the tools, techniques, and methods to
         effectively implement organization's business strategy
         though the project
84   Chapter 2 | Project Environment


          5. The project resource availability is at maximum in
             organizations with the following structure(s):
              A. PMO
              B. Hybrid
              C. Multi-divisional
              D. Organic
          6. The project manager is responsible for achieving
             project objectives in an organization with the following
             structure(s):
              A. Project-oriented only
              B. Strong matrix and project-oriented only
              C. PMO and projectized only
              D. All structures
          7. You have just joined an organization as a project manager
             and are studying the enterprise environmental factors of
             the organization to find out how you can leverage them
             for the success of your upcoming projects. Enterprise
             environmental factors may have what kind of influence
             on the projects?
              A. Positive only
              B. Negative only
              C. Positive or negative
              D. None
          8. Technical project management skills include the abilities
             to: (Check all that apply.)
              A. Manage IT-related aspects of project only
              B. Focus on the critical elements of each project, such
                 as critical success factors, and schedule.
              C. Tailor tools, techniques, and methods according to
                 the need of the project at hand
              D. Plan and prioritize
                                                     PMP (R) in Depth   85



9. Select the internal enterprise environmental factors:
    A. Code of conduct within the performing company
    B. Code of conduct that people in the city where the
       company is are expecting you to follow
    C. Standardized cost estimate data on the company
       computer system
    D. Project team members who are living in and working
       from foreign countries
10. Which of the following are the project management
    business documents?
    A. Project charter
    B. Project business case
    C. Project benefit management plan
    D. Business need analysis
11. Which document is issued to authorize a project?
    A. Project business case
    B. Project benefit management plan
    C. Project charter
    D. Both project charter and project business case
12. Who authorizes the project?
    A. Functional manager of the department where project
       will be performed
    B. CEO of the organization
    C. Project sponsor
    D. Project sponsor and project manager
                                                                        CHAPTER


                                                                                3

Initiating the
Project
PMP Exam Objectives         What It Really Means
1.2 Identify key            Identify key deliverables based on the business requirements.
deliverables based on the   This will help to manage customer expectations and gear efforts
business requirements       toward achieving project goals. Pay attention to how the project
                            charter is developed.
1.3 Perform stakeholder     Understand how to identify both the negative and positive
analysis                    stakeholders. You must know the key stakeholders in any
                            project, such as the project manager, sponsor, and project
                            team members. It is important to use appropriate tools and
                            techniques to properly align the stakeholders' expectations with
                            the project in order to gain their support.
1.4 Identify high-level     Identify high-level assumptions, constraints, and risks coming
risks, assumptions, and     from the current environment, organizational factors,
constraints                 historical data, and expert judgment in order to propose an
                            implementation strategy. Pay attention to this aspect when
                            studying how to develop the project charter.
1.5 Develop the project     Understand the Develop Project Charter process. You must
charter                     know the details of the process--for example, how to develop
                            the project charter by compiling and analyzing gathered
                            information in order to ensure project stakeholders are in
                            agreement on its elements.




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_3
88   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


     PMP Exam Objectives        What It Really Means
     1.6 Obtain project         Understand that the project charter approval process depends
     charter approval           upon the project and the performing organization. By default,
                                the approval is obtained from the project sponsor. The approval
                                is also necessary to get formal authority assigned to the project
                                manager and general project acceptance and commitment. You
                                must know that the project charter approval officially starts a
                                project.
     1.8. Inform stakeholders   Understand that informing stakeholders of the approved project
     of the approved project    charter is essential to ensuring common understanding among
     charter                    the key stakeholders about the project milestones and their
                                roles and responsibilities.


     As you learned in the previous chapters, you manage projects through
     processes. You also learned that a process is composed of input, tools and
     techniques, and output. You use the tools and techniques on the input of
     a process to generate its output. Also, recall that processes belong to five
     process groups and ten knowledge areas. You manage the initiation of
     a project through a process group called the initiating process group, which
     consists of two processes: Develop Project Charter and Identify Stakeholders.
     Before you can initiate a project, it must originate from somewhere, which we
     discussed in Chapter 1.
     So, the central question in this chapter is, how is a project initiated? In search
     of the answer, you will explore three avenues with me: developing the project
     charter, identifying stakeholders, and formally starting the project while
     informing and involving the stakeholders.


     Initiating a Project: Big Picture
     Initiating a project means defining the project such that it is in alignment
     with the organization's strategic objectives on one hand and with prospective
     stakeholders' needs on the other; getting approval to start it; identifying and
     analyzing project stakeholders; and starting the project while informing and
     involving the stakeholders. In Chapter 1, you learned how projects originate
     from the project initiation context aligned with organization's strategic
     objectives. Recall, initiation context refers to the situations faced by the
     organization, such as business/legal requirements; stakeholder requests or
     needs; need to implement changing business or technological strategies; and
     need to create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services. In Chapter 2,
     you saw how this context triggers the process of creating two project
     management business documents: project business case and project benefit
     management plan.
                                                                               PMP (R) in Depth         89




Tip It's a good policy to involve customers and other important stakeholders in the initiating
stage of the project. It would give them the feeling of shared ownership that will greatly contribute
to the success of the project by positively influencing factors such as deliverable acceptance and
stakeholder satisfaction.


As shown in the big picture of initiating a project presented in Figure 3-1,
these two business documents are the major input into the Develop Project
Charter process that generates the project charter, which in turn is an input
into the Identify Stakeholder process. The project charter basically contains
a project definition in the form of high-level information about the project.
The project is run for stakeholders and by stakeholders, and therefore is
aligned with stakeholders' expectations. In that sense, as shown in Figure 3-1,
the project charter acts as the interface between the project and the
organization's strategic objectives.



                                       KZ^



                                                                          E
                                              /Z
                                               Z




                                           /ZZ                        
                 
                                            WZ                        W



                                          ZWZ
                                          


                                                   WZ


                                            /
                                           ^Z


Figure 3-1. Illustration of the relationship among the major building blocks of the big
picture of initiating a project
90   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project



     Note If your project is divided into different phases, you will be going through the initiation
     stage at the beginning of each phase to check if the decisions and plans made during the initiation
     of the project are still relevant to the phase at hand. It helps to ensure the project is still focused on
     the business need for which it was started.


     The first process in the initiating process group is the develop project charter.


     Developing a Project Charter
     The project charter is a document that contains high-level project information,
     such as the project's purpose, objectives, and preapproved financial resources.
     The single most important purpose of this document is to convey the formal
     authorization for the project. To accomplish this, it is necessary that the
     charter clearly shows the business need for the project and that the project
     objectives align with the organization's strategic objectives. For this purpose,
     two project management business documents--i.e., the project business
     case and the project benefit management plan--are produced, as discussed
     in Chapter 2. Both of these documents are input to the Develop Project
     Charter process, as shown in Table 3-1, which also shows the other input
     items, along with the tools and techniques applied to the input to produce the
     listed output: project charter and assumptions log.


     Note The project charter is the document that formally authorizes a project, which includes
     naming the project manager, determining the authority level of the project manager, and allowing
     the project manager to start using organizational resources on the project.
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth        91



Table 3-1. The Develop Project Charter Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                               Tools & Techniques                   Output
1. Business documents               1. Data gathering                    1. Project charter
  * Business case                      * brainstorming                   2. Assumptions log
  * Benefit management plan            * focus groups
2. Agreements                          * interviews
3. Enterprise environmental         2. Interpersonal and team skills:
   factors                             * Conflict management
4. Organizational process              * Facilitation
   assets
                                       * Meeting management
                                    3. Expert judgment
                                    4. Meetings


Table 3-1 presents the Develop Project Charter process in term of input,
tools and techniques, and output. The other input items for the process of
developing a project charter are discussed in the following paragraphs.


Tip The business case document is developed from the project initiation context--i.e., the
organization's business need--and is used to justify the investment in the project and to draw
boundaries around the project, such as what is and is not included.


Agreements. When a project is to be executed for a customer who is
external to the performing organization, it is usually done based on a contract.
The contract may provide key information required for the charter, such as
customer-side stakeholders and payment terms. However, in addition to the
contract, agreement may also come in other forms, such as verbal agreements,
email, letters of intent, service-level agreements (SLAs), and memorandums of
understanding (MOUs). We will explore agreements futher when we cover
the procurement management knowledge area.
Enterprise Environmental Factors. During the development of the project
charter, you must consider the performing organization's environmental
factors relevant to this task, which include the following:
        *   Government and industry standards, such as legal
            requirements, product standards, and quality standards
            relevant to the project, used in determining the project
            requirements and so on.
        *   Regulatory and legal requirements and constraints
            can influence the product requirements.
92   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


           *    Organization's culture and political climate can
                influence how to process and channel the project charter
                and getting resources pre-approved.
           *    Marketplace conditions may influence milestone
                schedule and requirements.
           *    Organizational structure and governance framework
                may influence the project manager's assigned responsibility
                and authority levels and the decision on who will authorize
                the project.
           *    Stakeholders' expectations of their risk threshold
                can influence several elements of a charter, such as
                product requirements, milestone schedule, overall project
                risk, project objectives, and success criteria.
     Note that the environmental factors can be internal to the performing
     organization, such as the organization's culture, or external to the organization,
     such as market conditions.
     Organizational Process Assets. As you learned in Chapter 2, the
     organizational process assets are typically grouped into two categories:
     processes and procedures for conducting work, and a corporate knowledge
     base for storing and retrieving information to help the project and its
     processes. For example, the performing organization might have its own
     guidelines, policies, and procedures, whose effect on the project must be
     considered while developing the project charter and the other project
     documents that will follow. Another example of an organization's process
     assets are the knowledge and learning base acquired from previous projects.
     Here are some specific examples of organizational process assets that can be
     useful in developing the project charter:
           *    Templates to support some project management tasks,
                such as project charter templates
           *    Standard policies and procedures of the organization
                relevant to developing the project charter
           *    Procedures for issuing work authorizations
           *    Knowledge base of the organization that contains
                historical information from previous projects, such as
                project selection decisions and project performance
     To summarize, the input items to developing the project charter may include
     two business documents--the project business case and project benefit
     management plan--enterprise environmental factors, organizational process
     assets, and possibly a contract or some other form of agreement. You then
     take the available input and apply the relevant tools and techniques to develop
     the project charter.
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth        93




Tools and Techniques to Develop Project
Charter
Expert judgment, data gathering, meetings, and interpersonal and team skills
are the tools and techniques used to develop the project charter, as described
in the following paragraphs.
Expert Judgment. Expert judgment as a tool is discussed in Chapter 2. To
develop a project charter, expert judgment may be sought in the relevant area,
such as organization strategy to ensure the project aligns with this strategy,
benefit management, duration estimation for milestone schedule, budget
estimation, risk identification to asses high-level overall project risk, and the
field of the project.
Data Gathering. To collect data in the process of developing a project charter,
data-gathering techniques, such as interviews, focus groups, and brainstorming,
can be used. Interviews can be conducted in a formal or informal setting to
obtain information from experts or stakeholders on any appropriate topic, such
as stakeholder expectations, product requirements, project risk estimation, and
project constraints. You can bring together an appropriate set of stakeholders
and experts on any relevant topic, such as project success criteria and risk
identification. This is a form of focus group. Furthermore, in the process of
using this information to produce a project charter, you can use brainstorming
if you get stuck or just to make sound decisions. The brainstorming technique
is generally used in a group environment to gather ideas as candidates for a
solution to a problem or issue without any immediate evaluation of these ideas.
The evaluation and analysis of these ideas happens later.


Caution! In interviews, trust and proper confidentiality are essential to create an environment
of honesty and thereby collect unbiased data.


Meetings. We have already motioned this tool. This is a very general tool and
can be used when appropriate to collect or discuss information on any topic,
such as project objectives, success criteria, high-level project and product
requirements, and list of milestones.
Interpersonal and Team Skills. Interpersonal and team skills are an
important part of the leadership skills expected from a project manager, as
discussed in Chapter 2. These skills, such as meeting management facilitation
and conflict management, can be used to develop the project charter. Some of
the good meeting management practices include 1) run the meeting with an
agenda; 2) send timely invitations to appropriate stakeholders; 3) prepare for
the meeting; 4) make sure that meeting minutes are being taken; and 5) follow
up the meeting with minutes and action items from the meeting.
94   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


     The facilitation skill can be used in a meeting or in any group situation,
     including online, to effectively guide a group to a successful conclusion, such
     as a decision or resolution to an issue, by encouraging effective participation,
     considering all contributions, and developing mutual understanding. To develop
     mutual understanding, sometimes conflict resolution skills are warranted; e.g.,
     to get stakeholders to agree on project charter aspects like project objectives,
     product requirements, milestones, and project success criteria.
     You apply these tools and techniques to input to produce the output of the
     Develop Project Charter process.


     Output of Develop Project Charter
     The output of the Develop Project Charter process contains two items, the
     assumptions log and project charter, as described in the following paragraphs.
     Assumptions Log. This item contains assumptions and constraints mostly at
     the strategic and operational level. They are usually recorded in the business
     case document and can also come from expert judgment. When the project
     starts, the assumptions log grows as lower-level assumptions are made due
     to a lack of details that affect the cost estimate, schedule, plans, and so forth.
     Assumptions are important as they give rise to risks.
     An assumption is a factor that you consider to be true without any proof or
     verification. For example, an obvious assumption that you might make during
     planning for an in-house project could be the availability of the required skill
     set to perform the project. It's important to document assumptions clearly
     and validate them at various stages of the project because assumptions
     carry a certain degree of uncertainty with them, and uncertainty means risk.
     Assumptions can appear in both the input and the output of various processes.
     A constraint is a restriction (or a limitation) that can affect the performance
     of the project. It can appear in both the input and the output of various
     processes. For example, there could be a schedule constraint that the project
     must be completed by a predetermined date. Similarly, a cost constraint would
     limit the budget available for the project.
     Project Charter. It is a high-level document that summarizes information
     about the project and its intended outcome. A careful reader may already
     know what is in it by now, because we have been mentioning the items in it
     directly or indirectly. Anyhow, here they are:
           *    The project purpose and justification, which
                includes the purpose of the project and high-level project
                justification, including business need for the project and
                return on investment
           *    High-level project description, including key deliver-
                ables, and scope, i.e., boundaries around the project
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth       95



       *    High-level project requirements; e.g., based on
            the needs of the customer, the sponsor, and other
            stakeholders
       *    Project objectives and success criteria. It explains
            what exactly will be accomplished to meet the purpose--
            that is, what will be the outcome of the project. Each
            objective should be measurable and have a success
            criterion assigned to it.
       *    High-level risks. This is overall high-level project risk.
            The lower-level risks will be identified during the project
            planning.
       *    Milestone schedule. The charter should include a high-
            level schedule, such as a milestone schedule.
       *    A budget summary. A high-level summary of the
            project budget--that is, how much money is required and
            at what times during the project.
       *    Project manager. Assign a project manager with
            specified responsibility and authority level.
       *    Project sponsor. The name and authority level of the
            project sponsor authorizing the project charter
       *    Project exit criteria. This states the conditions that
            have to be met before closing or cancelling the entire
            project or project phase.
       *    Project approval and acceptance requirements.
            This item answers the following questions:

            *    What are the name and responsibility of the person
                 or committee that will approve and accept the
                 project when it's finished?
            *    What constitutes project success?
            *    Who decides whether the project is successful?
            *    Who signs off on the project completion?
Depending on the project and the organization, the charter may include other
elements as well, such as a budget summary, a list of participating functional
departments of the organization, and their roles in the project.


Caution! The project charter of a project provides the interface between the project and the
organization's strategic objectives.
96   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


     As previously stated, the project charter provides the project manager with
     the authority to use organizational resources to run the project. Remember
     that, formally speaking, project charters are prepared external to project
     management by an individual, a committee in the organization, or the PMO.
     In other words, project management starts where the project charter ends.
     However, practically, the would-be project manager might actually be involved
     in writing the project charter or a part of it. The project approval and funding
     will still be external to the project management boundaries.


     Note Usually the Develop Project Charter process is performed only once or at pre-determined
     points in the project; e.g., for a project that includes multiple phases, it may be performed at the
     beginning of each phase to validate the assumptions made during the previous phases.




                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.1

         Q1. True or false: It is the responsibility of the project manager to develop the project
         charter.
         Q2. True or false: Project charter is a contract between the performing entity and the
         entity for which it's being performed.
         Q3. Which process project document interfaces the project with the organization's
         strategy?


     The project charter is not a contract--no money is involved.


     Caution! It's important to realize that approval and funding of a project occur outside the
     boundaries of the project. However, the project management team may help and be involved
     in writing the project charter, and the project manager may even be asked to get involved in
     developing the business case.


     Once you have the project charter, you know the high-level product
     requirements that the project will satisfy. However, a high-level requirement
     written in a certain way might mean different things to different stakeholders.
     So, after you get the project charter, one of your next tasks will be to develop
     a common understanding of the project among the project stakeholders. You
     accomplish this by drawing or explaining boundaries around the project at a
     lower level--that is, what is included and what is not--thereby spelling out
                                                                 PMP (R) in Depth      97



what exactly the deliverables are. By doing this, you are determining the scope
of the project at a lower level; i.e., in detail. That will be discussed in the next
chapters, the first chapters of Part II of this book.
The first project stakeholder is the person who conceived the project. The
people who develop and authorize the project charter are also project
stakeholders. Thus, developing a project charter is very closely connected to
stakeholder management, which contains the Identify Stakeholders process.


Identifying the Project Stakeholders
As mentioned in Chapter 1 and explained in Chapter 2, project stakeholders
are individuals and organizations whose interests are affected (positively or
negatively) by the project's execution and completion and/or who can influence
or impact the project. In other words, a project stakeholder has something
to gain from the project or something to lose to the project. Accordingly,
stakeholders fall into two broad categories: positive stakeholders, who will
normally benefit from the success of the project, and negative stakeholders,
who see some kind of disadvantage coming from the project. The implications
obviously are that the positive stakeholders would like to see the project
succeed, and the negative stakeholders' interests would be better served if the
project were delayed or cancelled altogether. For example, your city mayor
might be a positive stakeholder in a project to open a Walmart store in
your neighborhood because it brings business to the city, whereas some local
business leaders might look at it as a threat to local businesses and thereby
may act as negative stakeholders.
Negative stakeholders are often overlooked by the project manager and
the project team, which increases the project risk. Ignoring either positive
or negative project stakeholders will have a damaging impact on the project.
Therefore, it's important that you, as a project manager, start identifying the
project stakeholders early on in the project. The different project stakeholders
might have different and conflicting expectations that you need to analyze and
manage.
Identifying all the project stakeholders might be a difficult task, but the obvious
ones include the project manager, program manager, portfolio manager,
customers and users, project sponsor, project management office, project
team, operations management, sellers and business partners, and functional
managers related to the project. In addition to these key stakeholders, discussed
in Chapter 2, there can be a number of other less obvious stakeholders both
inside and outside of your organization. Depending upon the project, these
might include investors, sellers, contractors, family members of the project
team members, government agencies, media outlets, lobbying organizations,
individual citizens, and society at large.
98   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


     It is critical for the success of the project that you identify positive and negative
     stakeholders early on in the project, understand and analyze their varying
     and conflicting expectations, and manage those expectations throughout the
     project.
     Table 3-1 presents the Identify Stakeholders process in terms of the input, tools
     and techniques, and output. Identifying stakeholders includes the following:
             *    Identify individuals and organizations that can influence
                  the project and/or be impacted by the project.
             *    Document relevant information about the individuals and
                  organizations and about their interests and involvement
                  in the project, etc.
             *    Document how these individuals and organizations can
                  influence the project and how they can be impacted by
                  the project.
             *    Determine the levels of importance of these stakeholders.


     Table 3-2. The Identify Stakeholders Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

     Input                                 Tools and Techniques          Output
     1. Project charter                    1. Data gathering             1. Stakeholder register
     2. Project management plan:             * Questionnaires and        2. Change requests
       *Communications management              surveys                   3. Project management
        plan                                 * Brainstorming                updates:
       *Stakeholder engagement plan        2. Data analysis:               *Communications
     3. Business documents:                  * Stakeholder analysis         management plan
       * Business case                       * Document analysis           *Stakeholders
                                                                            engagement plan
       * Benefit management plan           3. Data representation:
                                                                           *Requirement
     4. Project documents:                   * Stakeholder mapping and
                                                                            management plan
       * Requirement documentation             representation
                                                                           *Risk management
       * Change log                        4. Expert judgment
                                                                            plan
       * Issues log                        5. Meetings
                                                                         4. Project document
     5. Agreements                                                          updates:
     6. Enterprise environmental factors                                   * Issues log
     7. Organizational project assets                                      * Assumptions log
                                                                           * Risk register
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth        99




Note As the input items in Table 3-2 indicate, project planning should and does start early in
the project. The uncovered planning items in this table will be covered in Part II.


As mentioned earlier, stakeholder identification is necessary in order to
manage both stakeholder expectations and their influence on the project.
They can influence various aspects of the project, such as definition, changes,
execution, deliverables, and ultimately the success. They may come from
inside the organization with different levels of authority or from outside the
organization.
Identifying stakeholders is an iterative process--that is, you might have to
perform the identification over and over again because some old stakeholders
may become irrelevant, and some new stakeholders may appear during the
life of the project. Because identifying and analyzing the stakeholders and
managing their expectations and influence is so critical to the success of the
project, you should start this task early on in the project.
To identify the stakeholders, we gather, analyze, and then present data or
information about the stakeholders.


Gathering Data
You can start by collecting information about stakeholders from the input
items listed in Table 3-2.
The Project Charter. The project charter helps greatly to identify key
stakeholders with responsibilities by revealing the internal and external
individuals and groups who are either directly involved in the project
or potentially will be impacted by it. The project sponsor, customers, and
departments of the performing organization participating in the project are
some examples of stakeholders identified by the project charter.
Business Documents. The business case document reveals the project
objectives and the initial list of related stakeholders. From the benefit
management plan, you can extract information about stakeholders who would
benefit from the project's outcome.
Project Management Plan. As stakeholder management is closely coupled
with communication management, you can extract considerable information
about project stakeholders from the communication management plan.
Also, from the stakeholder engagement plan, if it contains information about
stakeholders. Both plans will be discussed in the next part of this book.
100   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


      Project Documents. The change log and issues log may reveal new stakeholders
      or changed project relationship with an existing stakeholder. Also, from the
      requirement documentation you can extract or derive stakeholder information.
      Procurement Documents. If the project originated from procurement
      activity, then the procurement documents, such as the contract, will be useful
      to help identify the stakeholders. If this project is going to use procurement
      to produce part of its product, then the procurement documents will help to
      identify some stakeholders, such as sellers and suppliers.
      Advanced Data Gathering. In conjunction with and in addition to
      simple information and data collection from input items, we can use some
      data-gathering techniques to identify new stakeholders and also to get more
      information about already identified stakeholders. These techniques include
      questionnaires and surveys and brainstorming. You can also use document-
      analysis techniques for this purpose. These techniques will be discussed in
      more detail in Chapter 4.
      Once the data about stakeholders is collected, it needs to be analyzed to
      extract the useful information from it, which will then need to be appropriately
      presented.


      Stakeholder Data Analysis
      Stakeholder analysis is an activity to analyze data about the stakeholders to
      extract useful and relevant information. The following are the three major
      steps:
            1. Identify. Identify all potential stakeholders and the
               important characteristics of each identified stakeholder,
               such as the following:
                a. Name, department, and role. For example, Dr.
                   John Serri,Vice President, Research and Development.
                b. Interest in the project. Why should the
                   stakeholder be interested in the project? Is the
                   stakeholder seeking to benefit or is the stakeholder
                   threatened?
                c. Rights, ownership, contribution. What are the
                   legal and moral rights of the stakeholder, ownership
                   of assets, etc., and how and how much can the
                   stakeholder contribute to the project?
                                                              PMP (R) in Depth     101



          d. Knowledge level. What is the knowledge level of
             the stakeholder, especially about the project and in
             the application area of the project? In other words,
             how and how much can the stakeholder's knowledge
             help or hurt the project?
          e. Expectations. What are the stakeholder's needs
             and expectations of the project?
          f.   Kind and level of influence. In which way and how
               much can the stakeholder influence the project to
               impact its outcome?
      2. Assess. Make an assessment of how a stakeholder is
         going to react to various situations in the project. This
         will help in your preparation to influence them in order
         to get their support to enhance the chances of project
         success.
With this information at hand, we can classify--i.e., categorize--the
stakeholders by using data-presentation techniques that will help you in
building appropriate relationships with the stakeholders.


Data Presentation
An example of a data-presentation technique is mapping stakeholders in a
way that categorizes them using various criterion. When there are so many
stakeholders, it's important for effective stakeholder management to classify
and prioritize them. This will help make efficient use of management efforts,
including communication and expectations management, and also will help
build appropriate relationships with stakeholders. For example, an obvious
classification is positive and negative stakeholders. For more sophisticated
classifications, there are several criteria and models, including the following:
Direction of Influence. This model classifies stakeholders according to the
magnitude and direction of their influence:
      *   Upward. For whom the project is: e.g., project sponsor,
          customer organization, and senior management or
          performing organization
      *   Downward. Project team or other people working for
          the project on a temporary basis, such as knowledge or
          skill specialists
102   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


            *    Outward. Stakeholders outside the project team; e.g.,
                 end users, suppliers, and regulators
            *    Sideward. Other project managers of middle management
                 in competition with this project; e.g., for resources.
      Power/interest Grid. In this model, you place the stakeholders on a two-
      dimensional plot: power (i.e., authority) level versus interest level. For example,
      if a powerful stakeholder has a lot of interest in the project, he is of great
      priority. If, on the other hand, a stakeholder lacks interest in the project, then
      he potentially is not going to influence the project that much, even if he has a
      lot of authority.
      Power/influence Grid. This model plots the stakeholders in a two-
      dimensional space: authority level versus ability to influence the project.
      Influence/impact. This model plots the stakeholders in a two-dimensional
      space: ability to influence the project versus ability to cause changes in the
      project planning, execution, and hence in the final outcome. For example, a
      project stakeholder may be highly involved (high influence) in the project but
      have no ability to impact the project, such as influencing changes in the project.
      In that case, this stakeholder is of lower priority than the stakeholder who has
      high involvement and high impact.
      Stakeholder Cube. This model plots the stakeholders in a three-dimensional
      space; e.g., influence, impact, and interest.
      Salience Model. This model classifies stakeholders based on multiple
      characteristics, such as the ability to impose their will (power); the urgency
      of their needs, expectations, or requirements; and the legitimacy of their
      involvement.
      One main purpose of stakeholder analysis and presentation models is to
      prioritize stakeholders. For example, you can draw a variable against another
      variable and see where the stakeholders fit in that plot. If the variables are
      chosen carefully, the plot will suggest how much attention should be given to
      various stakeholders in the plot. As an example, Figure 3-2 presents such a
      plot in which the x-axis represents the level of interest from very low to very
      high, and the y-axis represents the power--i.e., authority--level from very
      low to very high. Stakeholders 1, 2, and 3 have a low interest in the project and
      low power, and therefore they do not deserve much of your time and effort.
      However, they must be monitored because their interest and power may
      change over time. At the other extreme, Stakeholders 8, 9, and 10 have a high
      interest in the project and have a very high capability to influence the project
      due to high power. These stakeholders should obviously be managed with
      maximum effort. Also, the high-authority/low-interest stakeholders should get
      due attention because they have the power to drive a change in the project.
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth        103




Figure 3-2. An example of determining strategy by plotting stakeholders against different
variables



Caution! The communication of information about stakeholders is an important part of the
stakeholder management strategy. For example, some of the information about certain stakeholders
may be too sensitive to be included in a publicly shared document. As a project manager, you must
exercise your discreet judgment on which information about which stakeholders to share with
whom and to what detail.


The results of the information from stakeholder analysis and data presentation
go into the stakeholder register, the main output of this process.


Output of Identifying Stakeholders
You store information about the stakeholders that you identified in a document
called the stakeholder register. This information includes the following items:
        *    Identification. For example, name, location, organizational
             position, project role (if any), and contact information
104   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


            *    Assessment. Requirements and expectations coming
                 from this stakeholder, the part or phase of the project that
                 is of most interest to this stakeholder, and an assessment
                 of their potential influence and impact on the project
            *    Classification. There will be a whole array of different
                 kinds of project stakeholders with varied influence. So,
                 it's helpful to classify them in a register by using suitable
                 criteria, such as whether they are internal or external
                 to the performing organization; whether they are
                 proponents or opponents of the project; their power,
                 influence, impact, and interest levels; the direction of their
                 influence; etc.
      In addition to this output, the Identify Stakeholders process may also generate
      change requests, and as a result some documents may need to be updated,
      such as those listed in the output column of Table 3-2.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.2

         Knowing the Identify Stakeholders process, answer the following:
         Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholders.
         Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholders.


      Congratulations! Now you know the project stakeholders. But, before
      you can manage them, you need to plan. As pointed out earlier, managing
      stakeholders is all about stakeholders' engagement in the project. So, we
      want to plan stakeholder engagement. You will learn how to do this in the
      next part of this book.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.3

         Q1. What is the first process you perform in managing a project?
         Q2. What do you need before you can begin initiating your project?
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth    105




Welcome Aboard
As we have seen in this chapter, the project charter is a document that states
the initial requirements to satisfy the stakeholders' needs and expectations, and
it also formally authorizes the project. The single most important task for the
Develop Project Charter process, the standard process used to develop the
project charter, is to authorize the project. To accomplish that, it is necessary
to document the business needs and the new product or service that the
project will launch to satisfy those needs. This way, the project charter links the
proposed project to the ongoing work in the organization; in other words, the
project charter provides the interface between the project and the organization's
strategic objectives. This clears the way to authorize the project.
The project charter is approved by an appropriate person in the performing
organization. Who this person is depends on the organization and the project.
This person, for example, could be the CEO of the company, the project
sponsor, or a representative of the project selection committee. By default, it's
the project sponsor. With this approval of the project charter, the project is
officially authorized, the project manager is officially assigned, and the authority
level of the project manager is determined. All this officially starts the project.
Also note that in the whole process of initiating the project we have identified
the high-level assumptions, constraints, and risks coming from the current
environment, organizational factors, historical data, and expert judgment. We
can use this information to initially propose an implementation strategy for
the project.


Note If a project includes multiple phases, the processes in the initiating process may be
performed at the beginning of each phase; e.g., to validate the assumptions made during the
previous phases.



                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.4

   In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
   second column to describe its role during project initiation:

   Item                                  Role
      A. Business documents              1. Input to developing project charter
      B. Project charter                 2. Output of developing project charter
      C. Procurement documents           3. Input to identifying stakeholders
      D. Assumptions log                 4. Output of identifying stakeholders
106   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


      The four most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
            *    A project can originate inside the performing organization
                 or outside of it in order to meet business requirements,
                 take on an opportunity, offer a solution to a problem, etc.
                 But the grand origin of a project is always the strategic
                 plan of the organization.
            *    The Develop Project Charter process is used to generate
                 the project charter and assumptions log.
            *    The process of identifying the stakeholders generates a
                 stakeholder register, which contains detailed information
                 on project stakeholders.
            *    The project charter officially authorizes the project,
                 names the project manager, and determines the authority
                 level of the project manager.

      Summary of Project Initiation
      Organizations start projects to fulfill different kinds of needs called initiation
      contexts, such as to meet a business or legal requirement, to take on a
      business opportunity, to develop a solution for a problem, or to develop a new
      product. However, the underlying motivation is always to meet some business
      objectives in the strategic plan of the organization. The context triggers the
      process of creating two project management business documents: 1) project
      business case; and 2) project benefit management plan. One of the purposes
      of project initiation is to align the project with the organization's strategic
      objectives, which is accomplished by 1) generating a project charter based on
      the aforementioned two business documents; and 2) aligning stakeholders'
      expectations to the project charter. This way, the project charter acts as the
      interface between the project and the organization's strategic objectives.
      The initiating project stage (also informally called the starting stage) is
      constituted by two processes: Develop Project Charter and Identify
      Stakeholders. The three documents generated by the initiating stage are the
      project charter, which defines the project and names and authorizes the project
      manager; assumptions log, which contains information about the project
      assumptions and constraints; and the stakeholder register, which identifies
      the project stakeholders and relevant information about them. The project
      charter includes the project justification, a high-level project description, and
      high-level information, such as project scope, project objectives and success
      criteria, project objectives and success criteria, project requirements, and a
      risks and budget summary.
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth     107



Road Ahead. After the project has been chartered and project stakeholders
have been identified, it's time to plan the project. Project planning involves
determining exactly what will be done and how it will be done. Executing a
project means implementing the project management plan for that project.
Therefore, the project management plan contains the project scope, which
defines what needs to be done to meet the project objectives. But, how is
the project management plan actually developed? In other words, issuing an
approved project charter moves the project from the initiation stage into the
planning stage, which is composed of a number of processes collectively called
the planning process group. These processes will be explored in the next part
of the book.


Exam's Eye View
Comprehend

  *Project charter provides the interface between the project and the organization's
   strategic objectives.
  *The project charter, which is an output of the Develop Project Charter process, is an
   input to the Identify Stakeholders process.
  *The Develop Project Charter process needs to be performed at least once before
   the Identify Stakeholders process because the project charter is an input to identifying
   project stakeholders.
Look Out

  *A contract can be an input item to both the Develop Project Charter process and the
   Identify Stakeholders process; e.g., for identifying stakeholders, a contract could be a
   part of procurement documents.
  *Two business documents, the business case and the benefit management plan, are input
   items to both the Develop Project Charter process and the Identify Stakeholders
   process.
  *The assumptions log is an output, in addition to the project charter, of the Develop
   Project Charter process.
Memorize

  *Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations whose interests are affected
   (positively or negatively) by the project's execution and completion.
  *The project charter is the document that formally authorizes a project, which includes
   naming a project manager and the project manager's authority level.
  *The project charter includes high-level information about the project, such as purpose
   and justification, project requirements, objectives and success criteria, milestone
   schedule, risks, and budget summary.
  *The major output items of project initiating are project charter, assumptions log, and
   stakeholder register.
108   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


      Review Questions
            1. Which of the following issues the project charter
               document?
                A. The performing organization's higher management
                B. Any stakeholder
                C. The customer
                D. The project manager
            2. What document is the result of the integration
               management process in the project initiation process
               group?
                A. Business case
                B. Project charter
                C. Project benefit management plan
                D. Preliminary scope statement
            3. The project charter is important for which of the
               following reasons?
                A. It authorizes the sponsor.
                B. It names the project manager and authorizes the
                   project manager to use the organization's resources
                   for the project.
                C. It identifies all the stakeholders.
                D. It analyzes the stakeholders.
            4. Which of the following is not included in the project
               charter?
                A. High-level risks
                B. High-level product requirements
                C. Budget summary
                D. Project schedule
                                                      PMP (R) in Depth   109



5. You have been named the project manager for a project
   in your company codenamed Kill the Bill. The project must
   be completed before Thanksgiving Day this year. This
   represents which of the following project characteristics?
    A. Assumption
    B. Constraint
    C. Schedule
    D. Risk
6. Which of the following is true about assumptions in the
   project initiation?
    A. Because assumptions are a part of the project char-
       ter that you did not write, you don't need to validate
       them. Just assume the assumptions are true, and if the
       project fails, it's not your fault.
    B. Because assumptions represent risk, you must vali-
       date them at various stages of the project.
    C. An assumption is a condition that has been verified to
       be true, so you don't need to validate it.
    D. You must not start a project until all the assumptions
       have been proven to be true.
7. Which of the following stakeholders can authorize the
   closure of a project?
    A. Project manager
    B. Customer
    C. Project sponsor
    D. Functional manager
8. A data presentation model that presents a stakeholder's
   influence, impact, and interest in one plot is called a:
    A. Salience model
    B. Stakeholder cube
    C. Influence/impact/interest grid
    D. Three-dimensional model
110   Chapter 3 | Initiating the Project


            9. You are the project manager of a project named Teach
               the Congress. Your friend Cosmo is a project manager of
               a project that shares some resources with your project.
               What kind of influence does Cosmo have on project
               Teach the Congress?
                A. Upward
                B. Outward
                C. Sideward
                D. Downward
           10. What document is not the result of the project initiation
               process group?
                A. Statement of work
                B. Project charter
                C. Stakeholder register
                D. Assumption log
           11. The project charter is important for which of the
               following reasons?
                A. It authorizes the sponsor.
                B. It names the project manager and provides the proj-
                   ect manager with the authority to use organizational
                   resources to run the project.
                C. It interfaces between the project and the organiza-
                   tion's strategic objectives.
                D. It identifies all the stakeholders.
           12. Which of the following is not an input to identifying
               stakeholders?
                A. Stakeholder register template
                B. Contract
                C. Stakeholder register
                D. Business case
                                                       PMP (R) in Depth   111



13. Which of the following lists the documents in the order
    their first drafts are written?
     A. Benefit management plan, project charter, stakeholder
        register
     B. Project charter, benefit management plan, stakeholder
        register
     C. Stakeholder register, project charter, benefit manage-
        ment plan
     D. Benefit management plan, stakeholder register, proj-
        ect charter
                                                                PA R T


                                                                 II

Planning the
Project
Congratulations! You have already defined your project as described in Part I.
You can't wait to begin executing. But hold on! I have a couple of questions for
you. First, when you are executing your project, how will you know that you
are on the right track? Second, during the execution, how will you know that
the project is performing in such a way that it will end in success? To address
these two and other related questions, you will need to do some planning
before you begin executing. Also, to lead the project to success, you want to
monitor and control it throughout its lifetime. Planning gives you the tools
and the framework to do exactly that. For example, a performance baseline
against which you will be measuring the progress of the project, an important
part of monitoring and controlling, is developed during planning. This baseline
comprises the scope baseline, schedule baseline, and cost baseline, which
are developed during scope, schedule, and cost planning, respectively. You
will also need to plan for the resources needed to complete the project.
Furthermore, any management task has the potential to increase or decrease
a potential risk. Therefore, all project management is inherently connected to
risk management. You need to plan for managing risks and also quality.
Initiation determines what will be done, whereas planning embraces that what,
refines it, and determines how it will be done.
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                             4

Planning Project
and Scope
PMP Exam Objectives       What It Really Means
2.1Review                 Review and assess detailed project requirements, constraints,
   detailed project       and assumptions with stakeholders based on the project charter,
   requirements,          lessons learned, and using requirement-gathering techniques to
   constraints, and       establish detailed project deliverables. Understand the project
   assumptions            charter and the process of collecting requirements.
2.2Develop a scope        Develop a scope management plan based on the approved
   management plan        project scope and using scope-management techniques in order
                          to define, maintain, and manage the scope of the project. In
                          simple English, it means that the master the processes: define
                          scope, create work breakdown structure (WBS), and plan scope
                          management.
                          Note: To develop any plan is just a part of the project
                          management plan. So, it's obvious that you must understand the
                          develop project management process.
2.9Develop a change       Develop the change management plan by defining how changes
   management plan        will be addressed and controlled in order to track and manage
                          change.
                          Understand that the change management plan is a component
                          of the project management plan, which describes how changes
                          are handled in the organization. The Perform Integrated Change
                          Control process, discussed in Chapter 12, depends on it.


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_4
116   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      After the project has been initiated, as discussed in the previous chapter, you
      need to develop a project management plan, which becomes the primary
      source of information for how the project at hand will be executed, monitored
      and controlled, and closed. The project plan development involves developing
      subsidiary plans, of which one important plan is the scope management plan.
      How important is scope management? If a product is not in the scope, it will not
      and should not be produced. The primary purpose of project scope management
      is to ensure that the required work, and only the required work, is performed
      to complete the project successfully. If changes in the work requirements are
      made, they must be controlled--that is, the scope must be controlled.
      Before you start defining the scope, you need to know what the project and
      product requirements are. In other words, you need to collect requirements
      based on the needs and expectations of the stakeholders in line with the project
      objectives. Once you have defined the scope based on these requirements,
      it needs to be broken down into concrete, manageable tasks that can be
      assigned and performed. This is accomplished through what is called the work
      breakdown structure (WBS).
      In a nutshell, the central issue in this chapter is planning for the project
      scope. To be able to wrap your mind around this issue, you will explore three
      avenues: developing a project management plan, collecting requirements, and
      developing the scope baseline.


      Planning the Project: Big Picture
      Once the project has been initiated, it's time to do some planning. This includes
      determining the project scope, during which time you'll refine the project
      objectives and determine some how-to's: how the scope will be executed,
      how the execution will be monitored and controlled, and how the project will
      be brought to a proper closure. Project planning is embodied in the project
      management plan, which is developed through progressive elaboration, a
      concept explained in Chapter 1. The project management plan is a document
      that defines, prepares, coordinates, and integrates all subsidiary plans, such as
      scope and risk management plans, into one plan. The goal here is to develop
      a source of information that will work as a guideline for how the project will
      be executed, monitored and controlled, and closed.
      In this section, you will get a bird's-eye view of how different elements of
      project planning integrate into developing the project management plan.
                                                                             PMP (R) in Depth         117




Elements of Project Planning
Project planning means the following three things:
        *    Refining the project objectives defined during project
             initiation and collecting requirements based on the
             stakeholder needs and expectations.
        *    Determining the scope of the project.
        *    Determining the course of action required to attain these
             objectives, which involves breaking down the scope and
             objectives into concrete, manageable tasks.
It is important to plan the project because not all projects need all the planning
processes, nor do they all need them to the same degree. Therefore, the
content of the project management plan, the ultimate document developed
from project planning, will depend upon a specific project. As the project goes
through different stages, the project management plan may be updated and
revised through the change control process. The following is an incomplete
list of issues that project planning addresses:
        *    Which project management processes will be used for
             the project, what will the level of implementation for
             each of the processes be, and what are the inputs and
             tools and techniques used for the processes?
        *    The project baseline against which the performance
             of the project will be measured and against which the
             project will be monitored and controlled
        *    How the changes to the approved plan will be monitored
             and controlled
        *    What the needs and techniques for communication
             among the stakeholders are
        *    How the project lifecycle looks, including the project
             phases if the project is a multi-phase one

Note The project baseline is defined as the approved plan for the scope, schedule, and cost of
the project. The project performance is measured against this baseline, and therefore this baseline
is also called the performance baseline. The project baseline is also referred to in terms of its
components: cost baseline, schedule baseline, and scope baseline. How do you know how the
project is performing? You compare the performance to the baseline. Approved changes in scope,
schedule, or cost will obviously change the baseline.
118   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Figure 4-1 presents the big picture of project planning and its relationship with
      executing. This figure and other figures like this only present a high-level view.
      The details may be more complex. For example, the project management plan
      is initially an input to execution but can be influenced and changed as a result
      of execution. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the project
      management plan can be either a summary or a collection of subsidiary plans
      and components, which might include the following:
             *    Standard plans from different aspects of project planning,
                  such as the cost management plan, communication
                  management plan, scope management plan, and risk
                  management plan
             *    Other components, such as the milestones list, the
                  resource calendar, and baselines for scope, schedule, cost,
                  and quality. A baseline is a reference plan against which all
                  the performance deviations are measured. This reference
                  plan can be the original or the updated plan.




      Figure 4-1. A high-level view of interactions and data flow between different components of
      project planning
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth       119



In a nutshell, project planning involves determining exactly what will be done
and how it will be done. Executing a project means implementing the project
management plan for that project. Therefore, the project management plan
contains the project scope that defines what needs to be done to meet the
project objectives. But how is the project management plan actually developed?


Planning Scope: Big Picture
The project scope is defined as the work that must be performed to deliver
a product with a given scope. The product scope is the set of functions and
features that characterize a product to be delivered by the project. The
scope--i.e. product scope and project scope--refers to both what is included
in the project and what is not. In other words, scoping a project means drawing
boundaries around it. The importance of managing the project scope cannot
be over emphasized, because it has a profound impact on the overall success
of the project.


Caution! By project scope we usually mean the project product scope and the scope of the
work required to produce that product. However, keep in mind that in PMBOK the project scope
only refers to the work required to deliver the product and does not include product scope.




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.1

   Among the following attributes, identify which are part of product scope and which are
   part of the project scope, according to PMBOK, 6th Edition.
       A.   Develop software modules to support website.
       B.   The user can only access this website after logging in.
       C.   The drug should not have more than two side effects.
       D.   The drug must be developed within one year.
       E.   The drug must be tested in-house before it goes to Food and
            Drug Administration.
120   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Although we are covering only the planning part of scope management, it's a
      good idea to keep the big picture in mind, which is presented in Figure 4-1.
      As said earlier, the major goal of scope management is to ensure that the
      required work and only the required work is included and performed in the
      project. As shown in Figure 4-2, this goal is accomplished by the following
      processes of scope management:
            *   Plan Scope Management. This process is performed
                to develop a document called the scope management plan,
                which contains information on how to define, control,
                and validate the scope; i.e., the project and product scope.
            *   Collect Requirements. This is the process performed
                to collect, determine, and document the project and
                product requirements and plan to manage those
                requirements.
            *   Define Scope. This process is performed to develop a
                detailed description of the project and the product in the
                sense of what is included and what is not.
            *   Create Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). This
                process is used to develop the work breakdown structure
                in which deliverables, and hence work to produce them,
                are broken down into smaller manageable tasks that can
                be assigned to team members. This is done starting with
                the scope.
            *   Validate Scope. This is the process used to formalize
                the acceptance of the completed and already verified
                project deliverables.
            *   Control Scope. Used to monitor the status of the
                scope--i.e., project scope and product scope--and to
                manage changes to the scope baseline
                                                                       PMP (R) in Depth       121




               ^ZDW
                                     Z
                                    Z
                                               ^Z
                                               ZZ

                                     ^Z

                                               WZZ


                                      t^


                     ^Z                               ^Z


                         s^Z                      ZZ^Z


Figure 4-2. A high-level view of interactions and data flow between different components of
scope management. All processes are performed according to the scope management plan.

Figure 4-2 illustrates the high-level view of the logical connections between
these processes. More high-level information about these processes is presented
in Table 4-1.
122   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Table 4-1. Processes of Scope Management Processes Mapped to the Process Groups

      Scope Management     Process Group Major Output                     Performed
      Process
      Plan Scope           Planning         Scope management plan,      Once or at
      Management                            requirement management plan predefined
                                                                        project points
      Collect Requirements Planning         Requirement documentation,    Once or at
                                            requirement traceability      predefined
                                            matrices                      project points
      Define Scope         Planning         Project scope statement       Iteratively
      Create WBS           Planning         Scope baseline                At predefined
                                                                          project points
      Control Scope        Monitoring and   Work performance              Throughout the
                           Controlling      information                   project
      Validate Scope       Monitoring and   Accepted deliverables, work   As needed
                           Controlling      performance information
                                            change requests


      Except Control Scope and Validate Scope, all scope management processes
      are discussed in detail in this chapter. But, before we focus on scope
      management, we will discuss how the project management plan is developed.


      Developing the Project Management Plan
      Congratulations! You have already gotten your project defined and initiated
      with the project charter. You can't wait to begin executing. But hold on! I have
      three questions for you. First, how do you know what exactly to execute and
      how? Second, when you are executing your project, how will you know that
      you are on the right track? Third, during the execution, how will you know
      that the project is performing in such a way that it will end with success? To
      address these three and other related questions, you will need to do some
      planning before you begin the execution.
      So, once the project has been initiated, it is time to do some planning. Project
      planning starts with the process of Develop Project Management Plan, which
      defines, prepares, coordinates, and integrates all subsidiary plans, such as the
      scope and risk management plans, into one plan called the project management
      plan. Most of the subsidiary plans are prepared as part of other processes.
      One of the goals here is to develop a source of information that will work
      as a guideline for how the project will be planned, executed, monitored and
      controlled, and closed.
                                                                      PMP (R) in Depth       123




Note The Develop Project Management Plan process belongs to the project integration
knowledge area.


One reason why it is important to develop a project management plan is
that not all projects need all the planning processes or need them to the
same degree. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the project
management plan can be either a summary or a collection of subsidiary plans
and components. One necessary item in the plan is the baseline for at least
the following project features: scope, time, and cost. A baseline is a reference
against which all the performance deviations are measured.


Note The project management plan provides the basis of all the needed project work and how
it will be performed.


The process of developing the project management plan, presented in
Table 4-2 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output, falls in the
knowledge area of integration management because it coordinates the
various planning processes and activities. Therefore, output from other
planning processes, in addition to the project charter, are the obvious inputs
to this process. The other inputs are enterprise environmental factors
and organizational process assets. You take the relevant information from
the project charter and elaborate that. The outputs from other planning
processes refer to the subsidiary plans, such as cost or quality management
plans; we will cover these processes and plans in other chapters. You
have to deal with enterprise environmental factors, such as using the
existing facilities and working within the given organizational structure
and governance framework, following the industry standards, and meeting
the legal and regulatory requirements. Similarly, you must work with the
relevant organizational process assets: using the organizational standard
policies, processes, and procedures; plan-management templates; and
knowledge databases.
124   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Table 4-2. The Develop Project Management Plan Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
      Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques               Output
      1. Project charter                    1. Expert judgment                 Project
      2. Outputs from other planning        2. Data gathering                  management plan
         processes                            * Interviews
      3. Enterprise environmental factors     * Focus groups
      4. Organizational process assets        * Brainstorming
                                              * Checklists
                                            3. Meetings
                                            4. Interpersonal and team skills
                                              * Conflict management
                                              * Facilitation
                                              * Meeting management


      To develop the project management plan, you apply expert judgment, data
      gathering, meetings, and interpersonal and team skills as tools and techniques.
      Expert judgment may be sought in the areas relevant to developing the
      project management plan, such as tailoring the project management process
      to the project needs; elaborating on high-level information from the project;
      and developing technical details to be included in the project management
      plan. Data-gathering techniques used here include interviews, focus groups,
      brainstorming, and checklists. A checklist in this case would be a list of
      items or information to be included in the project management plan. While
      developing the plan you check against the list to verify that each item in the
      list has been included. Other data-gathering tools mentioned, which were
      explained in the development of the project charter, may be used here in the
      context of project management. The interpersonal and team skills are also the
      same as explained in the section on developing the project charter: conflict
      management, facilitation, and meeting management.
      By applying these tools and techniques to the input, you produce the output
      of the Develop Project Management Plan process, which is, well, the project
      management plan. Plans and baselines of a typical project management plan are
      listed in Table 4-3 with the chapter numbers where they are discussed in detail.
      Depending on the project's needs, additional plans and other components may
      be developed and included in the project management plan, such as a change
      management plan and a configuration management plan.
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth     125




Table 4-3. Plans and Baselines of a Typical Project Management Plan

Plan Component               Chapter Number Plan Component                   Chapter Numbers
Scope management plan        4                      Requirements             4
                                                    management plan
Schedule management plan 5                          Cost management plan     6
Quality management plan      7                      Resource management      6
                                                    plan
Communications               8                      Risk management plan     7
management plan
Procurement management       6                      Stakeholder              8
plan                                                engagement plan
Scope baseline               4                      Schedule baseline        13
Cost baseline                13                     Performance              12
                                                    measurement baseline



Caution! Some documents, which are not included in the project plan, are produced and used
at different times throughout the project lifecycle. They are simply called project documents.

Now that the Project Management Plan is in place, we turn our attention to
scope management. But before we can manage the scope, we need to develop
the scope management plan.


Developing the Project Scope Management Plan
Before starting to perform the five scope management processes, you must
develop the scope management plan, a blueprint that will show how to develop,
control, and validate the scope. As mentioned previously, this plan is developed
by using the Plan Scope Management process, presented in Table 4-4 in terms
of input, tools and techniques, and output.

Table 4-4. The Plan Scope Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                 Tools and Techniques              Output
1. Project charter                    1. Expert judgment                1. Scope management
2. Project management plan            2. Data gathering                    plan
  * Quality management plan             * Alternative analysis          2. Requirement
                                                                           management plan
  * Project lifecycle info            3. Meetings
  * Development approach
3. Enterprise environmental factors
4. Organizational process assets
126   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      You must develop this plan in the context of the purpose of the project
      documented in the project charter, which is where you will also find a
      high-level project description and high-level requirements, along with other
      relevant information, such as assumptions and constraints. Also, you will
      need a project management plan for the quality management plan, details of
      the project lifecycle, and development approach to develop it. All three will
      impact how you plan the scope management. Development approach refers to
      the development approach or approaches adapted for this project, such as
      agile, waterfall, and iterative. The Plan Scope Management process will also be
      influenced by EEFs like personnel administration, culture, and infrastructure
      of the organization, along with marketing conditions. Of course, speaking of
      OPAs, this plan will be developed by following the organizational policies and
      procedures, and you will make use of historical information, including lessons
      learned from past projects.
      As for tools, in the process of developing the scope management plan, you will
      use expert judgment on relevant topics and meetings with the appropriate
      stakeholders, such as the project sponsor and some project team members.
      We also want to explore various techniques that can be used to collect
      requirements, define and elaborate scope from the requirements, and validate
      the scope on the finished product--the alternative analysis. Of course, other
      data-analysis methods could also be considered to accomplish the same goal.
      As a result of applying these tools on the input, we get a scope management
      plan and a requirement management plan, described next.


      Requirement Management Plan and Scope
      Management Plan
      The requirement management plan basically describes the Collect
      Requirements process: how to collect, determine, and document the project
      and product requirements and how you plan to manage those requirements.
      It addresses questions like the following:
            *   How should requirements be prioritized?
            *   What kind of metrics will be used and why?
            *   How will requirement-related activities be planned,
                tracked, and reported?
            *   How will the changes be traced, initiated, tracked, and
                their impact be analyzed?
      Similarly, the scope management plan describes the "how-to" details regarding
      the rest of the scope management processes: define scope, create work
      breakdown structure, control scope, and validate scope.
                                                                             PMP (R) in Depth         127



Before you can actually define and develop the scope, you need to have a very
crucial item in place: stakeholder requirements, which form the basis of scope.


Caution! It's important to realize that product scope and project scope are not independent.
Product scope is the set of functions and features that fully define the product, and project scope
is the work required to deliver the product. So, the product scope more or less determines the
project scope.


The project scope management plan and requirement management plan
become part of the project management plan.


Collecting Requirements for the Project
Project success is defined as the delivery of the planned outcome with full
scope, on time, and within the schedule. To realize this success, it's very
important that there is agreement on what exactly is being delivered and with
what requirements. A requirement is a condition, characteristic, or capability
that a specific outcome of the project must have. For example, an online
banking website is an outcome of the project, and the condition that it must
record the number of users that visited the site each day is a requirement,
as is the fact that the user login must be secure. Requirements may come
from different sources, such as from standards, specifications, and contracts.
Stakeholder expectations and needs within the context of project objectives
materialize into requirements.


Note Generally speaking, project requirements should include the product requirements.
However, many organizations distinguish between project requirements and product requirements,
in which case project requirements include strictly project-related requirements, such as schedule
and delivery requirements, business-related requirements, and other project management
requirements, whereas product requirements include the product-related requirements, such as
those related to product performance, security, and defects.


You need to do some requirements planning, which includes the following:
        *    Defining and documenting the project requirements
        *    Defining and documenting the product requirements
        *    Managing the requirements throughout the project
128   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope



      Tip How effective you are in capturing requirements will determine how effective you are in
      getting agreement on these requirements from the stakeholders and in managing the stakeholders'
      expectations and needs. Also, these requirements go right into the foundations of the WBS, along
      with the deliverables. Therefore, collecting requirements effectively is critical for the success of
      the project.



      Table 4-5. The Collect Requirements Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                               Tools and Techniques                 Output
      1. Project charter                  1. Data gathering:                   1. Requirement
      2. Project management plan:            * Interviews                         documentation
        * Requirement management             * Focus groups                    2. Requirement
          plan                                                                    traceability matrix
                                             * Brainstorming
        * Scope management plan              * Checklists
        * Stakeholder engagement             * Questionnaires and surveys
          plan
                                          2. Data presentation and analysis:
      3. Project documents:
                                             * Affinity diagram
        * Assumptions log
                                             * Idea/mind mapping
        * Stakeholder register
                                             * Document analysis
        * Lessons learned register
                                          3. Prototyping
      4. Business documents:
                                          4. Context diagrams
        * Business case
                                          5. Decision making
      5. Agreements
                                          6. Interpersonal and team skills
      6. Enterprise environmental
                                          7. Expert judgment
         factors
      7. Organizational process assets


      You collect requirements by using the Collect Requirements process,
      illustrated in Table 4-5 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.
      Input includes all the relevant documents--i.e., plans and project documents
      and business documents--where you can get all the high-level information
      regarding the project and product requirements. Based on the information
      provided so far in this book, you can easily guess that these documents are:
              1. Business document: business case
              2. Project charter
              3. Agreements
                                                                      PMP (R) in Depth   129



      4. Plan documents: Requirement management plan and
         scope management plan, covered in the previous section,
         and the stakeholder engagement plan, which will be useful
         in managing the requirements.
      5. Project document: Assumptions log for assumptions
         about project, product, stakeholders, etc.; the lessons
         learned register for information on which requirement
         collection techniques have been effective so far; and the
         stakeholder register, which provides information about
         stakeholders and their requirements.
The stakeholder register was discussed in Chapter 3 and the stakeholder
management plan will be covered in Chapter 8.
Of course, there are some EEFs and OPAs that influence the requirement
collection process. This is left as an exercise for you in Study Checkpoint 4.2.
Just ask what factors and assets can be the source of requirements or can help
you reach them.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.2

   Make lists of enterprise environment factors and organizational process assets that
   can influence the Collect Requirements process.


So, these input items provide us with the high-level requirements and high-
level project and product information from which requirements may be drawn.
Next, we need to analyze these requirements and information by using some
tools and techniques to collect the requirements so as to do the following:
      1. Extract the final refined set of requirements.
      2. Manage them.


Tools and Techniques for Collecting Requirements
You collect the requirement-related data, present it, analyze, and make
decisions about requirements or tools. You perform these tasks by using
some techniques. If you need help with these techniques, you can always use
tools of expert judgment. Other techniques and methods are presented in the
following paragraphs.
130   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Data-Gathering Techniques
      The following are some examples of data-gathering techniques that can be
      used depending on the project need.
      Observations and Conversation. Observation is a technique in which
      the requirements for a product or project process are gathered by directly
      observing the user using the product or performing the process. In other
      words, the process or product is observed in action in the real world with
      people on the job. For that reason, this technique is also called job shadowing.
      Depending on the situation, the observer can simply observe the user doing
      the job or can participate in it. Of course, conversation and articulation skills
      will matter here.
      Interviews, Questionnaires, and Surveys. An interview is typically
      performed by asking pre-determined and on-the-spot questions and recording
      the responses. Depending on the situation, interviews may take several
      forms, such as one-on-one, multiple interviewees, or multiple interviewers.
      For example, by interviewing subject matter experts and individuals who
      ran similar projects before, you may identify and define some features and
      functions of the project deliverables.
      When you want to cover a large number of respondents quickly, questionnaires
      and surveys will be more appropriate. These are based on a written set of
      questions.
      Focus Groups and Facilitated Workshops. A focus group is a set of
      prequalified stakeholders and subject matter experts that are brought
      together with the purpose of learning about their opinions, expectations, and
      attitudes about a product, service, or result that will be the output of the
      project. Generally speaking, a moderator facilitates the interactive discussion
      to make this experience more conversational than one-on-one interviews.
      A facilitated workshop is a session that brings together cross-functional
      stakeholders to focus on defining product requirements. It generally
      proves to be an effective technique for quickly defining cross-functional
      requirements and reconciling differences among the stakeholders regarding
      the requirements. These workshops also help with developing trust and
      improving communication among the stakeholders and therefore fostering
      relationships that could help the project succeed.
      Benchmarking. Benchmarking is comparing practices, products, or services
      of a project with those of some reference projects for the purpose of learning,
      improving, and creating the basis for measuring performance. We will learn
      more about quality management in Chapter 7.
                                                               PMP (R) in Depth     131



Brainstorming. This is a creative technique generally used in a group
environment to gather ideas as candidates for a solution to a problem or an
issue without any immediate evaluation of these ideas. The evaluation and
analysis of these ideas happens later. Obviously, this technique can also be used
to collect requirements.


Data-Presentation and Analysis Techniques
When you have requirement-related data, it needs to be presented for review
and analysis.Various data-presentation techniques may be used, some of which
will be discussed next
Affinity Diagram. This is a technique in which a large number of ideas
or data are classified into different groups by using some criteria. Then, the
relationships among these ideas are explored. This facilitates an effective and
efficient review and analysis.
Idea/Mind Mapping. This is a visual technique in which various ideas, such
as those collected through brainstorming, are mapped around a central or key
concept to expose commonalities and differences among them. In this way, one
can understand the existing ideas better, consolidate them, and generate new
ideas. Mapping also helps classify ideas into groups by discovering relationships
among them. In addition to project management, this technique is also used in
other areas, such as personal, family, and education. It helps with summarizing,
clarifying, and revising ideas.
Nominal Group Technique. This technique combines brainstorming with
discussion and ranking ideas by voting or scoring. Here are the steps:
      1. For a given problem, a group member creates her/his
         own ideas in private.
      2. A moderator presents all ideas in one place to the group.
      3. All presented ideas are discussed to better understand
         them.
      4. Each member scores each idea privately on a scale; e.g.,
         from 1 to 5.
Higher-ranking ideas can be processed again through these steps. At the end,
the best-ranked idea or ideas are selected.
These techniques can be used to prioritize the requirements.
Also, different data-analysis techniques can be used, such as document analysis,
which involves accessing the relevant documents, studying them, and extracting
the relevant information--in this case the requirements--from them. In this
132   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      process, the relevant document is any document with requirement-related
      information, such as project product marketing materials, agreements, business
      plans, and requests for proposals.


      Prototyping
      A prototype is a working model of a product put together without developing
      the actual product, such as a small-scale or toy product, mock-ups, computer-
      generated models, and computer simulations--e.g., a Monte Carlo simulation.
      Organizations usually make prototypes when developing a proof of concept.
      Prototypes can also be used to collect requirements by experimenting with
      the prototype and letting stakeholders experiment with it and offer feedback.
      It's more tangible than the abstract idea of a product. Prototypes can be
      improved and modified based on the feedback from the stakeholders. In this
      way, prototypes support the progressive elaboration process of developing
      requirements.


      Context Diagrams
      A context diagram is a very useful tool for determining the requirements
      of a product, as it presents the product scope visually by showing how the
      business system is used. In other words, a typical context diagram shows two
      kinds of components: parts of the system that users can access, and users--
      also called actors. Actors play two kinds of roles: entering the input into the
      system and receiving the output from the system. One actor can play one or
      both roles. Figure 4-3 presents a very simple example of a context diagram
      of an online learning system, where arrow direction shows which way the
      information flows.



                                                      
           d                       >Z                                  ^
                                                      ^Z



                                               >Z


                                                                       
                                     h
       Z                                               W               W
                                    WZ
                                                                       ^


      Figure 4-3. Context diagrams of an online learning system
                                                                  PMP (R) in Depth   133




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.3

   Assuming that the online learning system in Figure 4-3 is managed by a company
   with its own teachers:
   Q1. Name internal actors
   Q2. Name external actors



Decision-making Techniques
Decision making is, in general, a process used to collectively assess and
evaluate multiple alternatives in terms of expected outcomes. The decision
usually results in taking specific action. In this process, you will need to make
decisions; e.g., identify/generate, classify, and prioritize project and product
requirements. There are multiple methods available to make decisions that
were discussed in Chapter 3.


Interpersonal and Team Skills
In applying the data-collection techniques, interpersonal and team skills will
be needed, such as conversational and articulation skills, running facilitation
works, and using nominal group techniques. All these techniques are discussed
in the sections on data gathering, presentation, and analysis.
You use one or more of these techniques on the input to generate the output
of the Collect Requirements process.


Output of Collecting Requirements
During this process of collecting the requirements, you will produce two
documents: the stakeholder requirements document and the requirements
management plan.


Requirements Documentation
This documentation consists of a list of requirements and any necessary
details for each item in the list. The details of the requirements and the format
of the document depend on the project and the rules within the performing
organization. The following are some essential elements of the requirements
document:
For effective management, you can organize the requirements into different
categories, as follows:
134   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Business Requirements. It describes the business-related need for which
      the process was started; e.g., the overall purpose of the project, such as the
      opportunity being seized or the business problem being solved.
      Project Requirements. These are about the project-related processes,
      needs, and conditions, such as milestone data and other conditions in the
      contract.
      Solution Requirements. These are of two types: 1) Functional requirements,
      referring to the functionality of the project outcome--e.g., what the product
      does, its feature; and 2) non-functional requirements, such as compliance,
      compatibility, support, reliability, safety, and performance.
      Stakeholder Requirements are based on the needs of all or part of the
      stakeholders.
      Quality Requirements such as not allowing more than three bugs per
      software module.
      Support and Training Requirements such as that the product will be
      released with a manual.
      Impacts of the Requirements. This element describes the impact of
      requirements on the project and on entities external to the project, such as
      different groups in the organization.
      Some requirements will start out vague due to a lack of detailed information,
      but will progressively become more well defined as more detailed information
      becomes available.


      Caution! The final version of each requirement must be well defined and not vague. As
      a test, always ask this question: How will I be able to measure or test it? Only then can it be
      used for baselining. Also, make sure that a requirement is consistent within itself and with other
      requirements.


      Requirements are usually traced and tracked by using a tool called the
      requirements traceability matrix.
      Requirements Traceability Matrix. As the name suggests, the requirements
      traceability matrix is a table that traces each requirement back to its origin,
      such as product or business objective, and tracks its progress throughout
      the project's life. Linking a requirement to the business objective underlines
      its value. Tracking the requirement throughout the lifecycle of the project
      ensures that it will be delivered before the project is completed. So, this
                                                                 PMP (R) in Depth     135



table becomes a very useful tool to remind the team how important these
requirements are, when they are going to be implemented, and how we are
progressing in implementing them. The requirements traceability matrix links
each requirement to, for example,
      *    business need, opportunity, and objective;
      *    project objectives and deliverables;
      *    the project scope and the product scope and deliverable;
      *    product design, development, and testing; and
      *    for high-level requirements, to their details.
Key information about a requirement can be stored in the form of its attributes.
Here are some examples of attributes of a requirement: a unique identifier,
description, owner, source, priority, status, and completion date.
The requirements become the basis on which you develop the scope.


Defining the Project Scope
The project charter is developed during the initiation stage of the project.
As you move to the planning stage, during the development of the scope
management plan and requirement document--also called the requirement
documentation--you have enough information about the project and the
product to start defining the project scope.


Note When we say scope or project scope it generally includes both the scope of the
project and the scope of the product that it will deliver unless stated otherwise.


The scope is defined by using the Define Scope process presented in Table 4-6.
136   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Table 4-6. The Define Scope Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques Output
      1. Project charter                    1. Data analysis:              1. Project scope statement
      2. Project management plan:              * Alternative analysis      2. Project document
        * Plan scope management plan        2. Decision making:               updates:
      3. Project documents:                    * Multicriteria               * Assumptions log
        * Assumptions log                        decision analysis           * Stakeholder register
        * Requirement documentation         3. Interpersonal and             * Requirement
                                               team skills: Facilitation       documentation
        * Stakeholder register
                                            4. Product analysis            * Requirement traceability
      4. Enterprise environmental factors
                                            5. Expert judgment               matrix
      5. Organizational process assets



      Input to Scope Definition
      The purpose of the Define Scope process is to figure out the detailed
      descriptions of the project and its product. Therefore, the following documents
      will be the obvious input to this process:
              *    Project Charter. This is needed for high-level project
                   and product descriptions and approval requirements.
              *    Scope Management Plan. This is needed for information
                   on how the scope will be defined.
              *    Project Documents. These include requirement docu-
                   mentation, assumptions log, and risk register.
      Here are some examples of the organizational process assets that can be
      helpful in defining the scope:
              *    Template for project scope statement
              *    Scope-related project files from previous projects
              *    Lessons learned from previous projects or from the
                   previous phases of this project
              *    Policies and procedures relevant to defining the project
                   scope
      This process will be influenced by almost the same enterprise environment
      factors as in the case of the Collect Requirements process.
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth        137




Tip It's critical to the success of the project that you determine the scope correctly--only
the required features and functions for the product and only the required work to produce those
features and functions; nothing less, nothing more.


Once you have input for the scope definition, you apply the tools and
techniques discussed next to define (or redefine) the project scope.


Tools and Techniques for Scope Definition
This section will discuss the tools and techniques used in the scope definition
process.
       *    Expert Judgment. You can use help from relevant
            experts in the organization to develop parts of the
            detailed project scope.
       *    Product Analysis. To hammer out the details of the
            product scope, you might need to perform product
            analysis, which might include techniques such as product
            breakdown, requirement analysis, system analysis, system
            engineering, value analysis, and value engineering. The
            goal is to translate the project objectives to tangible
            deliverables that meet the requirements. Each application
            area has different product-analysis methods to accomplish
            this.
       *    Data Analysis. Scope includes both product description
            and the kind of project work needed to deliver that
            product. Analysis is performed to find the best approaches
            to defining and performing project work. One such
            analysis technique is alternative analysis, which can be
            used to evaluate the different methods for implementing
            the requirements to help one pick the best method.
       *    Decision-making Techniques. One or more of these
            techniques, described in Chapter 3, such as multicriteria,
            can be used to set the criteria for requirements, schedule,
            cost, resources, etc. The goal here would be to explore
            and refine the scope.
       *    Interpersonal and Team Skills. Of course, in the
            business of project management, you often use these skills.
            In this process, for example, you would use facilitation
            skills in facilitated workshops with stakeholders.
138   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      You apply these tools or techniques to the input to hammer out the output
      of the scope definition process.


      Output of Scope Definition
      Depending on the input, the scope definition process can generate two kinds
      of output: the project scope statement, which contains the original scope
      definition, and approved updates to some project documents. Recall that
      the project scope statement is a component of the baseline used to manage
      change requests to the project.


      Caution! The project scope statement contains both the project scope and project
      product scope.



      Project Scope Statement
      The key output item of the Define Scope process is the project scope
      statement, which includes the project scope as well as the product scope. It
      basically describes what needs to be accomplished by the project: product
      and work to generate the product. It provides a documented basis for the
      following:
            *   Developing a common understanding among the
                stakeholders about the project scope
            *   Doing detailed planning
            *   Creating WBS
      The specific elements that may be included in the project scope statement are
      discussed in the following list:
            *   Product Scope Description. Product scope is defined
                as the description of features, functions, and other
                characteristics of a project product.
            *   Product Acceptance Criteria. This defines the process,
                criteria, and conditions for accepting the completed
                products that the project will deliver.
            *   Project Assumptions and Constraints. Assumptions
                and constraints are initially included in the project charter.
                However, at this stage, you have more information
                about the project and therefore can revisit the initial
                assumptions and constraints; you might be able to identify
                more assumptions and constraints. You should document
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth         139



             the specific assumptions related to the project scope and
             also analyze their impact in case they turn out to be false.
             Due to the uncertainty built into them, assumptions are
             potential sources of risk.
             The constraints related to the project scope must also
             be documented in the scope statement. Because the
             constraints limit the team's options, the constraints'
             impact on the project must be evaluated. The con-
             straints can come from various sources, such as a pre-
             determined deadline (also called a hard deadline) for
             the completion of the project or a milestone, limits
             on the funds available for the project, and contractual
             provisions.
        *    Project Deliverables. A deliverable is a unique and
             verifiable project outcome, such as a product, a capability
             to provide a service, or a result. It may be required to be
             produced to complete a project, a process, or a phase
             of the project. The deliverables may also include related
             material, such as manuals and other documentation. The
             scope statement provides the list of deliverables and
             their descriptions.
        *    Project Exclusions. This involves drawing boundaries
             around the project by specifying what is included and what
             is not, especially focusing on the gray areas where the
             stakeholders may make their own assumptions, different
             from each other. It generally identifies what is excluded
             from the project, which helps to manage stakeholder
             expectations.

Tip You must be able to make a distinction between objectives, deliverables, and requirements.
For example, in a project to launch a website, the website is a deliverable. That the website must
print a warning message at the login time is a requirement, and that the website should increase
the company revenue by 3 percent is an objective.

The project scope statement serves the following purposes:
        *    It serves as a component of the baseline that will be
             used to evaluate whether the request for a change or
             additional work falls within or beyond the scope of the
             project; hence, helps with avoiding scope creep.
        *    In general, it helps with making project decisions throughout
             the lifecycle of the project.
140   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


            *    By providing a common understanding of the project
                 scope, the scope statement helps bring stakeholders
                 onto the same page in their expectations.
            *    Because the scope statement describes the deliverables
                 and the work required to create those deliverables, it
                 is used to create a WBS, which helps in scheduling the
                 project.
            *    It serves as a guide for the project team to do more-
                 detailed planning.
      As a result of this process, some documents would need to be updated.


      Project Document Updates
      In the process of defining the project scope, you may end up modifying the
      existing requirements or adding new requirements. You may also learn more
      about the stakeholders. Also, some assumptions may no longer be true.
      Accordingly, the documents that may be updated as a result of defining the
      scope include the following:
            *    Requirement documentation
            *    Requirement traceability matrix
            *    Stakeholder register
            *    Assumptions log
            *    Stakeholder register

                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.4

         In the following table, match each item in the first column with an appropriate item in
         the second column:

         A. The software product must run on both           1. Project deliverable
            Microsoft Windows and Apple Macintosh.
         B. An online education website                     2. Project constraint
         C. The drug must be developed within six           3. Product requirement
            months.
         D. The software module must not have               4. Project management requirement
            more than 10 bugs.
         E. Project manager must have a PMP certification. 5. Product acceptance criteria
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth        141



In a nutshell, the project scope statement outlines the scope of the project
in terms of the project outcome specified by its characteristics and the way
it would be produced and delivered by the project. From the perspective of
actually performing the work, the scope statement is still a high-level docu-
ment. To be able to schedule the project, identify and assign resources, and
manage the project successfully, these deliverables need to be broken down
into manageable tasks. This is accomplished by creating an entity called the
work breakdown structure (WBS).


Caution! In defining scope, we don't use all the requirements that were collected; instead, we
consider only those that made it to the requirement documentation after analysis.




Creating a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
What is the secret behind accomplishing seemingly impossible tasks in any
field? The answer is to break down the required work into smaller, manageable
pieces. This is also a very important process in project management. To be
able to actually execute the project, the project scope is broken down into
manageable tasks, thereby creating a work breakdown structure (WBS). In
other words, a WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchy of the work that must
be performed to accomplish the objectives of and create the deliverables for
the project.
Table 4-7 shows the input, tools and techniques, and output of creating the
WBS. The project scope statement contains the list of deliverables and
product description. The requirement documentation describes the product
and project requirements. Information in these two items provides the basis
for creating the WBS, and scope management tells us the "hows" of developing
the WBS.
You should always consider organizational process assets while going through
this and several other processes. You can, for almost any process, close your
eyes and see the relevant organizational policies and procedures, templates,
project files, and lessons learned from previous projects. In this case, relevant
means related to the WBS. Depending on the application field or specific
industry of your project, there may be industry-wide standards for creating a
WBS. That standard is an example of an EEF for this process.
142   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      Table 4-7. The Create WBS Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                              Tools and Techniques   Output
      1. Project charter                 1. Decomposition       1. Scope baseline
      2. Project management plan:        2. Expert judgment     2. Project document updates:
        * Plan scope management                                   * Assumptions log
          plan                                                    * Requirement
      3. Project documents                                          documentation
        * Project scope statement
        * Requirement
          documentation
      4. Enterprise environmental
         factors
      5. Organizational process assets



      You can always make use of expert judgment on topics relevant to the process,
      but the main technique that you will need to create the WBS is decomposition.


      Decomposition
      Decomposition is a technique for subdividing the project deliverables into
      smaller, manageable tasks called work packages. The WBS is a hierarchical
      structure of an inverted tree, with work packages at the lowest level of each
      branch--the leaves. A level can be broken down into sublevels. The depth or
      height of the tree or decomposition depends on the size and complexity of
      the project. Different deliverables may have different levels of decomposition,
      as shown in Figure 4-4, a simple example of a WBS, where the lines are called
      branches and the boxes are called nodes or packages; the lowest packages are
      called work packages.
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth        143



                                     t
                                     Z
                                     WZ


h                                     ^&Z                               ^



      KZt                                           Z
                           Z                                                    
                                                    ZZ


                                                                               
        DZ                        ^Z                     Z
                                                                               



         '                        ^Z                     Z                  



                                                        


Figure 4-4. An example of a WBS. The work packages are represented by the dark boxes at
the end of each branch. Servlet and Bean refer to the programs that will need to be developed.

You decompose the scope by executing the following steps:
       1. Identify the deliverables and the work involved by
          analyzing the project scope statement and requirement
          documentation.
       2. Understand the relationships among the deliverables.
       3. Structure and organize the first level (just below the root
          of the hierarchical tree) of the WBS hierarchy. Based on
          the project at hand, you can use one of the following
          approaches: use the deliverables as the components in
          the first level or use the phases of the project as the
          components in the first level.
       4. Decompose the upper level into more detailed
          components for the lower level.
       5. Keep decomposing to lower levels until necessary and
          sufficient decomposition has been achieved.
       6. Assign identification codes to the WBS components.
144   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      As the work is decomposed to lower levels of detail, work components
      become more concrete and manageable. However, you should avoid excessive
      decomposition because it will lead to a large number of work packages, and it
      will not be possible to manage all of them effectively. In other words, excessive
      decomposition leads to inefficient use of management and other resources.
      Necessary and sufficient decomposition is the key.


      Tip During decomposition, the components are defined in terms of how the project work will
      actually be executed and controlled. You must verify the correctness of the decomposition at each
      level by requiring that the lower-level components are necessary and sufficient to the completion
      of the corresponding higher-level deliverables.


      One final point: While using the technique of decomposition, remember
      a useful concept or trick: rolling wave planning. It's a fancy term that refers
      to handling a deliverable or its subcomponent that cannot be decomposed
      further currently because we don't know the details about it yet; for example,
      it is to be executed far in the future. We leave the decomposition of such a
      deliverable at a level allowed by the available information and wait for further
      decomposition until more information becomes available. Yes, it is an example
      of progressive elaboration.
      The WBS document is the key output item of the Create WBS process, but
      there are some other output items as well.


      Output of Creating WBS
      During the Create WBS process, and when putting together the scope
      baseline--which is the main output of this process--we may discover that
      the content of some documents need to be updated; e.g. assumptions and
      constraints in the assumptions log or requirements in the requirement
      documentation.


      Scope Baseline
      The main output of the Create WBS process, the scope baseline, consists
      of the project scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. These
      components of the scope baseline are discussed next.
              *    Project Scope Statement. This document includes
                   project and product scope descriptions, project
                   deliverables, product acceptance criteria, and project
                   assumptions and constraints.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth        145



       *    Work Breakdown Structure. As explained earlier,
            the WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical structure
            that decomposes the project scope and deliverables into
            the work packages that will be executed by the project
            team to create the planned deliverables, and in this way
            accomplish the planned project objectives. The project
            manager creates this document with the help of the
            project team.
       *    Work Packages and Control Account. Remember,
            at the lowest part of each branch in the WBS, we have
            work packages, with each work package assigned a unique
            identifier. To this identifier is attached information about
            schedule, resources, and cost for this work package, and
            it acts as a code of account. In other words, each work
            package represents a deliverable or a component of it,
            with schedule, resources, and cost attached. Using one
            or more such points or codes of account, information
            on schedule, resources, and cost for a group of work
            packages can be summed or integrated and managed.
            This way, each package control point becomes a part
            of what is called the control account for that group of
            work packages. A control account represents a control
            management point where scope, schedule, and cost are
            integrated for the purpose of monitoring and controlling
            the performance; e.g., comparing with earned value.

Caution! A control account may contain one or more work packages, but a work package
can have membership in only one control account. This means that a control account is in some
package above the work packages and contains all the work packages below it in the branch to
which it belongs.


A control account may include as one or more planning packages:
       *    Planning Package. This is a WBS component or package
            used for planning one or more work packages. Obviously,
            it should be below the control account package to which
            it belongs and above the work packages that it's going to
            plan.
146   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


               *    WBS Dictionary. This is a supporting document for
                    the main WBS document to provide details about the
                    components of the WBS. The details about a compo-
                    nent might include elements such as a code of account
                    identifier, description of work involved, quality require-
                    ments, acceptance criteria, list of milestones, schedule,
                    cost estimates, required resources, contract information
                    (if any), and the organization or group responsible for this
                    component.


      Tip As you can guess, most of the information in the WBS dictionary is generated by other
      processes.

      Note Do not confuse the WBS with other information breakdown structures, such as
      the organizational breakdown structure (OBS), which provides a hierarchy of the performing
      organization and can be used to identify organizational units for assigning the WBS work packages.
      Remember, the end goal of the WBS is to specify the project scope in terms of work packages; this
      is what distinguishes the WBS from other information breakdown structures.

      Caution! The PMP exam expects you to know the ropes around the formal standard terminology.
      For example, if I say project plan, you should be able to figure out that I'm referring to project management
      plan. Another example: If I say "defining scope," you should be able to translate it to the Define Scope
      process, the same way you will translate the planning stage to the planning process group.



                                    STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.5

          Q1. What is the difference between management control point and control account?
          Q2. What is the difference between control account and code of account?


      The mantra before developing the WBS is: If it's not in the WBS, it will not be
      done. The mantra after developing the WBS should be: If it's not in the scope
      baseline, it will not be done.
      The approved version of the scope baseline becomes a component of the
      project management plan and can be changed only through the formal
      change control procedure; i.e., running the processes. It plays a crucial role in
      determining many aspects of the project, such as schedule, cost, quality, and
      procurement. In other words, it's very important that the scope is monitored
      and controlled, which we will learn about in the monitoring and controlling
      part of the book.
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth        147




Project Management Common Sense
By now,you must have noticed some of the common inputs,tools and techniques,
and outputs. Let's make them common sense for project management.
Enterprise Environmental Factors and Organizational Process
Assets. The enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) and organizational
process assets (OPAs) are very common inputs to the processes. If you
master the EEFs and OPAs discussed in Chapter 2 and applied in the previous
and current chapters, then by knowing the definition of a process, you should
be able to figure out what EEFs and OPAs the process would need as input to
help produce the output. Also note that sometimes OPAs are needed because
they need to be updated as part of the process output.
Project Documents. The same is true for project documents. If you know
the names of most of the project documents and what they contain, then by
knowing the definition of a process, you should be able to tell what project
documents the process would need as input. Again, a process may need a
document to help produce output, including the case where the output item
is to update the document.
Expert Judgment and Meetings. There are many tools and techniques in
common for many processes. Knowing what the process is supposed to do
reveals the topics involved, and those are the topics you may possibly need
expert judgment on. Similarly, by knowing the project topics and activities, it
will become obvious to you what kinds of meetings you will be holding during
the process. General rules of good meeting management remain the same;
e.g., timely invitations to appropriate stakeholders, running the meeting by the
agenda, starting and finishing on time, and follow-up action.
So, the coverage of these common inputs, tools and techniques, and output
items in the upcoming chapters will assume that you have developed the skills
just described.


Tip Although the standard project processes are the same for each organization, the details
and manners in which they are implemented might be different for different organizations. Each
organization can develop its own implementation details, which consist of items, such as detailed
steps for how to carry on the project processes, templates, meetings, and procedures.
148   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
            1. All subsidiary project management plans, baselines, and
               some other documents are integrated into one plan
               called the project management plan.
            2. Requirements are the basis on which we develop the
               scope that leads to the WBS--the work required--
               which requires a schedule and determines cost. In that
               way, requirements play a crucial role in determining the
               schedule, cost, quality, and procurement.
            3. The project scope statement consists of both project
               scope and product scope. The WBS, WBS dictionary, and
               project scope statement constitute the scope baseline,
               an output of the Create WBS process. The actual work
               results are compared against this scope baseline to
               measure project progress.

      Summary
      After a project has been initiated, the project management plan is developed
      to specify how the project at hand will be executed, monitored and controlled,
      and closed. The project management plan can contain subsidiary plans, such
      as a quality management plan, a risk management plan, a project scope
      management plan, and a scope baseline.
      Using documents such as the project charter and quality management plan,
      we develop the scope management plan and requirement management plan,
      which tell us how to develop, control, and validate the scope of the project
      and product--called scope or sometimes project scope. Based on the scope
      management plan and requirement management plan, we use the Collect
      Requirements process to collect project and product requirements and put
      them into requirement documentation, and we also create a requirement
      traceability matrix to monitor the requirements by linking them to project
      objectives, deliverables, status, and so forth. This requirement documentation
      is used for the rest of the scope processes, a reflection of the fact that
      requirements directly or indirectly affect multiple project aspects, including
      scope, schedule, cost, risk, and procurement. With requirement documentation
      in hand, and by using the Define Scope process, we develop the project scope
      statement, a document that consists of both project scope and product scope.
      The project scope statement, along with the requirement documentation, is
      used to create the WBS, a hierarchical structure in which the project scope is
      broken down into manageable tasks, which can be assigned to team members.
      The process Create WBS also creates the WBS dictionary, which offers
      details for the WBS components, such as schedule milestones, cost estimate,
      and quality requirements.
                                                                         PMP (R) in Depth     149



The WBS, WBS dictionary, and project scope statement constitute the scope
baseline, an output of the Create WBS process, against which the actual work
results are compared.
Road Ahead. Now that you have the project scope--i.e., project and product
scopes--figured out, you are one step closer to starting project execution.
Before we start project execution, however, we will need to develop a schedule
for it. We will show how to plan scheduling in the next chapter.


Exam's Eye View
Comprehend

  *The scope management plan developed from the project charter is the blueprint that
   will show how to develop, control, and validate the scope.
  *The stakeholder register generated by the Identify Stakeholders process is an input
   item to collecting requirements, and so is the project charter.
  *The requirement documentation generated by the Collect Requirements process is an
   input to defining the project scope.
  *The project charter and the requirement documentation are input items to the Define
   Scope process that is used to develop the project scope statement.
  *The project scope statement and requirement documentation are input items to
   creating the WBS.
  *The scope baseline consists of the project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary
   and is generated by the Create WBS process.
  *Requirements, both themselves and those surfaced through the project scope
   statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary--i.e., the scope baseline--affect almost all the
   important aspects of a project, such as schedule, resources, cost, quality, procurement,
   and risk.

Look Out

  *Do not confuse project scope with product scope. The product scope consists of
   the features and functions that characterize a product to be delivered by the project,
   whereas the project scope is composed of the work that must be performed (and only
   that work) to deliver products with specified features.
  *The project scope statement contains both the project scope and the project product
   scope.
  *The scope statement, the WBS document, and the WBS dictionary combined
   constitute the scope baseline against which the actual work results are compared.
150   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope



      Memorize

        *All subsidiary project management plans, baselines, and some other documents
         are integrated into one plan called the project management plan. The rest of the
         documents used in a project are simply called project documents.
        *Most of the information in the WBS dictionary is generated by other processes and
         not by the Create WBS process.
        *Control accounts are the points in the WBS at which scope, schedule, and cost are
         integrated for the purpose of monitoring and controlling the performance.
        * The Plan Scope Management process generates two plans: the scope management plan
          and the requirement management plan.



      Review Questions
             1. Which of the following is a false statement about the WBS?
                 A.A control account may have many code of account
                   identifiers.
                 B.You should keep decomposing WBS components
                   to lower levels until necessary and sufficient
                   decomposition has been achieved.
                 C.Each work component appears in the WBS once and
                   only once.
                 D. The work packages should appear from left to right
                    in the order in which the work will be performed.
             2. Which of the following is done first?
                 A. Creating the scope statement
                 B. Creating the WBS
                 C. Creating the requirement documentation
                 D. Creating the project charter
             3. The WBS is the output of which of the following
                processes?
                 A. Create WBS process
                 B. Define Scope process
                 C. Develop WBS process
                 D. Project Initiating process
                                                      PMP (R) in Depth   151



4. The project scope statement is the output of which of
   the following processes?
   A. Create WBS process
   B. Define Scope process
   C. Create Project Scope process
   D. Project Initiating process
5. Which of the following is a false statement about the
   output of the Plan Scope Management process that
   creates the project scope management plan?
   A. It describes how to verify the project scope.
   B. It describes how to control the project scope.
   C. It doesn't describe how to manage the requirements.
   D. It describes how to define the product scope.
6. What are the components in the lowest level of the WBS
   hierarchy collectively called?
   A. Work packages
   B. Control accounts
   C. Phase
   D. Milestones
7. Choose what is included in the project scope statement:
   A. Project scope
   B. Product scope
   C. Assumptions and constraints
   D. Some things that the project is not going to do
8. Which one of the following constitutes the project scope
   baseline?
   A. The WBS document and the scope statement
   B. The scope statement
   C. The WBS document
   D. The WBS, the WBS dictionary, and the scope statement
152   Chapter 4 | Planning Project and Scope


           9. Who creates the WBS?
               A. The project manager alone
               B. The upper management in the performing organization
               C. The customer
               D. The project manager, with help from the project team
          10. Which of the following is not included in the project scope
              statement?
               A. Project assumptions and constraints
               B. The WBS
               C. Product description
               D. Project deliverables
          11. You are in the process of developing the requirement
              management plan for your project. You will develop this plan:
               A. By performing the Develop Requirement Plan process
               B. By performing the Plan Scope Management process
               C. There is no process for it.
               D. During the initiation stage of the project
          12. You are in the planning stage of a project. Walking down
              the hallway, your supervisor mumbles, "Don't forget job
              shadowing." Job shadowing is a technique used in:
               A. Defining the project scope
               B. Collecting product requirements
               C. Creating the WBS
               D. Developing the stakeholder management strategy
          13. You are planning the scope for your project. You have
              just created the requirements documentation after
              meeting with the stakeholders and studying the project
              charter. This requirements documentation can be used in
              developing:
               A. Project scope statement
               B. The WBS
               C. The work-performing information
               D. The project scope statement and the WBS
                                                   PMP (R) in Depth   153



14. What document is the result of the integration of the
    management knowledge area with the project planning
    process group?
    A. Business case
    B. Project charter
    C. Project benefit management plan
    D. Project management plan
15. Which of the following are the input documents for the
    Develop Project Management Plan process?
    A. Project charter
    B. Quality management plan
    C. Scope baseline
    D. Resource management plan
                                                                     CHAPTER


                                                                             5

Planning for
Project Schedule
Management
PMP Exam Objectives                 What It Really Means
2.4 Develop the project schedule    Develop the project schedule based on the approved
                                    project deliverables and milestones, scope, and
                                    resource management plans in order to manage timely
                                    completion of the project.
                                    It means understand the Develop Schedule process
                                    and all the processes leading to it: Plan Schedule
                                    Management, Define Activities, Sequence Activities,
                                    and Estimate Activity Duration, covered in this
                                    chapter, and Estimate Activity Resources, covered in
                                    the next chapter.
                                    Understand that the scope baseline, covered in
                                    Chapter 4, is the main input to planning the project
                                    schedule.


At its core, a project consists of two main components: the project work
that needs to be performed and the schedule to perform that work. As you
learned in the previous chapter, the overall project work, i.e., the project scope,

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_5
156   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      is broken down into smaller manageable components. These components in
      the WBS are called work packages. However, a work package might not be
      a suitable item to assign to an individual to perform. So, work packages can
      be rearranged, or decomposed, into smaller components called activities. A
      project schedule contains not only the activities to be performed, but also
      the sequence in which the activities will be performed, along with a start and
      a finish date. The sequencing of activities is constrained by the dependencies
      among the activities. A realistic project schedule can be created from the
      bottom up by identifying the activities, estimating the resources for the
      activities, and determining the time that each activity will take with the given
      resources available. The schedule, once developed and approved, needs to
      be controlled to stay on track. All these tasks belong to what is called project
      schedule management.
      So, the main issue in this chapter is planning schedule management. To enable
      you to wrap your mind around this issue, we will explore the following three
      avenues: determining sequencing of project activities, estimating the activities'
      durations, and developing the schedule.


      Project Schedule Management: Big Picture
      Developing and controlling the project schedule to complete the project work
      in time is what schedule management is all about. To complete a project, you
      need to perform some activities to produce the project deliverables. To make
      that happen, you need to estimate resources for and schedule the activities.
      But before all this can happen, you need to identify the activities. One thing
      more: all this should happen as planned.


      Note The process of estimating activity resources belongs to the resource management
      knowledge area and will be discussed in the next chapter.


      Although all this sounds like common sense, it makes sense to define the
      following terms so we are all on the same page:
            *    Activity. A component of project work
            *    Activity Duration. The time measured in calendar units
                 between the start and finish of a schedule activity
            *    Schedule Activity. A scheduled task (component of
                 work) performed during the lifecycle of a project
            *    Logical Relationship. A dependency between two
                 project schedule activities or between a schedule activity
                 and a schedule milestone
                                                                    PMP (R) in Depth   157



       *   Schedule Milestone. A milestone is a significant point
           (or event) in the life of a project, and a schedule milestone
           is a milestone on the project schedule. A milestone refers
           to the completion of an activity, marking possibly the
           completion of a set of activities, and therefore has zero
           duration. The completion of a major deliverable is an
           example of a milestone.
Project schedule management includes the processes required to complete
the project in a timely manner. Figure 5-1 presents the flow diagram for the
schedule management processes that lead to schedule development.


     ^DW

                                   t^


                                          ^Z



                                 

                                                        
                                                        
                        DZ
                                          
                                                  Z
           ^                                        
                                 ZZ                                 Z

                          Z                   Z
                EZ                            
                

                                     Z
                                    ^

                                          WZ


                                 ZZ^



Figure 5-1. The schedule management processes that lead to schedule development. The
processes shown in gray are not from the schedule management knowledge area.
158   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      The usages of these processes are listed here:
             *     Plan Schedule Management. Plans how to develop,
                   execute, and control the project schedule
             *     Define Activities. Identifies the specific schedule
                   activities--i.e., pieces of work--that must be performed
                   to produce the project deliverables
             *     Sequence Activities. Puts the activities to be scheduled
                   in a sequence by identifying the dependencies among
                   them.
             *     Estimate Activity Duration. Estimates the time
                   in units of work periods individually for each schedule
                   activity required for the activity's completion. A work
                   period is a measurement of time for when the work
                   is in progress; it is measured in hours, days, or months,
                   depending upon the size of the activity. This estimate is
                   performed for given resources.
             *     Develop Schedule. Develops the project schedule by
                   analyzing schedule activity sequences, schedule activity
                   durations, resource requirements, and schedule
                   constraints
             *     Control Schedule. Monitors the status of the project
                   progress to manage the resulting changes in project
                   schedule and hence in schedule baseline.

      Note As Table 5-1 shows, all schedule management processes, except the Control Schedule
      process, are planning processes, which are covered in this chapter. The Control Schedule process
      will be covered in the monitoring and controlling part of the book.


      These processes are listed in Table 5-1 along with their process groups and
      major output from each process.
                                                                  PMP (R) in Depth   159




Table 5-1. Processes of Schedule Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Time Management       Process Group    Major Output        Performed
Process
Plan Schedule         Planning         Schedule            One at predetermined
Management                             management plan     project points
Define Activities     Planning         Activity list,      Throughout the process
                                       milestone list
Sequence Activities   Planning         Project schedule    Throughout the process
                                       network
Estimate Activity     Planning         Activity duration   Throughout the process
Durations                              estimates
Develop Schedule      Planning         Project schedule    Throughout the process
Control Schedule      Monitoring and   Work performance    Throughout the process
                      Controlling      measurements


The underlying philosophy of project management for schedule development
is to first develop the schedule based on the work required to complete
the project tasks, and then to see how you can make it conform to other
constraints, calendar requirements, and the strategic goals of the organization.
You build the schedule through cold, hard mathematical analysis, and you don't
just accept whatever schedule goals come down the pipeline from elsewhere,
such as from the customer or the project sponsor.
In a nutshell, the path to schedule development includes defining activities,
arranging the activities in the correct logical order, and getting the resource
estimate for the activities. In other words, the work necessary for completing
the project is expressed in terms of activities and the resources required to
complete those activities. But, like anything you do in project management,
you have to plan schedule management.


Planning Schedule Management
As mentioned earlier, the Plan Schedule Management process is about planning
how to develop, execute, and control the project schedule. This process is
performed by using the input and tools and techniques shown in Table 5-2 to
generate the schedule management plan.
160   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Table 5-2. The Plan Schedule Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques    Output
      1. Project charter                    1. Data analysis        Schedule management plan
      2. Project management plan:           2. Meetings
        * Scope management plan             3. Expert judgment
        * Product development approach
          management plan
      3. Enterprise environmental factors
      4. Organizational project assets



      I will explain how to perform this process in terms of the following steps you
      can take to develop the schedule management plan from input and tools and
      techniques:
              1. Start with the scope management plan, which provides
                 some information on how to develop the schedule.
              2. Study the document on product development approach. As
                 the schedule you want to develop is for producing the
                 product, this approach will help in almost all aspects of
                 schedule management, including estimating techniques,
                 scheduling tools, and schedule-controlling techniques. It
                 will help in determining the general scheduling approach.
              3. Don't forget the milestone information from the project
                 charter; you have to include that in the plan.
              4. Make a list of different methods or approaches that you
                 come with from steps 1 and 2, also accounting for step 3.
                 By scheduling here, we mean schedule management all the
                 way from defining activities to developing and controlling
                 the schedule.
              5. To plan a given process, use data-analysis techniques,
                 e.g., alternative analysis, to pick one or a combination of
                 methods from the list from step 4. Also, we can use such
                 data-analysis methods to strike the appropriate balance
                 between schedule details and time taken to update the
                 schedule.
      While executing the preceding five steps, you can also hold meetings with
      appropriate stakeholders, such as the project sponsor and those who have
      responsibilities regarding the schedule or who will be affected by it. Of course,
      you can seek expert judgment on related topics, such as schedule development
      and control, scheduling software tools, and scheduling methods.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth        161



Knowing this much about this process, you should be able to figure out the
EEFs and OPAs for it; see Study Checkpoint 5.1.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.1

   Q1. Using your knowledge of enterprise environmental factors and the plan schedule
       management process, make a list of EEFs that would influence this process.
   Q2. Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the plan schedule
       management process, make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.


The output of these efforts just described generates the schedule management
plan.


Schedule Management Plan
The schedule management plan document records how to develop, execute,
and control the project schedule. Table 5-3 describes it in terms of some of
the questions it can answer.

Table 5-3. Schedule Management Plan

Questions                             Schedule Management Plan
What is the chosen schedule           Describes the chosen methods and tools for the
development model?                    development of the schedule
What are the organizational           Refers to the WBS's being used in this project as
procedure links?                      a framework for schedule development. Purpose:
                                      provides consistency in work scope and scheduling
                                      the work
How does it maintain the chosen       Describes the processes used to record the
schedule model?                       schedule progress status and update the schedule
                                      model
What are the lengths of time-boxed    Specifies the lengths of time-boxed periods for
periods?                              release, iterations, and waves. A time-boxed period
                                      is the duration for which a team works to finish a
                                      certain amount of work in a steady fashion.
What are the units of measurement?    Defines units of quantities: hours, days, or months
                                      for time; meters/yards for length, kilogram/pounds
                                      for weight, etc.
                                                                                  (continued)
162   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Table 5-3. (continued)

      Questions                            Schedule Management Plan
      What is the level of accuracy?       Specifies the accuracy or uncertainty in estimating
                                           the countable and measurable variables; i.e., It will
                                           take 255 days to complete this activity; here, 5 days
                                           is accuracy.
      What are the rules of performance    Describes the rules for measuring the performance
      measurements?                        of various quantities; e.g., performance in the
                                           schedule will be measured in terms of magnitude of
                                           variations from the original schedule baseline, etc.
      What are the control thresholds?     Specifies the allowed maximum performance
                                           variance above which action request will be
                                           triggered
      What are the frequency and           States the frequency and reporting formats for
      reporting formats?                   various reports



      Note The time-boxed periods are used in projects with adaptive lifecycles. They help with
      avoiding scope creep by making the team focus on essential works within the scope.


      With the schedule management plan in your hands, the first step toward
      schedule development is defining activities.


      Defining Activities
      Activities are pieces of work that need to be performed to produce the
      project deliverables. However, first we need to identify them, and we do that
      using the Define Activities process, with the input, tools and techniques, and
      output shown in Table 5-4.
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth   163




Table 5-4. The Define Activities Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques           Output
1. Project management plan:   1. Decomposition               1. Activity list
  * Schedule management       2. Rolling wave planning       2. Activity attributes
    plan                      3. Expert judgment             3. Milestone list
  * Scope baseline: scope                                    4. Change requests
    statement, WBS, WBS
                                                             5. Updates:
    dictionary
                                                                * Scope baseline
2. Enterprise environmental
   factors                                                      * Cost baseline
3. Organizational project
   assets



The main steps needed to perform this process, using the information from
Table 5-4, are described in the following section.


Raw Data for Defining Activities
This process identifies activities--i.e., pieces of work--that will need to
be completed to deliver the project outcome. In the previous chapter, we
covered WBS all the way up to work packages; that is where identifying
project activities starts. So, the starting point for defining activities is the
lowest level of the WBS that contains work packages. Basically, each work
package is broken down into one or more activities.
Recalling that the WBS is derived from the project scope statement, the
items described in the following hold the data or information that we need to
identify activities.
Project Scope Baseline. The following three components of the project
scope baseline are needed to define activities:
        *    WBS and WBS Dictionary. The work packages in the
             WBS are decomposed into project activities. To define
             activities in detail so that you can assign appropriate
             resources to them, you need the details about work
             packages, which are provided in the WBS dictionary.
164   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


            *    Project Scope Statement. The WBS is built from
                 the project scope statement. While dealing with the
                 WBS, you might need to go back to the project scope
                 statement. The following elements of the project scope
                 statement are especially important to consider while
                 identifying activities:
                 *   Assumptions related to the activities or schedule
                     planning, such as work hours per week
                 *   Constraints that will limit the schedule options, such
                     as predetermined deadlines on project milestones
                 *   Project deliverables, to ensure everything is covered
                     in WBS work packages


      Tip The WBS dictionary also contains the milestone dates, which traveled all the way
      from the project charter.


      In order to perform this process effectively, we must be aware of the following
      EEFs and OPAs, which can influence the process:
            *    Enterprise Environmental Factors. The enterprise
                 environmental factors relevant to identifying schedule
                 activities include project management information systems
                 and project scheduling software tools, published infor-
                 mation from a commercial database, and organizational
                 structure and culture.
            *    Organizational Process Assets. The following are
                 examples of organizational process assets that can influ-
                 ence the process or be useful in the process of identifying
                 activities:
                 *   Organizational policies related to activity planning
                 *   Organizational procedures and guidelines used in
                     defining activities
                 *   Templates and other information from previous
                     projects that was used in defining activities
                 *   Knowledge base of lessons learned from previous
                     projects regarding activity lists
      So, we use the raw data or information discussed in this section to generate
      the output of the Define Activities process.
                                                                  PMP (R) in Depth      165




Generating the Output of Defining Activities
The key output item of the activity definition process is a comprehensive
list of all the activities that need to be performed to produce the project
deliverables. This is obtained by breaking down the work packages using the
decomposition and rolling wave techniques discussed in the previous chapter.
Activities make the core of a project. So, it's very important to identify and
define them correctly in order to make the project schedule efficient and
effective. Therefore, expert judgment is a very important tool that can be used
in this process. For example, during the process of decomposing the work
packages into schedule activities, you can use the help of team members and
other experts who are experienced in developing WBS and project schedules.
In addition to this, you can hold meetings with relevant stakeholders.
This and other output items are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Activity List. This is a list of all the activities that are necessary and sufficient
to produce the project deliverables; each activity is assigned its own unique
identifier within the WBS. In other words, these activities are derived from
the WBS and are within the scope of the project. Also, the scope of each
schedule activity should be described in sufficient detail in concrete terms so
that the team member responsible for it will understand what work needs to
be performed. Examples of schedule activities include a chapter of a book, a
function of a computer program that will accomplish a well-defined task, and
an application to be installed on a computer.
Activity Attributes. In addition to the scope description, each activity also
has some attributes assigned to it; for example:
       *   Unique activity identifier (ID) and WBS ID
       *   Activity description
       *   Assumptions and constraints related to this activity, such
           as an imposed date
       *   Predecessor and successor activities
       *   Resource requirements
       *   Team member responsible for performing the work and
           information about the work; for example, where it will be
           performed
Some attributes are assigned not at once, but over time. The attributes
are used to arrange the activities in the correct order (sequencing) and to
schedule them.
166   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management



      Caution! The Define Activities process generates the final output as activities and not
      deliverables. Therefore, ideally speaking, the WBS and the WBS dictionary should be generated
      before defining activities. However, practically speaking, the activity list, the WBS, and the WBS
      dictionary can be developed concurrently.


      Milestone List. This list comes out of the WBS dictionary. Recall that a
      schedule milestone is a point in time by which a certain amount of project
      work will be finished. They may include the completion of a major deliverable.
      They can be mandatory or optional, and are built into the schedule.
      Change Requests and Updates. Deliverables are broken down into work
      packages, which are subsequently broken down into activities in a rolling
      wave or progressive elaboration fashion. This may create the need to modify
      the baseline, which may affect the cost baseline. But, to make changes to any
      baseline, you must create a change request, which will be processed through
      the Perform Integrated Change Control process. If the change is approved and
      implemented, the scope baseline and cost baseline documents may need to be
      updated accordingly.


      Tip You create the WBS and decompose the work packages to project activities with the help
      of the project team. Even though the schedule is not yet developed and the resources are not fully
      assigned, the project team in some initial form will be there. When decomposing a work package
      into activities, involve the individuals who either are familiar with the work packages or will be
      responsible for them.

      Note Rolling wave planning is an example of progressive elaboration, which was discussed
      in Chapter 4.


      Before you can schedule them, the identified activities need to be arranged in
      the correct order, which is called sequencing.


      Sequencing Activities
      The activity sequencing process is used to arrange the schedule activities
      in the appropriate order, which takes into account the dependencies among
      them. For example, if activity B depends upon the product of activity A, then
      activity A must be performed before activity B. So, the activity sequencing has
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth   167



a two-pronged goal--to identify the dependencies among the activities and
to order the activities accordingly. Table 5-5 shows the Sequence Activities
process in terms of its input, tools and techniques, and output.


Note One main advantage of sequencing activities is that it is a way to handle project
constraints in a most efficient manner.



Table 5-5. The Sequence Activities Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                              Tools and Techniques         Output
1. Project management plan:        1. Determining dependencies 1. Project schedule network
  * Schedule management plan       2. Precedence diagramming      diagrams
  * Scope baseline: scope            method (PDM)               2. Updates:
    statement, WBS, WBS            3. Applying leads and lags     * Activity list
    dictionary                     4. Project management          * Activity attributes
2. Project documents:                 information system          * Milestone list
  * Activity list                                                 * Assumptions log
  * Activity attributes
  * Milestone list
  * Assumptions log
3. Enterprise environmental
   factors
4. Organizational project assets



The main goal of this process is to generate schedule network diagrams.

From Activities to Project Schedule Network
Diagrams
The main steps to perform this process, using the information from Table 5-5,
are described in the following:
        1. Study any related program and portfolio plans; they may
           reveal some dependencies among activities.
        2. From the schedule management plan, find out the
           information on sequencing activities, such as methods to
           be used, level of accuracy, and other criteria.
168   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


            3. Examine the scope baseline, from which activities were
               derived, including WBS and WBS dictionary, deliverables,
               and assumptions and constraints, to collect information that
               could help to extract the relationship between the activities.
            4. Use the assumptions log to study how assumptions
               might influence the relationship between activities. For
               example, if an assumption is that an event would happen
               by a certain date, on which the start of activity B depends,
               and it does not happen, then activity B must be delayed,
               which in turn may give rise to early and late starts of
               some other activities; this is called leads and lags, and will
               be covered in the next section.
            5. From the milestone list, collect the milestones that
               have scheduled dates because that will influence their
               relationship with other activities.
            6. Using the information from steps 1 through 5 and
               information from the activity attributes document,
                a. determine the dependency relationship between the
                   activities listed in the activity list, and
                b. generate the project schedule network diagrams
                   using the tools and techniques discussed in the next
                   section.

      Tools and Techniques for Generating Project
      Schedule Network Diagrams
      Dependency determination is the prerequisite to determining sequencing.
      Therefore, most of the tools and techniques used for sequencing are focused
      on determining and displaying the dependencies.


      Determining and Integrating Dependencies
      These types of dependencies describe the logical relationships between
      activities. Where do these relationships come from? To answer this question,
      the dependencies can be grouped into three categories:
            *   Mandatory Dependencies. These are the dependen-
                cies inherent to the activities or required by law and a
                contract. For example, a software program needing to
                be developed before it can be tested is inherent to these
                activities. Mandatory dependencies are also referred to
                as hard logic or hard dependencies.
                                                                PMP (R) in Depth    169



      *    Discretionary Dependencies. These are the depen-
           dencies at the discretion of the project team. For example,
           it was possible to perform activities A and B simultane-
           ously or to perform A after B was finished, but the team
           decided, for whatever reason, to perform B after A was
           finished. Some of the guidelines for establishing discre-
           tionary dependencies can come from the knowledge
           of best practices within the given application area and
           from previous experience of performing a similar project.
           Discretionary dependencies are also referred to as soft
           logic, preferential logic, or preferred logic.
      *    External Dependencies. An external dependency
           involves a relationship between a project activity and
           a non-project activity--that is, an activity outside the
           project. For example, in a movie production project, a
           project activity might involve shooting scenes with lots of
           tourists skiing. This scene is planned to be shot at a skiing
           resort during the skiing season. This is an example of an
           external dependency.
      *    Internal Dependencies. An internal dependency involves
           a relationship between two project activities that are under
           the control of the project. For example, it is convenient for
           the team to perform B after A.
Careful readers may have realized that all of these categories are not exclusive;
there may be internal and external mandatory dependencies, and internal and
external discretionary dependencies. This is integration.
The dependency between two schedule activities is an example of the logical
relationships defined earlier in this chapter. Logical relationships can be
displayed in schematic diagrams, called project schedule network diagrams, or
just network diagrams for brevity. A common method used to develop network
diagrams is called the precedence diagramming method (PDM).


Precedence Diagramming Method (PDM)
To properly sequence the schedule activities, you need to determine the
dependencies among them. As illustrated in Figure 5-2, a dependency
relationship between two activities is defined by two terms: predecessor and
successor. In other words, when two activities are in a dependency relationship
with each other, one of them is a predecessor of the other, and the other one
is the successor. In Figure 5-2, activity A is a predecessor of activity B, and
activity B is a successor of activity A. That means A must start before B.
170   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management




      Figure 5-2. Predecessor/successor relationship between two activities


      By definition, the successor activity must start after the predecessor activity
      has already started. But exactly when can the successor activity start after the
      predecessor activity has already been started? Well, both the predecessor and
      the successor have a start and a finish, and there are at maximum four possible
      combinations between the start and finish points of the predecessor and the
      successor activities. Accordingly, there are four kinds of dependencies, also
      called precedence relationships or logical relationships, listed here:
             *    Finish to Start. The initiation of the successor activity
                  depends upon the completion of the predecessor
                  activity--that is, the successor activity cannot be started
                  until the predecessor activity has already been completed.
             *    Finish to Finish. The completion of the successor
                  activity depends upon the completion of the predecessor
                  activity--that is, the successor activity cannot be
                  completed until the predecessor activity has already been
                  completed.
             *    Start to Start. The initiation of the successor activity
                  depends upon the initiation of the predecessor activity--
                  that is, the successor activity cannot be initiated until the
                  predecessor activity has already been initiated.
             *    Start to Finish. The completion of the successor activity
                  depends upon the initiation of the predecessor activity--
                  that is, the successor activity cannot be completed until
                  the predecessor activity has already been initiated.
      The precedence diagramming method (PDM) is the method used to construct
      a project schedule network diagram by connecting the activities in a schedule
      to each other by their logical relationships. In a diagram, a box (for example, a
      rectangle) is used to represent an activity, and an arrow is used to represent
      a dependency between two activities. The boxes representing activities are
                                                                             PMP (R) in Depth         171



called nodes. Figure 5-3 presents an example of a network diagram constructed
using PDM, in which activity A is a predecessor of activity B; activity C is a
predecessor of activities D and G; D is a successor of C; and so on.




Figure 5-3. An example of a project schedule network diagram constructed by using the
precedence diagramming method (PDM)


In this diagram, only C and I have more than one successor. In general, PDM
supports all four kinds of precedence relationships, but the most commonly
used dependency relationship in PDM is finish-to-start. The start-to-finish
relationship is rarely used.
Applying Leads and Lags. In the real world, some activities may need or
lend themselves to what are called leads and lags to accurately or effectively
define the logical relationships. For example, the finish-to-start dependency
means that the successor activity starts when the predecessor activity finishes.
Applying a lead means you allow the successor activity to start before the
predecessor activity finishes, and applying a lag means you start the successor
activity a few days after the predecessor activity finishes. Sometimes you might
need to make such adjustments in the schedule for effectiveness and efficiency.
Of course, leads and lags are measured in units of time; e.g., days.


Caution! The project management information system (PMIS) can be used as a tool to produce
and display project schedule network diagrams. It can also be counted as a part of the input to the
sequence activities process because it is an enterprise environment factor.
172   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.2

         Q1. What is the most common logical relationship used in the schedule network
             diagrams?
         Q2. What is the least common logical relationship used in the schedule network
             diagrams?
         Q3. Make a list of EEFs and OPAs that could influence the process of scheduling
             activities.


      We have already described the main output of this process: the project
      schedule network diagrams. Due to the discovery of relationships among
      activities, the documents listed in the output column of Table 5-5 may need to
      be updated. During the process of sequencing activities, you may identify new
      necessary activities, split an activity into two, modify activity attributes, add
      new attributes, or identify a risk related to an activity. Accordingly, you may
      need to modify the project documents, such as activity list, activity attributes,
      and risk register.
      Once the activities have been identified and resources acquired to perform
      them, as discussed in the next chapter, you have enough information to begin
      estimating the time needed to complete each activity, which is called the
      activity duration.


      Estimating Activity Duration
      Activity duration is the time between the start and the finish of an activity.
      It is estimated in work periods by using the Estimate Activity Durations
      process for the given resources assigned to the activity. A work period is a
      measurement of time when the work is in progress; it is measured in hours,
      days, or months, depending upon the size of the activity. This estimate can
      be converted to calendar units of time by factoring in the resource's passive
      time, such as holidays. For example, suppose you have estimated that it will
      take one programmer four days (with eight work hours in a day) to write a
      program. You also know that the work will start on a Friday, and there will be
      no work on Saturday and Sunday. Therefore, the activity duration estimate is
      four days (or 32 hours) measured in work periods and six days measured in
      calendar units.
      Table 5-6 shows the input, tools and techniques, and output for the activity
      duration estimating.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth      173



Table 5-6. The Estimate Activity Durations Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques           Output
1. Project management plan:   1. Analogous estimating        1. Activity duration estimates
  * Schedule management       2. Parametric estimating       2. Basis of estimates
    plan                      3. Three-point estimating      3. Updates:
  * Scope baseline: scope     4. Alternative analysis           * Activity attributes
    statement, WBS, WBS
                              5. Reserve analysis               * Assumptions log
    dictionary
                              6. Decision making                * Lessons learned register
2. Project documents:
                              7. Expert judgment
  * Activity list
                              8. Meetings
  * Activity attributes
  * Milestone list
  * Assumptions log
  * Risk register
  * Team assignments
  * Resource calendars
  * Resource requirements
  * Resource breakdown
    structure
3. Enterprise environmental
   factors
4. Organizational project
   assets



Performing the Estimate Activity Durations process means the following:
1) extract the information on activities and resources, along with any other
estimate-related information from the input in Table 5-6; and 2) estimate the
duration for each activity from this information by applying the tools given in
Table 5-6. You do it according to the schedule management plan, which also
tells you about the accuracy level to use for these estimates and any other
criterion. You can also examine the assumptions log and risk register for
assumptions and risks that may potentially impact the activity durations. For
example, you may be assuming that a technology would be installed before the
project starts that would make it faster to complete certain activities. What if
the installation doesn't happen?
Collecting the activity and resource information is discussed in the following
section.
174   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Activity and Resources Information for Duration
      Estimation
      As mentioned earlier, to estimate the activity duration, you will need
      information about the activity, resource requirements for the activity, and the
      resources available for the activity. Here are some sources of the information
      listed in Table 5-6.
      Activity List and Activity Attributes. These documents will provide a
      list of activities whose durations need to be estimated and activity attributes,
      which will help in estimating the duration. For example, if activity attributes
      tell us activity A should be performed before activity B, and if part of what is
      done during A can be used in B, then it will shorten the duration of B.
      Project Scope Baseline. The technical details of the WBS and dictionary
      in the scope baseline may affect the duration of some activities. Some
      assumptions and constraints in the project scope statement, which is another
      component of the scope baseline, can affect activity duration estimates as well.
      For example, there might be an assumption that part of the work related to
      an activity has already been performed in a previous project and can be used
      in this project. If the assumption is true, the activity duration will be less than
      otherwise. An example of a constraint might be that a specific work package
      must be finished before a predetermined deadline. This will put a maximum
      limit on the duration for any activities corresponding to this work package.
      Activity Resource Requirements. The activity duration, by definition, is
      estimated for given resources. In other words, the work periods required to
      complete an activity depend on the resources assigned to the activity. For
      example, suppose it will take four work days to complete an activity that
      involves having two programmers write two programs. If only one programmer
      is available, it will take roughly eight work days to finish this activity, given both
      programmers are equally skilled. However, while assigning additional resources
      to an activity, always consider the following:
             *   Sometimes assigning additional resources might reduce
                 the overall efficiency and productivity. For example, think
                 of two engineers with different skill levels assigned to
                 work on the interrelated components of an activity.
             *   Most of the activities have a threshold beyond which
                 assigning additional resources does not help. For example,
                 installing an operating system on machines; each given
                 machine will take the same amount of time regardless of
                 how many system administrators have been assigned to
                 this activity.
                                                                       PMP (R) in Depth   175



Resource Breakdown Structure, Resource Calendar, and Team
Assignments. The Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical
structure that displays the identified resources by category and type. The
resource calendar, finalized (or modified) during activity resource estimating,
contains the type, quantity, availability, and capability of each resource,
including the skills of a human resource, which must be considered during
activity duration estimating. For example, an experienced programmer can
finish the same program in less time than a beginner can. This is where team
assignments come into play.
Also, capability and quantity of available resources, both human and material,
can affect the activity duration estimate. For example, if an activity will take
four work days for an engineer to finish, and the engineer can work only four
hours a day on this activity, it will take eight calendar days to finish.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.3

   Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of estimating activity durations.
   Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of estimating activity durations.


The activity duration estimate is a non-trivial task, and there are various tools
and techniques available to help one perform this task effectively and reliably.
We will next apply these tools to the information collected in this section to
estimate the duration.


Tools and Techniques for Activity Duration
Estimating
The project schedule depends upon the activity duration estimates. The
duration estimates of activities on the critical path will determine the finish
date of a project for a given start date. However, there might be many
uncertainties involved in the estimate. For example, two programmers, due
to the differences in their experience, will take different amounts of time to
write the same program.
The good news is that there are a number of tools and techniques that you
can use in activity duration estimating.
Analogous Estimating. Analogous estimating techniques estimate the
duration of an activity based on the duration of a similar activity in a previous
project. The accuracy of the estimate depends upon how similar the activities
are and whether the team member who will perform the activity has the same
level of expertise and experience as the team member from the previous
176   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      project. This technique is useful when there is not enough detailed information
      about the project or a project activity available--for example, in the early
      stages of a project. This technique can be applied to the whole project or just
      a part of it.
      Parametric Estimating. This is a quantitative technique used to calculate the
      activity duration when the productivity rate of the resource performing
      the activity is available. You use a formula such as the following to calculate the
      duration:

                 Activity duration = Units of work in the activity /
                 Productivity rate of the resources
      For example, if your team is assigned to the activity of repairing 40 miles of
      road, and you know from data that the average rate for repairing such a road
      by a similar team was half a mile per day, then the duration calculation can be
      performed as follows:

                 Activity duration = 40 miles / (0.5 miles/day) = 80 days
      Three-point Estimating. This method addresses the issue of uncertainty in
      estimating activity duration. The uncertainty in the duration estimate can be
      calculated by making a three-point estimate in which each point corresponds
      to one of the following estimate types:
            *    Most-likely Scenario. The activity duration is calculated
                 in the most practical terms by factoring in resources likely
                 to be assigned and realistic expectations of the resources,
                 dependencies, and interruptions.
            *    Optimistic Scenario. This is the best-case version of
                 the situation described in the most-likely scenario.
            *    Pessimistic Scenario. This is the worst-case version of
                 the situation described in the most-likely scenario.
      The spread of these three estimates determines the uncertainty. The resultant
      duration is calculated by taking the average of the three estimates. For example,
      if the duration for an activity is estimated to be 30 days for the most-likely
      scenario, 27 days for the optimistic scenario, and 33 days for the pessimistic
      scenario, then the average duration is 30 days, and the uncertainty is 3 days,
      which can be expressed as follows:

                 Duration = 30  3 days
      It's equivalent to saying that the activity duration is 30 days, give or take three
      days.
                                                                           PMP (R) in Depth    177



In general, the duration value is obtained by adding the three values and dividing
by three. However, the most-likely scenario may be given more weight than
the other two scenarios. Therefore, the expected duration can be calculated
by using the following formula:
                                  te = (ntm+to+tp)/(n+2)
where te is the expected duration, tm is the duration in the most-likely scenario,
to is the duration in the optimistic scenario, tp is the duration in the pessimistic
scenario, and n is the weight given to the most-likely scenario.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.4

   In the program evaluation and review technique (PERT), the most-likely scenario is
   given a weight of 4 as compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and
   optimistic scenarios. The pessimistic estimate for an activity is 20 days, the optimistic
   estimate is 10 days, and the most-likely estimate is 15 days. Calculate the expected
   estimate using the PERT technique.


Bottom-up Technique. This technique is used when it's difficult to estimate
the duration of an activity; e.g., it's big in size or complicated. This technique
decomposes the activity into smaller pieces, estimates the durations of those
pieces, and aggregates all those duration values into one final value.
Alternative Analysis and Decision-Making Techniques. These tech-
niques have been discussed several times in this book so for. Their basic ideas
remain the same, but you can apply them to different situations. For estimating
activity duration, you can use alternative analysis to estimate durations at
different levels of resource capabilities, skills, tools, and so forth, then compare
the results from different levels. Based on this comparison, hiring and buying
decisions can be made using decision-making techniques.
Reserve Analysis. Reserve analysis is used to incorporate a time cushion
into your schedule; this cushion is called a contingency reserve, a management
reserve, or a schedule reserve buffer. The whole idea is to accommodate the
possibility of schedule risks. One method of calculating the contingency
reserve is to take a percentage of the original activity duration estimate as
the contingency reserve. It can also be estimated by using quantitative analysis
methods. Later, when more information about the project becomes available,
the contingency reserve can be reduced or eliminated.
178   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Expert Judgment and Meetings. Expert judgment can be used to estimate
      the whole duration of an activity when not enough information is available. It
      can also be used to estimate some parameters to be used in other methods--
      for example, what percentage of the original activity duration estimate should
      be used as a contingency reserve--and in comparing an activity to a similar
      activity in a previous project during analogous estimating.
      Of course, meetings with relevant stakeholders will be useful.
      Note that, in general, a combination of techniques is used to estimate the
      duration of an activity. For example, you can use the analogous technique and
      expert judgment to estimate the productivity rate of resources, and then use
      that productivity rate in parametric analysis to calculate the activity duration.
      At the end of this road, you will have activity duration estimates along with
      some document updates.


      Output of Activity Duration Estimating
      Guess what the main output of the activity duration estimating process is.
      Yes, you are right: It is the activity duration estimates! Regardless of which
      technique you use, these estimates are quantitative assessments of the
      required time units to finish activities, such as five days or ten weeks. As
      shown earlier, you can also assign an uncertainty to the estimate, such as 202
      days to say that the activity will take at least 18 days and at most 22 days. In
      addition to this, more information about the basis of these estimates should
      be documented; e.g., how the estimates were made, what the assumptions and
      constraints were, and the uncertainty with confidence level, etc.
      The duration of an activity is an attribute of the activity. Therefore, you
      must update the activity attributes, originally developed in the Define
      Activities process, to include the activity durations. Also, the assumptions
      made in estimating the durations will require an update of the assumptions
      log document. Last, you can update the lessons learned register with what
      techniques worked better than others.
      By using the various processes discussed in this chapter, you have identified
      activities, arranged them in the proper sequence, determined resource
      requirements for them (as discussed in the next chapter), and estimated their
      durations. All these tasks and accomplishments are a means to an end called
      project schedule development.
                                                                          PMP (R) in Depth    179




Developing the Project Schedule
The project work is composed of individual activities. The processes
previously discussed in this chapter deal with activities--defining activities,
sequencing activities, and estimating activity durations--and so does the
process of estimating resource requirements for the activities, covered in the
next chapter. By using these processes, you work out a few schedule-related
pieces at the activity level, which come together as the project schedule when
you crank them up through the Develop Schedule process. Until you have a
realistic project schedule, you do not have a project. A project schedule has
activities sandwiched between the project start date and the project finish
date. Table 5-7 shows the Develop Schedule process in terms of input, tools
and techniques, and output.
Table 5-7. The Develop Schedule Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques            Output
1. Project management plan:     1. Schedule network analysis   1. Project schedule
  * Schedule management plan    2. Critical path method        2. Schedule baseline
  * Scope baseline              3. Schedule compression        3. Schedule data
2. Project documents:           4. What-if scenario analysis   4. Project calendar
  * Activity list               5. Resource optimization       5. Change requests
  * Activity attributes         6. Resource leveling           6. Plan updates:
  * Resource requirements       7. Simulations                    * Project schedule plan
  * Resource calendars          8. Applying leads and lags        * Cost baseline
  * Project team assignments    9. Project management          7. Project document updates:
  * Duration estimates and         information system          8. Activity attributes
    basis of estimates         10. Agile release planning      9. Duration estimate
  * Project schedule                                              resource requirements
    network diagrams                                           10. Assumptions log
  * Milestone list                                             11. Risk register
  * Assumptions log                                            12. Lessons learned register
  * Risk register
  * Lesson learned register
  * A greements
3. Enterprise environmental
   factors
4. Organizational project
   assets
180   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      All the processes discussed in this chapter so far had a common goal: schedule
      development. This is directly and indirectly apparent from the input items in
      Table 5-7, which we will use to extract essential information for developing
      the project schedule.


      Collecting Information for Schedule Development
      The following output items from the schedule-related processes discussed in
      this chapter directly support the schedule development process:
            *   Activity list and activity attributes
            *   Project schedule network diagrams showing the
                dependencies among activities
            *   Activity resource requirements and resource calendars
            *   Activity duration estimates
            *   Global Information. The WBS and WBS dictionary will
                provide details about the project deliverables, which are
                the real reason for the schedule. The schedule development
                plan will show "how" and what type of information--e.g.,
                what method and tools--should be used to create the
                schedule. Don't lose sight of this big picture while figuring
                out the schedule details.
            *   Basic Activity-related Information. The activity list
                shows all the activities that need to be scheduled, and
                activity attributes help with the details of working out a
                schedule. The duration estimates document gives the
                activity duration estimates in work periods, and the basis
                of estimates tells how these were obtained. The resource
                requirement document shows details about the resources
                assigned to each activity on which these estimates depend.
            *   Activity Relationship-related Information. The
                information about dependencies among the activities and
                in which order they should be performed can be extracted
                from 1) schedule network diagrams; 2) milestones list with
                hardcoded, i.e., fixed, dates; and 3) resource calendars
                showing availability of resources along the timeline.
            *   Risk-related Information. This can be extracted from
                schedule assumptions in the assumptions log, which may
                lead to risk, and schedule-related risks in the risk register.
                This information will help with risk mitigation by applying
                the contingency reserve, explained earlier in the chapter, in
                the project schedule.
                                                                      PMP (R) in Depth   181



Also, project-related agreements and contracts may have some information,
such as fixed deliverable dates, that you must consider while developing the
schedule.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.5

   Q1. Describe how assumptions and constraints, e.g., in the project scope statement,
       can affect the schedule, as well as what you can do about it.
   Q2. List EEFs and OPAs that can influence the process of schedule development.


Once we have extracted this information from the input, we can transform
it into the project schedule using the tools and techniques listed in Table 5-7.


Applying Tools and Techniques for Schedule
Development
Once you have the information talked about in the previous section in network
diagrams for the activities, as well as the activity duration estimates, you are
well equipped to start scheduling the project. Starting with the network
diagram and activity durations, you put the pieces together while dealing with
issues like the following:
      *    The actual start date
      *    Uncertainty on the availability of resources
      *    Identification of and preparation for activities on the
           critical path
      *    Risks involved, or "what if" scenarios
      *    The hard start/finish dates for activities or for the
           project that came down the pipeline from very important
           stakeholders
In the following paragraphs, we will show how to use various tools and
techniques to address these and other issues or concerns while hammering
out the project schedule.
182   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Schedule Network Analysis
      The schedule network analysis is a wrapper technique used to generate a
      project schedule model using multiple techniques, such as critical path
      method, resource optimization, and simulation models. All of these and more
      techniques are discussed next.


      Critical Path Method
      This is the schedule network analysis technique used to identify the schedule
      flexibility and the critical path of the project schedule network diagram. The
      critical path is the longest path (sequence of activities) in a project schedule
      network diagram. Because it is the longest path, it determines the duration
      of the project, and hence the finish date of the project given the start date.
      An example will explain this. Consider the network diagram presented in
      Figure 5-4. The boxes in the figure represent activities, such as activity A
      followed by activity B, and the number on top of a box represents the
      duration of the activity in time units, such as days.




      Figure 5-4. An example of a project schedule network diagram. The duration of an activity
      is represented by the number shown on top of the box that represents the activity.


      Table 5-8 shows the calculations for the duration of each path of the network
      diagram by adding the durations of the individual activities on the path. You
      can see from Table 5-8 that the path Start-F-G-H-Finish is the critical path
      because it is the longest path in the diagram, at 21 days. This means if the
      project start date is January 2, the project finish date will be January 23;
      i.e., 2+21, given that the duration is shown in calendar time units.
                                                                     PMP (R) in Depth   183




Table 5-8. Path Durations Calculated from the Network Diagram Shown in Figure 5-4

Path                          Durations of Activities           Path Duration
Start-A-B-Finish              5+3                               8
Start-C-D-E-Finish            5+4+5                             14
Start-C-G-H-Finish            5+6+8                             19
Start-F-G-H-Finish            7+6+8                             21
Start-I-G-H-Finish            5+6+8                             19
Start-I-J-H-Finish            5+4+8                             17


The second important feature of the critical path method is that it can identify
the flexibility in the project schedule by calculating the early and late start and
finish dates of each activity on each path. The schedule flexibility of an activity
is measured by the positive difference between the late start date and the
early start date for the activity, and is called float time or total float.
Table 5-9 shows calculations for the early and late start and finish dates and
the float time for each activity in the network diagram being analyzed. The
early start and finish dates of activities on a path are calculated using the
forward-pass method, which means you start your calculations from the start
point (left-most) and make your way forward. As an example, consider the
path Start-A-B-Finish in the network diagram shown in Figure 5-4. Because A
is the first activity on the path, its early start is day 0. Because B depends on
the completion of A, and A takes five days to finish, the early start date for B
is the early start date of A plus the duration of A--that is, 0 + 5 = 5. The late
start and finish dates are calculated using the backward-pass method, which
means you start your calculations from the finish point. The project finish date
determined by the critical path is day 21, given that the project start date is
day 0. Because activity B has a duration of three days, it must be started no
later than day 18 (21[ms]3=18). Therefore, day 18 is the late start date of
activity B. Activity A has a duration of five days, so given that B must start by
day 18, A must not start later than day 13; i.e., (18[ms]5=13). Therefore, the
late start date for A is day 13. The float times are calculated as follows:
             Float time for A = late start [ms] early start =
             13[ms]0 = 13
             Float time for B = late start [ms] early start =
             18[ms]5 = 13
184   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Table 5-9. Early and Late Start and Finish Dates for Activities in the Network Diagram
      Shown in Figure 5-4

      Activity        Early Start      Early Finish     Late Start      Late Finish      Float Time
      A               0                5                13              18               13
      B               5                8               18               21               13
      C               0                5               2 (not 7)        12               2
      D               5                9               12               16               7
      E               9                14              16               21               7
      F               0                7               0                7                0
      G               7                13              7                13               0
      H               13               21              13               21               0
      I               0                5               2 (not 4)        9                2
      J               5                9               9                13               4


      Note that each of the activities on the critical path (F, G, and H) has a float
      time of zero. This obviously is a source of schedule risk.


      Note Each activity on a critical path has zero float time, and therefore poses a schedule
      risk. So, you must monitor the activities on all critical paths very closely during the execution of
      the project.



      Resource Optimization
      Resource optimization refers to optimizing the use of available resources
      to finish the project within the planned start and finish dates. This may be
      done by adjusting the activities' dates as shown in the following two example
      techniques.
      Resource Leveling. Resource leveling is applied to the schedule that has
      already been analyzed using other methods, such as the critical path method,
      and hence we know the project's start and finish dates, as well as the start and
      finish dates and floats for activities. This technique adjusts the start and finish
      dates of activities, using the already assigned resources to finish the project
      within the planned start and finish dates. The following are some examples of
      situations where resource leveling may help:
              *    Resources are available only at specific times.
              *    Resources are available in limited quantities.
                                                                        PMP (R) in Depth        185



       *    Resources are assigned to multiple activities to be
            performed at the same time.
       *    Resources need to be used at a constant rate.
To deal with such situations, this technique adjusts the start and finish dates
of activities by using the activity floats. In this interplay between activities
and resources, a part of the resources from one activity may be assigned to
another activity--hence, the name resource leveling.
Resource Smoothing. In this technique, like in resource leveling, you adjust
the activities so as to finish the project within the start and finish dates for the
given assigned resources by using activity floats. Unlike in resource leveling, you
cannot change the critical path of the project. What trick makes it possible?
The answer is total float; you cannot change the start and end dates of the
paths, but you can delay the activities within the free float and total float of
the path.

Caution! Due to the change in activity durations, resource leveling can result in a change of
critical paths. Resource smoothing may not always optimize the use of resources.



Simulations and "What if" Scenario Analysis
In addition to the main techniques used to develop the project schedule, which
I already discussed, there are some other tools and techniques for developing
the project schedule that I will now discuss in this list.
"What if " Scenario Analysis. The purpose of the "what if" scenario
analysis is to calculate the effects of a specific scenario on the schedule--for
example, how the schedule will be affected if a vendor does not make the
delivery of a major component on the promised date. Because a "what if"
scenario by definition represents uncertainty, this analysis often leads to risk
planning, which might include changing the schedule or changing the network
diagram to get a few activities out of harm's way if possible.
As you have seen, the critical path method is used to develop a schedule for
given resources, whereas the critical chain method factors in the uncertainty
of the availability of the resources. The resource leveling technique is used to
move the resources around to meet the resource needs of the activities that
must be accomplished by a specific date. In other words, in an ideal world in
which the required (or planned) resources are guaranteed, you do not need
the critical chain method or resource leveling; just the critical path method
will do.
186   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Simulations. In any field, simulation models are used when calculatable
      theory is not available or when dealing with a multitude of parameters and
      options, making exact calculations unfeasible. In the case of the schedule,
      simulation models, such as Monte Carlo models, are used to estimate the
      combined effect of all sources of uncertainty, hence risk, on project objectives.
      In using the Monte Carlo model for this purpose, you can use multiple activity
      durations with different sets of assumptions, constraints, and risks to simulate
      their combined effect of each set, and study how the combined project effect
      varies with different sets of values.


      Caution! The PMBOK levels the simulation and "what if" scenario analysis as data-analysis
      techniques. One may make the case that data analysis is also involved in other techniques
      discussed here.



      Applying Leads and Lags
      Just like in the activity sequencing process, leads and lags can be applied during
      the development of the project schedule. If you applied some leads and lags
      during the activity sequencing process, it is time to consider whether you
      need to adjust those. This adjustment might be necessary to create a realistic
      schedule.
      Let's assume you have used the critical path method to determine the schedule
      for a project. You have also applied other techniques, such as the critical chain
      method and resource leveling. The final realistic schedule that you have come
      up with has an unacceptable project duration (the length of the critical path).
      What do you do? This is where the schedule compression technique comes
      to the rescue.


      Schedule Compression
      Schedule compression is an attempt to shorten the project schedule without
      changing the project scope. It may be necessary in order to deal with schedule-
      related constraints and objectives. It is true that you, the project manager,
      build the schedule through cold, hard mathematical analysis, and you don't
      just accept whatever schedule goals come down the pipeline from elsewhere,
      such as from the customer or the project sponsor. However, once you have
      the schedule built through analysis, you can attempt to accommodate some
      critical stakeholder expectations or hard deadlines, such as a predetermined
      project finish date. I have already discussed one such method, called resource
      leveling, which accommodates hard deadlines for activities. In this section, I
      will discuss two more methods for schedule compression: crashing and fast
      tracking.
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth         187



Crashing. This is a project schedule compression technique in which cost
and schedule tradeoffs are analyzed to decrease the project duration with
minimal additional cost. A number of alternatives are analyzed, including the
assignment of additional resources. Approving overtime is another example of
crashing. This option may increase the cost.
Fast Tracking. This is a project schedule compression technique used to
decrease the project duration by performing project phases or some schedule
activities within a phase in parallel that would normally be performed in
sequence. For example, testing of a product can start when some of its
components are finished, rather than waiting for the whole product to be
completed.


Tip Crashing usually involves assigning more resources and hence increasing the cost.
However, guard yourself against the misconception that additional resources will linearly improve
the performance. For example, if one programmer can develop a program in eight days, it does
not necessarily mean that two programmers will develop the same program in four days, because
there will be overheads, such as the initial less-productive stage of the newly assigned resource,
the time taken to reallocate the work, the interaction among the resources, and so on.



Agile Release Planning and PMIS
These two tools can be used to help present the project schedule and related
items. Agile release planning refers to the release of a high-level schedule
time-bound with the product roadmap. This release only looks into the near
future, accommodating the ideas of iteration and product evolution. Project
management information systems (PMIS), including schedule software, can be
used to generate the schedule and schedule-related items, such as project
network diagrams, bar charts, and histograms.
After you apply these techniques on the information extracted from the input,
you obtain the project schedule and related items discussed in the following
section.


Output of the Schedule Development Process
The planned project schedule is an obvious output of the schedule development
process. This and other output items are discussed in this list.
Project Schedule. The project schedule includes a planned start date and a
planned finish date for each schedule activity. The schedule will be considered
preliminary until the resources have been assigned to perform the activities
according to the schedule. Although a schedule for a simple project might be
188   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      presented in a tabular form, typically a project schedule is presented in one of
      the following graphical formats:
            *    Project Schedule Network Diagram. These diagrams
                 present the schedule activities on a timescale with a start
                 and finish date for each activity, and hence show the
                 dependencies of activities on each other. Because they
                 show the dependencies--that is, the logic--they are also
                 called logic charts.
            *    Bar Chart. In these charts, the activities are represented
                 by bars, with each bar showing the start date, the finish
                 date, and the duration of the activity. They are easy to
                 read and are often used in presentations.
            *    Milestone Chart. These are typically the bar charts
                 representing only the milestones, not all the schedule
                 activities.
      Schedule Baseline. This is a specific version of the project schedule that is
      accepted and approved by the appropriate stakeholders, such as the project
      sponsor. This schedule baseline becomes part of the project plan. The actual
      project work results are compared against this baseline to measure the project
      progress. Any proposed changes to this baseline must go through standard
      change procedures; e.g., the Integrated Change Control process.
      Project Calendars. These calendars contain information about work days,
      shifts, times of the day, and activities available for the project.
      Schedule Data. This is the supporting data for the project schedule and
      consists of the following:
            *    Schedule activities, schedule milestones, activity attributes,
                 and documentation of all identified assumptions and
                 constraints
            *    Resource requirements by time periods
            *    Alternative schedules--for example, schedules based on
                 best-case and worst-case scenarios
            *    Schedule contingency reserves

      Tip The schedule data may be enriched with items such as delivery schedules, order
      schedules, and resource histograms depending on the nature of the project.


      This data is used to create the baseline version of the schedule.
                                                                            PMP (R) in Depth         189



Change Requests and Updates to Documents. Modification requests
for the project scope or schedule will generate change requests, which must
be processed through the Integrated Change Control process. Because
schedule development is an iterative process, over time the way the schedule
is developed may change; then, the schedule development plan will need to be
updated. Also, schedule changes such as new activities may affect the cost, so
the cost baseline may need to be updated. Similarly, the project documents
listed in the output column of Table 5-7 may need to be updated for changes
obvious to figure out. For example:
        *    Resource Requirements. The schedule development
             process--e.g., resource leveling--may change the initial
             estimate for the types and quantities of the required
             resources.
        *    Activity Attributes. Resource requirements or any
             other activity attributes that have changed must be
             updated during this process.
        *    Assumptions Log and Risk Register. During schedule
             development, changes in assumptions about activity
             durations, needed resources, etc. may be revealed. This
             will cause a change in the risk assessment. Hence, the
             assumptions log and risk register will need to be updated.

Note Project schedule development is an iterative process. For example, it might be necessary
to review and revise the duration and resource estimates for some activities to create a project
schedule that will be approved. The approved project schedule will act as a baseline against which
project progress will be tracked.


As mentioned earlier, the approved project schedule is used as a baseline
to track the project progress. To some extent, the schedule development
(or modification) continues throughout the project execution due to the
approved changes and the risk occurrences.
190   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.6

         Lora Nirvana is the project manager for Sequence DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project.
         Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item in the
         second column.

         Output of the Develop Schedule       Description
         Process
         A. Schedule data                     1. A bar chart that includes all the activities
                                                 of the project and also milestones. Lora
                                                 points this bar chart out to the project
                                                 sponsor to show where they are in the
                                                 execution of the project.
         B. Project document updates          2. A bar chart hanging on the calendar that
                                                 has never changed since it was approved.
                                                 Lora compares the current bar chart with
                                                 this bar chart to show the progress.
         C. Schedule                          3. On a bar chart Lora points to the dates
                                                 on which she will have the DNA sample
                                                 isolated and purified, when she will get
                                                 the DNA sample run through the genetic
                                                 analyzer, when she will receive the results
                                                 from the analyzer, and when the results
                                                 will be published on the internet.
         D. Schedule baseline                 4. After realizing that their chosen vendor
                                                 has a track record of sending the DNA
                                                 analysis kits late, Lora writes something
                                                 into the risk register.



      Once the schedule is developed and approved, it needs to be controlled
      throughout the lifecycle of the project by using the Control Schedule process
      that is discussed in the monitoring and controlling part of this book.
      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
            *    Various schedule management processes are used to
                 produce schedule data--a list of schedule activities and
                 attributes for each activity, such as activity duration,
                 previous and following activity, and also the required
                 resources as determined by a resource management
                 process.
                                                               PMP (R) in Depth     191



      *    The schedule data is used to develop the project schedule,
           which is an iterative process due to uncertainties in the
           schedule data and to changes during project execution.
           Nevertheless, the approved version of the planned
           schedule is used as a baseline to track the project
           progress.
      *    As you will learn in the monitoring and controlling part
           of this book, schedule needs to be controlled to keep the
           project on the track; i.e., in alignment with the schedule
           baseline. The major output items of the schedule control
           process are work performance information, schedule
           forecasts, and change requests resulting from comparing
           the schedule-related work performance data with the
           schedule baseline.

Summary
Project schedule development is a journey that begins with decomposing the
work packages in the WBS into project activities and ends with an approved
schedule for performing those activities, called the schedule baseline.
The schedule, once developed, needs to be controlled to keep the actual
project execution in synch with this baseline. Of course, all the schedule-
related processes are performed according to the schedule management plan
developed before using these processes.
The Define Activities process is used to decompose the work packages in
the WBS into activities, which must later be scheduled. The resulting activity
list is used by the activity sequencing process to generate schedule network
diagrams, which display the dependencies among the activities. The network
diagrams are constructed using the precedence diagramming method (PDM)
along with other techniques. The activity list and attributes are also used
to determine the resource requirements for the project. Given the available
resources, you can estimate the activity duration--that is, the time it will take
to perform the activity.
All the pieces developed by these processes come together to develop
the project schedule by using the Develop Schedule process and a host of
techniques. You, for example, may start by using the critical path method to
develop the project schedule from a network diagram. After you have this
schedule, you can use schedule compression methods, such as fast tracking
and crashing, to accommodate hard deadlines. Schedule development is an
iterative process that can continue throughout the project execution; e.g., due
to approved changes and risk occurrences. However, the approved planned
project schedule is used as a baseline to track the project progress. You need
to control the schedule to keep it aligned with the schedule baseline, which
we will discuss in detail later in the book.
192   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


      Road Ahead. The duration is an important attribute of an activity as the
      schedule directly depends upon it. The duration is estimated for the given
      resources available for the activity. In the next chapter, we will discuss the
      process used to estimate the activity resources along with other processes
      used to plan which resources are needed for the project.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
        *The schedule management plan is developed from the project charter, scope
         management plan, and product development approach and is used as an input to all
         other project schedule management processes.
        *The major task of the Define Activities process is to generate the activity list by
         decomposing the work packages from the WBS into activities.
        *The major task of the Sequence Activities process is to determine the dependencies
         among the activities in the activity list, sequence them accordingly, and display that
         sequence in the network diagrams.
        *Network diagrams with activity durations assigned to each activity can be used to
         develop the schedule.
        *We need to know the activity resource requirements to estimate the duration for an
         activity.

      Look Out

        *Because deliverables are broken down into work packages and activities in progressive
         elaboration fashion, it may generate change requests that require the update of the
         scope and cost baselines.
        *One main advantage of sequencing activities is that it is a way to handle project
         constraints in the most efficient manner.
        *Activity duration is estimated for a given resource committed to the activity. Changing
         the quantity or capability of the resource will change the duration estimate.
        *Each activity on a critical path has zero float time and thus poses a schedule risk.
         Therefore, you must monitor the activities on all critical paths very closely during the
         execution of the project.
        *The approved version of the project schedule is called the project schedule baseline,
         against which the project progress is tracked and measured by comparing the actual
         progress with the baseline.
                                                                      PMP (R) in Depth   193




Memorize

 *Project milestone schedule, an output of Define Activities, comes from the WBS
  dictionary, a component of the scope baseline.
 *Dependencies have four attributes: internal mandatory dependencies, external
  mandatory dependencies, internal discretionary dependencies, and external
  discretionary dependencies.
 *In PDM, finish-to-start is the most commonly used dependency relationship, whereas
  start-to-finish is the least used.
 *Activity duration measured in work periods does not include holidays, whereas the
  duration measured in calendar units does. For example, the activity duration from
  Friday to the following Tuesday is three days when measured in work units and five
  days when measured in calendar units, given that no work is done on Saturday and
  Sunday.
 *The approved project schedule, called the schedule baseline, becomes part of the
  project management plan.
 *Fast tracking compresses the schedule by performing activities simultaneously that
  would otherwise be performed in sequence, whereas crashing compresses the
  schedule by assigning more resources.



Review Questions
      1. Which of the following is the most commonly used
         network diagramming method?
           A. Critical path method (CPM)
           B. Simulations
           C. Precedence diagramming method (PDM)
           D. Arrow diagramming method (ADM)
      2. What is the crashing technique used for?
           A. Schedule network diagramming
           B. Duration compression
           C. Cost reduction
           D. Activity sequencing
194   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


           3. In your research project on tourism, you must collect
              data before the tourist season ends because the project
              involves interviewing tourists. The data-collection activity
              has which of the following kinds of dependency?
               A. Mandatory
               B. External
               C. Internal
               D. Internal discretionary
           4. You know from a network diagram that Activity B cannot
              start until Activity A is finished. Which of the following
              are true?
               A. Activities A and B have a start-to-finish dependency.
               B. Activities A and B have a finish-to-start dependency.
               C. Activity B has a mandatory dependency on Activity A.
               D. Activities A and B are on a critical path.
           5. Why should you monitor the activities on the critical
              path more closely?
               A. Because each activity on the critical path has zero
                  float time and thereby poses a schedule risk
               B. Because the activities on the critical path need to be
                  performed before the activities on other paths are
                  performed
               C. Because the activities on the critical path are critical
                  to the organization's strategy
               D. Because the activities on noncritical paths depend
                  upon the activities on the critical path
           6. You estimate the duration of an activity as five days
              because an expert told you that it took five days to
              complete a similar activity in a previous project. Which of
              the following methods might the expert be using for this
              activity duration estimate?
               A. Parametric estimating
               B. Expert judgment
               C. Analogous estimating
               D. Delphi technique
                                                     PMP (R) in Depth   195



7. The amount of time by which an activity can be delayed
   without changing the project finish date is called:
   A. Float time
   B. Lag time
   C. Grace time
   D. Activity gradient
8. You are the project manager of a project that is running
   behind schedule. The project sponsor is very unhappy
   at the new finish date that you proposed, but he has
   accepted it. However, you also requested extra funds to
   support the extended time of work, and the sponsor has
   refused to supply more funds and is threatening to cancel
   the project if you cannot finish the project within the
   planned budget. What are your options?
   A. Crashing
   B. Fast tracking
    C. Asking the executive management for a new sponsor
    D. Speaking with the customer directly without involving
       the sponsor to see whether the customer can
       increase the budget
9. Consider the following network diagram. Which of the
   following is the critical path?
196   Chapter 5 | Planning for Project Schedule Management


               A. Start-C-D-E-Finish
               B. Start-I-G-E-Finish
               C. Start-I-G-H-Finish
               D. Start-I-J-H-Finish
               E. Start-I-G-H-E-Finish
          10. What is the float for Activity G in the network diagram
              in Question 11?
               A. 3
               B. 2
               C. 1
               D. 0
          11. What is the length of the critical path in the network
              diagram shown in Question 11?
               A. 4
               B. 6
               C. 22
               D. 5
          12. You use a three-point estimate for activity duration
              estimating. An activity has a duration of 9 days for an
              optimistic scenario, 18 days for a pessimistic scenario,
              and 12 days for the most-likely scenario. Which of
              the following will you take as the duration estimate if
              a weight of 4 is assigned to the most-likely scenario as
              compared to the weight of 1 for each of the optimistic
              and pessimistic scenarios?
               A. 13 days
               B. 12.5 days
               C. 12 days
               D. 18 days
                                                      PMP (R) in Depth   197



13. Which of the following is not an input item to the Define
    Activities process?
     A. The WBS
     B. The activity duration
     C. The project scope statement
     D. The WBS dictionary
14. Which of the following is not an output of the schedule
    control process?
     A. Recommended corrective actions
     B. Updates to the schedule baseline
     C. Schedule variations
     D. Work performance data
15. The project charter is an input to which schedule
    management process?
     A. Define activities
     B. Sequence activities
     C. Plan schedule management
     D. Schedule development
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                            6

Planning
for Project
Resources, Cost,
and Procurement
PMP Exam Objectives           What It Really Means
2.5 Develop the resource      Develop the resource management plan by defining the roles
management plan               and responsibilities of the project team members in order
                              to create a project organizational structure and provide
                              guidance regarding how resources will be assigned and
                              managed.
                              You should understand the Plan Resource Management
                              process, including both human and physical resources, and
                              the Estimate Activity Resources process inside out.
                                                                                 (continued)




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_6
200   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      PMP Exam Objectives         What It Really Means
      2.3 Plan cost management    Develop the cost management plan based on the project
                                  scope, schedule, resources, approved project charter, and
                                  other information using estimating techniques in order to
                                  manage project costs.
                                  You must understand how the cost estimates for schedule
                                  activities are made and then aggregated into a budget.
      2.7 Develop the procurement Develop the procurement management plan based on the
      management plan             project scope, budget, and schedule to ensure that the
                                  required project resources will be available.
                                  Know how to work out all the pieces of procurement
                                  planning, including procurement management plan,
                                  procurement strategy, make or buy decisions, statement of
                                  work (SOW), bid documents, source selection criteria, and
                                  independent cost estimates.


      Executing a project requires resources, and executing a project successfully
      requires the optimal use of those resources. Therefore, coordinating and
      managing resources--including both human resources, also called team
      resources, and physical resources, i.e., material, equipment, facilities, and
      infrastructure--is an integral part of overall project execution. Identifying,
      acquiring, and managing these resources is called resource management. During
      project planning, you define roles and assign responsibilities to those roles, as
      project work is generally performed in the form of roles and responsibilities.
      Project roles, the responsibilities of the roles, and the reporting relationships
      among the roles need to be determined in order to perform a project. This
      is accomplished during the development of the resource management plan.
      The roles need to be filled with qualified individuals, which will be discussed
      in the executing part of this book. In this chapter, we will discuss developing
      the resource management plan and estimating the resources for each activity
      scheduled.
      You also need financial resources to support these human resources or project
      team and physical resources; e.g., to make purchases and acquisitions. These
      financial resources are managed in the form of cost in project management.
      Furthermore, some of the expected outcome items of the project will be
      developed by the project team, and others will be purchased or acquired in a
      process called procurement, which may also include items that are needed to
      complete the project and are not necessarily the end product of the project.
      Procurements are managed under procurement management. This chapter
      includes the planning processes for cost management and procurement
      management as well.
      So, the core question in this chapter is: How do you plan for the project
      resources? This issue breaks down into three avenues that we will explore:
      team and physical resource planning, cost planning, and procurement planning.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth     201




Planning for Resources: Big Picture
The big picture of planning resources, including cost and procurement, is
illustrated in Figure 6-1, which shows that the resource management plan, cost
management plan, and procurement management plan are all developed from
the project charter in addition to other input items. Procurement planning also
uses the resource management plan as input, which is also used in the Estimate
Activity Resources process that generates the resource requirements, which
in turn are used in developing the project schedule. The project schedule and
cost management plan are both used in estimating costs, which leads to the
project budget. Remember that in this or any other big picture not all the
inputs and outputs are shown.

                                       W
                                     WZ
                                                            ZZ
                         WZ                                 
                         
                        WZ
  ZWZ                                WZZ                            
                                     D                              ZZ
                                          Z
                                                        ZZ
                                                        Z



 WZ                                  Z                                        ZZ
 
                                                                              Z

                   Z                           Z
                   D                           
                   W

                                                        WZ
     WZ                                                 ^               Z
    D                                                                   ^

Figure 6-1. Relationships among major processes of resource planning, including cost and
procurement



Note As shown in Figure 6-1, resource management and cost management are closely
connected.
202   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Resource management processes will be performed according to the resource
      management plan.


      Developing the Resource Management Plan
      First, to avoid confusion, you must understand the logical relationships among
      project, team resource requirements, roles, and responsibilities as illustrated
      in Figure 6-2. Roles are determined from the resource requirements, and
      responsibilities are assigned to the roles to perform the project activities.
      In a nutshell, project work is generally performed in the form of roles and
      responsibilities. The project roles, responsibilities of the roles, and reporting
      relationships among the roles need to be determined in order to perform a
      project. With the concept of roles, we can talk about it during planning even
      before hiring a person who will play the role. So, a role is a defined function
      to be performed by a team member, such as programmer or tester. The other
      issue that needs to be addressed before the project can be performed is how
      and when the project team members, who will perform the project work, will
      be acquired. The resource planning process addresses these issues.




      Figure 6-2. Relationship among project, project activity resource requirements, roles, and
      responsibilities
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth         203



Therefore, two of the main goals of the resource planning process are the
following:
        *   Identify and document project roles, responsibilities for
            each role, and reporting relationships among the roles.
        *   Develop the staff management plan.
All this planning will go into a document called the human resource plan,
which is developed by the Plan Resource Management process illustrated in
Table 6-1 in term of input, tools and techniques, and output.


Tip The main goal of the Plan Resource Management process is to develop a document that
will answer the question: How do you identify the right resources in just the right amount and
manage them for the successful completion of the project?


Table 6-1. The Plan Resource Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques           Output
1.Project charter              1.Data representation          1.Resource management
2.Project management plan:        *Hierarchical charts          plan
   *Quality management            *Responsibility matrix      2.Team charter
    plan                          *Text-oriented formats      3.Project document updates:
   *Scope baseline: scope      2.Organization theory             *Assumptions log
    statement, WBS, WBS                                          *Risk register
                               3.Expert judgment
    dictionary
                               4.Meetings
3.Project document:
   *Project schedule
   *Requirements
    document
   *Risk register
   *Stakeholder register
4.Enterprise environmental
  factors
5.Organizational project
  assets
204   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Generating Resource Management Plan
      In order to devise an approach for how to identify and manage resources, we
      need to know what kind of resources we are talking about. This information
      can be derived from the project requirements. So, the following paragraphs
      explain the main steps one can take to generate a resource management plan
      by extracting project requirements and related information from the input of
      this process.
      Core Resources Information. Get information from the requirements
      document as it will largely determine the kind and amount of resources needed
      for the project. It may also suggest how to manage those resources. Also, get
      information about preapproved financial resources from the project charter,
      which also contains a high-level description of project and other requirements
      and a summary of milestones. From its info, you can not only derive the
      resource requirements, but also how to manage those resources.
      Go to Root of Resource Requirements. Get information about
      deliverables from the scope baseline, from which information regarding the
      kinds and amount of needed resources and how to manage them can be
      derived. Also, the quality management plan contains info about the kind and
      level of resources needed to implement and maintain the required quality.
      You use this information for two purposes: 1) check on the information in the
      requirements document, and 2) derive new resource requirements.
      What Will Impact Resources? Get information about threats and
      opportunities that may impact the need, availability, and management of
      resources from the risk register. Also, check into the stakeholder register to
      identify stakeholders who can impact the different aspects of resources, such
      as kinds and availability of resources.
      Generate Resource Management Plan. Use data-presentation and other
      techniques to generate the resource management plan.


      Tools and Techniques for Resource Management
      Planning
      At the heart of resource management planning lies the art of converting
      information about work packages or related activities and activity resource
      requirements into roles and responsibilities. For example, consider an activity
      in a project--writing a software program. The program will be written by a
      programmer, which is a human resource, in this case a team resource. However,
      before you even know the name of the programmer, for planning purposes
      you can work with this programmer as a role whose main responsibility is
      to write the program. You can assign a real individual to fill this role later.
      This approach allows for planning before hiring. The tools and techniques
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth         205



for planning resource management, including determining the roles for the
project, are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Data-Presentation Techniques. These techniques can be used to identify,
document, and communicate the roles of the project team members, the
responsibilities assigned to the roles, and the relationships among the roles.
The most popular way to implement these techniques is in the form of charts,
which can fall into three categories--hierarchical, matrix, and text-oriented.


Tip Hierarchical techniques are suitable for representing high-level roles, while text formats
can be used to describe the responsibilities in detail.



       *    Hierarchical. Hierarchical charts are the traditional way
            to represent the reporting relationships in an organization
            in a top-down format. Such a chart is also called an
            organizational breakdown structure (OBS) and is arranged
            according to the organization's existing departments,
            units, or teams. The OBS approach used in resource
            management will list project work packages or related
            activities as well as team members with their roles and
            responsibilities for the project under each department.
            We have already explored another hierarchical chart
            called WBS in the chapter on scope management. Recall
            that WBS breaks down deliverables into work packages,
            which can be used to show responsibilities at a high level.
            Another type of hierarchical chart is called the resource
            breakdown structure (RBS), which starts by dividing the
            team and physical resources into different categories and
            then breaks them down further, providing increasingly
            more detail at each lower level. The idea is to break them
            into small enough pieces that they can be assigned to
            work packages or related activities in the WBS. The RBS
            will be covered in the next section of this chapter.
       *    Assignment Matrix. This matrix is used to specify
            the relationships between activities or work packages,
            the roles for performing those activities, and the team
            members assigned to the roles. Such a matrix is generally
            called a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM). Different
            matrices can show these relationships at different levels.
            For example, you can use the RAM to document resource
            requirements for each activity, as shown in Table 6-2. For
206   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


                   example, the third row of Table 6-2 says it will take six
                   developers, six workstations on which the developers
                   will work, and one server to perform activity B. You can
                   also use RAM to document the specific responsibilities
                   assigned to specific team members for the schedule
                   activities, as shown in Table 6-3.

      Table 6-2. An Example of a Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM) Depicting the
      Resources Required to Perform Schedule Activities

      Activity      Designer      Developer Tester            Marketer      Workstation Server
      A             1
      B                           6                                         6             1
      C                                         3                           3             2
      D                                                       2
      E             1             1             1                           1



                   Remember that the RAM can be used for various purposes
                   at various levels. While the RAM in Table 6-2 documents
                   the resource requirements for the schedule activities, the
                   RAM in Table 6-3 depicts the roles of team members with
                   responsibilities for schedule activities and is called an RACI
                   chart, where RACI stand for responsible, accountable, con-
                   sult, and inform.
              *    Text-oriented Formats. These formats are useful
                   when the team member responsibilities need to be
                   described in greater detail. A text-oriented chart may
                   include information about role responsibilities, authority,
                   competencies, and required qualifications. In the real
                   world, these charts are known by different names, such
                   as job description and job responsibilities.

      Caution! Information about some responsibilities of the resources will be scattered across the
      project management plan. For example, the risk register lists the risk owners and the communication
      management plan lists the individuals responsible for some types of communications, such as
      status reports.
                                                                                PMP(R) in Depth          207



Table 6-3. An Example of a Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM) Depicting Roles
Assigned to Team Members for Various Activities. Letters Are Used as Symbols to Represent
Roles: R for Responsible, A for Accountable, C for Consult, and I for Inform

Activity        Susan            Cathleen         Pappu            Maya             Kiruba
Design          R                A                I                I                C
Develop         I                I                R                I                C
Test            C                R                A                I                C
Deploy          I                I                A                I                R


             The RAM in Table 6-3 is also called an RACI chart
             because it assigns four roles to team members for
             various activities: responsible (R), accountable (A),
             consult (C), and inform (I). For example, Susan has the
             responsibility of designing the product, Cathleen will
             be held accountable for the design, Kiruba will play the
             role of a consultant for designing the product, while
             Pappu and Maya will play the role of keeping every-
             body informed of the status and progress.

Tip Each activity or task should have an owner who is responsible for its successful completion.
For complex tasks and activities there may be more roles assigned to it, but there must be only one
principle owner. Joint ownership usually gives rise to confusion, finger pointing, conflict, increased
overhead, and dilution of commitment.


Organizational Theories. Various organizational theories provide
information on and insight into how people behave in a team or an organization,
what motivates team members, and the like. If you have knowledge of these
theories, it will help you plan resources quickly and more effectively. By
understanding organizational theories, you can also comprehend why different
organizational structures support different kinds of relationships among the
organization's members and different kinds of responses to the same situation.
To summarize, data-presentation techniques, such as charts in hierarchical
and text-oriented form, and organizational theories are the main tools and
techniques used to develop the resource management plan. Of course, you can
seek expert judgment in relevant topics, such as obtaining the best sources for
talent management and complying with government, organizational, and union
regulations. You will also be holding meetings to plan resource management.
208   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      The Resource Management Plan
      The results of your resource management planning efforts--the output of the
      Plan Resource Management process--consist of the resource management
      plan and team charter documents described next.


      Resource Management Plan
      This document describes how to identify, obtain, manage, and release the
      project resources, both human and physical. It categorizes them and describes
      roles and responsibilities, reporting relationships among the roles, and skills
      required to complete the project activities. The following are the main
      elements of this document.
      Identifying and Acquiring Resources. This plan recommends the methods
      and ways to identify and obtain the right team and physical resources for the
      project.
      Roles and Responsibilities. This component contains roles and the
      responsibilities assigned to each role. The schedule activities will be completed
      by individuals working in certain roles and performing those responsibilities
      that come with the roles. So, roles and responsibilities are an important part of
      resource management planning. While determining roles and responsibilities,
      you must be clear about the following concepts:
            *    Role. In real life, most activities are performed by
                 people playing certain roles, such as a parent, a teacher,
                 or a student. Similarly, in project management a role
                 is essentially a set of responsibilities, such as the
                 responsibilities of a developer, a tester, or a manager. A
                 role is assigned to a team member, who will perform the
                 responsibilities included in the role to complete one or
                 more project activities.
            *    Responsibility. A responsibility is a piece of work (task)
                 that must be performed as part of completing a project
                 activity. Responsibilities can be grouped together as a role
                 or assigned to a role.
            *    Competency. Competency is the ability of a team
                 member to play a certain role--that is, to perform the
                 responsibilities assigned to the role. While assigning a
                 role to a team member, you should know whether the
                 team member possesses the skills required to perform
                 the responsibilities of the role. You need to respond to a
                 mismatch with training, hiring, schedule changes, or scope
                 changes.
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth         209



        *    Authority. Authority is a right assigned to a role that
             enables the person playing the role to do things such
             as apply project resources, make certain decisions, sign
             approvals, or accept a completed deliverable. A person
             with authority obviously can influence the teamwork for
             the project. Poorly defined or undefined authorities can
             cause confusion and conflicts.

Tip Roles must be clarified by specifying the responsibilities and the authorities assigned to
each role. A good match between the levels of responsibility and authority for each team member
generally produces the best results. This gives the team members a sense of ownership. If you own
it, you will be less likely to break it.


In a nutshell, human or team resource planning accomplishes two main things:
It determines roles with responsibilities to perform the activities, and it guides
you on how fill those roles with team members.
Project Organizational Charts. A project organizational chart displays
the project team members and the reporting relationships among them. The
levels of formality and detail of these charts depend upon the size and needs
of the project at hand.
Staff Management Plan. This component of the resource management plan
recommends how to manage the team resources: identify roles, acquire the
staff to fill those roles, manage resources or team, and release the resources.
After you have determined the roles needed to perform the activities, you
need to identify individuals to fill those roles. The staff management plan
describes when and how human resource requirements for a project will be
met. This component of the plan can include items such as the following:
        *    Training Needs. If some team members lack the
             adequate level of skills needed for the project, a training
             plan can be developed as part of the project. General
             approaches or strategies are provided in this plan.
        *    Team Development. Methods of team development
             are recommended.
        *    Recognition and Rewards. Recognition and rewards
             are good tools to use to promote and reinforce desired
             behavior. However, to use this tool effectively, you must
             have clear criteria for rewards based on the activities and
             performance of team members. The potential candidate
             for a reward must have an appropriate level of control
             over the activity for which the reward will be offered.
210   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


                 For example, if a team member is to be rewarded for
                 completing the project within the budget, the team
                 member must have an adequate level of control over the
                 decision making that affected the spending.

      Team Charter
      The purpose of the team charter document is to record the team's operating
      guidelines and rules to make the team more effective. To that end, it includes
      items such as communicating and meeting guidelines, conflict-resolution
      process, decision-making process, and team values and agreement.
      To make this document more effective, you should consider the following:
            1. This document should make clear what behavior is
               expected from the team members.
            2. The ground rules should be set up very early on for the
               smooth functioning of the team.
            3. If the whole team participates in developing the team
               charter, it will be easier to implement it.
            4. The charter should be reviewed from time to time to
               ensure continued and collective understanding.
            5. It should be made available to new members right away
               as part of team orientation.

                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.1

         Use your knowledge of the Plan Resource Management process to answer the
         following questions:
         Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the process of Plan Resource Management.
         Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the process of Plan Resource Management.
         Q3. How can the assumptions log and risk register project documents be updated as
             a result of this process?


      The implementation of the project resource management plan starts with
      estimating the resource requirements for project activities.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth     211




Estimating Activity Resources
In the previous chapter, we estimated the activities' durations given the
resource requirements, which we will cover here. The resource requirements
for project activities are estimated by using the Estimate Activity Resources
process. The main purpose of this process is to identify and estimate the
following about the human and physical resources needed for each project
activity:
        *   Features
        *   Types
        *   Quantities
Table 6-4 shows the Estimate Activity Resources process in terms of its input,
tools and techniques, and output.

Table 6-4. The Estimate Activity Resources Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques           Output
1.Project management plan:    1.Bottom-up estimating         1.Resource requirements
  *Resource management        2.Parametric estimation        2.Bases of estimates
   plan                       3.Analogous estimation         3.Resource breakdown
  *Scope baseline: scope      4.Alternatives analysis          structure
   statement, WBS, WBS                                       4.Updates to project
                              5.Project management
   dictionary                                                  documents:
                                information systems
2.Project documents:                                           *Activity attributes
                              6.Expert judgment
  *Activity list                                               *Assumptions log
                              7.Meetings
  *Activity attributes                                         *Lessons learned register
  *Resource calendars
  *Cost estimate
  *Assumptions log
  *Risk register
3.Enterprise environmental
  factors
4.Organizational project
  assets
212   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      The first step in estimating activity resources is to collect data--i.e., the
      relevant information from the input items for the Estimate Activity Resources
      process.


      Raw Data for Estimating Activity Resource
      Requirements
      As the first step in estimating the resource requirements of the project at the
      activity level, collect information about the resources from the input items
      listed in Table 6-4.
      Identify and Quantify Resource Needs. Collect information from the
      resource management plan on how to identify and quantify the resources
      needed to do the project work. This plan also reveals how to aggregate this
      information into document(s). Get high-level information about the team or
      physical resource needs for the project from the project scope.
            *   Activity-level Resource Information. Check out the
                activity list to know what activities need resources. You can
                derive the human and physical resources needs of each
                activity from its attributes, such as resource requirements,
                required start and finish dates, activity location, and
                assumptions and constraints. This information is found in
                the activity attributes.
            *   Resource Information from Resource Calendars.
                Get team and physical resource information from
                resource calendars. From there, you can possibly extract
                the information at both the activity and attribute levels,
                such as type of resource, quantity, skill level, experience,
                and geographical location. Typically, the resource calendar
                also contains the following useful information:
                *    Days and times of day when a resource is available
                *    The passive time for the resource--for example,
                     holidays for human resources
                *    The quantity of each type of available resource
                *    The capability of each resource

            *   Cost, Risk, and Information. Cost information about
                the resources may be extracted from the assumptions log
                and cost estimates, and risk information for each resource
                from the risk register. This cost and risk information would
                be useful when selecting the resources by some analysis
                technique, such as alternatives analysis.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      213



You should also consider the EEFs and OPAs, such as the following, that can
influence activity resource estimation:
      *    Enterprise Environmental Factors. Information
           about the infrastructure of the performing organization,
           such as existing facilities, will be used in identifying the
           resources and their availability. In addition to market
           conditions and published estimation data, organizational
           culture, resource location, and in-house skills would be
           important EEFs to consider.
      *    Organizational Process Assets. The organizational
           process assets relevant to activity resource estimating
           include organizational policies for staffing and purchase of
           supplies, as well as historical information on what types
           of resources were used for similar activities in a previous
           project.
With this information, you can estimate activity requirements and aggregate
them into a resource breakdown structure (RBS) with the help of tools.


Tools and Techniques for Activity Resource
Estimating
Depending on which aspect of resource estimation you want to explore and
in what detail, you can use one or more of the following tools and methods.
Analogous Estimation. This method is used for quick estimation in various
situations, such as when enough detailed activity information is not available
(e.g., you can figure out only a couple of top levels of the WBS), or when
there is an immediate need for a rough estimate before you get into making
the accurate detailed estimate. This method estimates resource requirements
based on information from similar projects performed in the past.
Bottom-up Estimating. You might discover that it is rather complex to
estimate resources at the work-package level or even at the activity level. In
that case, it might be helpful in certain cases to start at the activity level and
decompose activities into even smaller components if need be for the purpose
of resource estimating, then estimate the resources for each component, and
then aggregate the resources to get an estimate for the whole activity. You can
continue this aggregation to reach the package, control account, and summary
levels of the WBS. In aggregation, you must consider the possible relationships
(overlaps and such) among different components of the activity so you don't
double-count the resources.
214   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Parametric Estimating. This method makes resource estimates from
      given data using parameters. For example, it's known it took 10 workers 15
      days to repair one mile of road, so under the same conditions it would take
      20 workers 15 days to repair 2 miles of road. The implementation of the
      technique generally includes statistical methods.
      Alternatives Analysis. Alternatives analysis is all about exploring alternative
      solutions to a problem. In the case of estimating resource requirements, you
      might need to consider alternatives available for the resources needed for
      some activities. For example, you might need to decide whether you want to
      buy or develop a tool needed to perform an activity, what types of machines
      (for example, Windows or Linux) to use, which computer technology to use
      to do the development, or what level of skills is needed. Cost information and
      experience can come in handy here.
      Of course, make use of expert judgment, such as for resource planning and
      estimating and in the form of team training.
      Published Estimating Data. Information published by various vendors,
      such as costs for resources, can be useful in estimating the resources.
      Project Management Software. Depending upon the sophistication
      of the resource requirements and the capabilities of the available features,
      project management software might be useful in estimating and managing the
      resources. It can also be used to create resource breakdown structures.
      You can use a combination of these tools and techniques to generate the
      output of the resource estimating process. You also should be holding
      meetings with the team and other relevant stakeholders as the need arises.


      Output of Activity Resource Estimating
      The resource requirements are the major output of the resource estimating
      process. These and other output items are discussed in the following
      paragraphs.
      Activity Resource Requirements and Bases of Estimations. The
      main purpose of the activity resource estimating process is to determine the
      resource requirements for each activity, and therefore this is the major output
      item from this process. In this document, you identify the types of resources
      required to perform each activity and also the estimated required quantity of
      each identified resource. If a work package in the WBS has multiple activities,
      the resource estimates for those activities' resources can be aggregated to
      the resource requirements for the work package, and then you can continue
      this aggregation to reach the control account and project summary levels of
      the WBS.
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      215



The requirement documents may also include information such as the basis
for each estimate, including methods, assumptions made, known risks and
constraints, and resources used to make the estimates.
Resource Breakdown Structure. The resource breakdown structure
(RBS) is a hierarchical structure of resource categories and types required
to complete the activities of the project. The RBS can be used to identify and
analyze the project team resource assignments and usage of physical resources.
Updates to Project Documents. The identified types of required resources
for an activity and the estimated quantity of each identified resource become
activity attributes and must be added to the activity attributes documents.
The activity resource estimating might generate modifications to the activity
list--for example, to add or delete an activity. Moreover, new and changed
assumptions and constraints will update the assumptions log, and you will
update the lessons learned register with lessons, such as which methods were
more efficient and effective than others in resource estimation.
Team and physical resources cost money. So, after you develop the resource
management plan and have estimated the resource requirements, you need to
plan for cost.


Estimating Costs and Determining Budget
Project cost management consists of developing a cost management plan,
estimating costs, determining budget, and controlling costs. First of all, we
need to distinguish between cost and budget. Cost is the value of the inputs
that have been (or will be) used up to perform a task or to produce project
outcome: product, service, or result. This value is usually measured in units of
money. For example, you paid two programmers $1,000 each for developing a
software program, and you paid $100 to a tester to test the program. So, the
cost for the task of developing and testing the software program is $2,100.
You can add the costs of components of a system, and the sum will represent
the cost of the system, but it's still a cost, and not a budget. Budget is an
aggregated cost with a timeline. You aggregate the costs of all the resources
needed to perform the project and put a timeline on it: the availability of funds
over time. That is called a budget.
As illustrated in Figure 6-3, cost management contains the Plan Cost
Management process to generate a cost management plan, according to which
all the three other processes are performed. The Estimate Costs process
generates the output items cost estimate and bases of estimates, which are
used by the Determine Budget process to generate a cost baseline and project
funding requirements, which are used in controlling costs.
216   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


                                          WWZ
                                          D



                                 ZD                 ZD
                                   W                  W
                             Z                               WZ
                                                             Z
       Z                                                                      ZZZ
                                                               Z
                             

      Figure 6-3. Big picture of cost management

      Table 6-5 lists the processes of cost management along with their process
      groups and major output.

      Table 6-5. Processes of Cost Management Mapped to the Process Groups

      Cost Management          Process Group       Major Output              Perform
      Process
      Plan Cost Management     Planning            Cost management plan      Once or at
                                                                             predefined points
                                                                             in the project
      Estimate Costs           Planning            Activity cost estimates   Periodically
                                                   Bases of estimates        throughout the
                                                                             project
      Determine Budget         Planning            Cost baseline             Once or at
                                                   Project funding           predefined points
                                                   requirements              in the project

      Control Costs            Monitoring and      Work performance          Throughout the
                               Controlling         information               project
                                                   Budget forecasts


      Here, we will discuss the three cost planning processes. The Control Costs
      process will be discussed in the monitoring and controlling part of book.
      Cost management starts with developing the cost management plan.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth         217




Developing the Cost Management Plan
The cost management plan, developed by the Plan Cost Management process, is
a guide for how to manage project cost, including estimating cost, determining
a budget, and monitoring and controlling cost. Table 6-6 presents the Plan
Cost Management process in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.

Table 6-6. The Plan Cost Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                              Tools and Techniques        Output
1.Project charter                  1.Data analysis             Cost management plan
2.Project management plan:         2.Expert judgment
   *Schedule management plan       3.Meetings
   *Risk management plan
3.Enterprise environmental
  factors
4.Organizational project assets



Caution! Cost is planned very early in the project; that is when the probability of influencing
the project cost is at a maximum.


We extract raw data from input items, listed in Table 6-6, and convert it into a
cost management plan by using techniques, listed in the same table, as shown
the following sections.


Performing the Plan Cost Management Process
Here, we will describe the steps needed to perform the process of developing
the cost management plan.
        1. From the project charter, extract information about 1)
           preapproved financial resources from which you can
           develop the details of the project cost; and 2) project
           requirements that will influence cost management.
        2. From the schedule management plan and risk management
           plan, get information about which processes and controls
           may influence cost management, such as cost estimates.
218   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


            3. From the enterprise environmental factors, get information
               about the factors that can influence the development of
               the cost management plan, such as organizational structure
               and culture; market conditions in terms of product
               availability globally and in different regions; productivity
               differences in different regions, which will affect the cost
               of project work; any relevant cost-related published
               data; currency exchange rates; and project management
               information systems via which to get information about
               different ways of managing cost.
            4. From the organizational project assets, get information
               about the factors that can influence the development of
               the cost management plan, such as organizational policies
               and procedures regarding cost estimates, budgeting, and
               financial control--e.g., account code, time reporting,
               standard contract provisions, etc.--and historical
               information from lessons learned from past projects.
            5. Use data-analysis techniques such as alternatives analysis
               to choose one option out of the many available; e.g., to
               choose which funding option will be better or best: loan,
               self-funding, funding with equity; or whether to make, buy,
               or rent a project-related item.
            6. Use expert judgment where needed on cost management-
               related topics, such as cost estimate, cost control, and
               budgeting.
            7. Put all the information collected from steps 1 through
               6 together into the cost management plan document.
               To facilitate this, you can hold meetings with relevant
               stakeholders, such as the sponsor, needed team members,
               and anybody who has project cost-related responsibilities.
      What are some specific items in the cost management plan?


      Cost Management Plan
      The cost management plan presents a guide for how to manage cost, including
      estimating cost, budgeting, and controlling cost. The following are examples of
      which items typically can be found in this plan.
      Choice of Processes. Whether for this project cost estimation and budgeting
      will be performed as one process or two separate processes.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      219



Cost Measurements: Units, Precision, Accuracy. The plan has answers
for simple questions about measurements of cost and other relevant quantities;
for example:
      1. What are the unit systems of measurements? For example,
         U.S. dollar, pound, Euro, or Indian rupees for money; miles
         or kilometers for distance; and pounds or kilograms for
         mass, commonly called weight.
      2. What is the precision level? This refers to the rounding-
         off error; e.g., rounding off to nearest whole number
         corresponds to an error of 0.5. For example, $19.4
         would round off to $19.0, and $19.6 to $20.0.
      3. What is the accuracy level? This refers to the
         approximation errors; e.g., if the cost is estimated to be
         $100 with an accuracy of 20%, it means that cost could
         be any amount from $80 to $120.
WBS Usage. Recall Chapter 4 on scope management, where we covered the
work breakdown structure (WBS) that contains the component for project
cost accounting called control account. The cost management plan may suggest
to use that WBS account consistently for cost estimating, budgeting, and cost
controlling. The control account points may be defined inside the WBS.
How to Measure Performance. The cost management plan may define
rules for cost performance measurement; e.g., how to set up control account
points within the WBS; details of how to implement the earned value
management (EVM) technique; how to employ estimate at completion (EAC);
what cost-tracking methods to use, etc.
Other Items. The cost management plan may specify and describe 1) the
format and frequency of different cost reports; 2) maximum cost performance
deviation from baseline before red alarm goes off to trigger an action; 3)
recommended funding options; and 4) procedures for documenting cost and
accounting for currency fluctuations, etc.
With the project cost management plan in hand, you are ready to start
working on estimating the project cost.


Estimating Project Costs
Estimating project cost means developing an estimate for the monetary
resources needed to complete the project work; that is, activities. That
includes both kinds of resources: team and physical. These estimates are based
on the information available at a given time. The estimates in the beginning are
less accurate; for example, their accuracy may be only as good as 50%. For
220   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      example, if you say the cost will be $100,000, it could be anywhere between
      $50,000 and $150,000. As the project moves along and more information
      becomes available, the cost estimates can be improved to get better estimates.

      Table 6-7. The Estimate Costs Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                           Tools and Techniques        Output
      1.Project management plan:      1.Analogous estimating      1.Cost estimates
        *Cost management plan         2.Bottom-up estimating      2.Estimate bases
        *Quality management plan      3.Parametric estimating     3.Updates to project
        *Scope baseline               4.Three-point estimates       documents:
      2.Project documents:            5.Data analysis:              *Assumptions log
        *Project schedule                *Alternatives analysis     *Risk register
        *Resource requirements           *Reserve analysis          *Lessons learned register
        *Risk register                   *Cost of quality
        *Lessons learned register     6.Decision making: vote,
        *Enterprise environmental       etc.
         factors                      7.Project management
        *Organizational project         information System
         assets                       8.Expert judgment


      The standard process used to estimate costs is called the Estimate Costs
      process and is presented in Table 6-7 in terms of input, tools and techniques,
      and output. Performing the process is described next.


      Estimating Project Costs
      The project cost estimating process may be described in the high-level steps
      shown in the following sections.


      Collect Basic Work Information: Scope Baseline
      Estimating project cost means estimating the costs required to complete the
      project scope by executing activities. Therefore, you need the scope baseline
      to ensure that when estimating costs all the needed elements are accounted
      for. Recall that the scope baseline is constituted by the scope statement,
      WBS, and WBS dictionary. All three components of the scope baseline--
      scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary--are useful in estimating the project
      cost. The scope statement will provide the cost-relevant information, such as
      project and product acceptance criteria, assumptions and constraints, product
      scope description, and project boundaries around the scope. An example of
      a cost-related assumption is if we are only counting the direct costs of the
                                                                           PMP(R) in Depth         221



project or if we are also counting the indirect costs. The indirect costs are
those costs that cannot be directly traced to a specific project and therefore
are usually shared by multiple projects and determined by some approved
accounting procedure. An example would be the utility bill of the building or
a computer network shared by many projects in the company.
The WBS will be useful by providing the relationships of project deliverables
to different WBS components; that cost is linked to the deliverables, double
counting is avoided, and the cost can be aggregated or integrated. The WBS
dictionary will provide the identification and description of the work.
Work is performed in terms of activities, which need resources, and it is the
resources that cost.


Collect Resource Information
Information about the project resources can be collected from several sources,
such as the following:
       *     Project Schedule. The approved project schedule--
             i.e., schedule baseline--will give you information about
             the resources needed along the timeline to complete
             the project work. So, the schedule baseline is crucial to
             making the cost estimates as it yields information about
             the type, amount, and time window of both team and
             physical resources.
       *     Resource Requirements. This document, generated
             by the Estimate Activity Resources process, provides
             detailed information about scheduled resources; e.g.,
             identification, type, quantity, etc.
       *     Quality Management Plan. This document contains
             quality-related resource information as it describes
             activities and the needed resources to perform those
             activities in order to meet the planned project quality
             objectives.
       *     Risk Register. Both kinds of risks--threats and
             opportunities--have an impact on the cost in the form
             of risk-mitigation costs and revenues or savings from the
             opportunities. So, the detailed information about risk
             provided in the risk register can be used in cost estimates.

Caution! As you learned in the previous chapter, activity resources are estimated by
performing the Estimate Activity Resources process. Therefore, the Estimate Costs process should
be closely coordinated with the Estimate Activity Resources process.
222   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      We also need information on how to get the process going once started.


      Collect Information to Facilitate the Process
      Information on how to get the process going once started can be extracted
      from the following sources:
            *   Cost Management Plan. This document can be used
                as a guide on how to perform the Estimate Cost process;
                e.g., methods, units, and precision to use.
            *   Lessons Learned Register. Record your experience
                estimating the cost; e.g., which technique works the
                best, etc. The lessons learned register can facilitate team
                management in the sense that you can use it to record
                the ongoing lessons learned so as to subsequently use
                them to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of cost
                estimating.
      The following are the information sources for the items that can facilitate or
      influence this process:
            *   Enterprise Environmental Factors. Enterprise
                environmental factors relevant to estimating costs include
                market conditions and published commercial information
                that will provide the cost of resources including team and
                physical resources such as material and equipment. This
                will also provide information related to the availability of
                products and services and their cost and rates. Supply
                and demand conditions can also influence the project
                cost, as can currency exchange rates and inflation.
            *   Organizational Process Assets. This includes the
                organization's policies and procedures regarding cost
                estimates, cost estimating templates, and information
                from previous projects, including lessons learned.
      All the cost-related information that you have collected from input items, as
      just described, needs to be converted into cost estimates.


      Convert Cost-related Information into Cost Estimates
      The cost-related information is converted into cost estimates by using one or
      more available methods; e.g., those listed in the tools and techniques column
      of Table 6-7. In general, you can use several methods to estimate the cost, such
      as analogous estimating, three-point estimates, bottom-up estimating, and so
      on. Methods like alternatives analysis and decision making are used to choose
      the methods of cost estimating.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth     223



All these techniques have been discussed before in this book, such as in
estimating activity durations and estimating activity resources. Now, we will
discuss them in the context of estimating project cost and budgeting.
Analogous Estimation. Analogous cost estimation is a technique that uses
cost-related information to evaluate cost-related variables such as rate, cost
of a component, cost of an activity from similar components and activities
in previous projects, or cost of a similar project from the past to measure
the same variable in the current project. This technique is useful when very
limited component information is available, especially in the beginning of a
project, and is usually used for estimating the gross values and not the detailed
component-based values. It's generally less costly and less time consuming
than other techniques, but also is less accurate. Its accuracy and reliability
improve if the person making the estimate is an expert and the components
or activities being compared are actually similar.
Parametric Estimation. This is a technique that uses some parameters and
the statistical relationships among them to make an estimate. For example, if
the unit cost is known, say, from historical data, the cost of the whole package
containing a number of units can be calculated. For example, if there are 10
identical or similar activities in a work package and it is known that one activity
costs $100, then we can say that the whole work package will cost $1,000.
This technique can generate quite accurate results depending on the accuracy
of the quantity of resources and other data that goes into the estimation.
Bottom-up Estimation. This technique involves estimating the cost of the
parts of a component and then aggregating the cost of those parts to calculate
the cost of the whole component. By continuing the process, we can aggregate
the cost of multiple components and eventually get the cost of the whole
project. This technique can generate accurate results when you can generally
make a better estimate of a part than the whole, which is usually the case
when enough information is available. Of course, the statistical uncertainty
or accuracy improves as the number of activities, packages, and components
increases.

                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.2

                                         Problem

   An activity cost estimate goes like this:
   It will take 20 hours for a programmer to write this program. The average rate at which
   to hire a programmer is $50 per hour. Therefore, the cost of writing this program,
   assuming that everything else needed to write the program, such as a computer, is in
   place, is 20 x $50 = $1,000.
   What kind of estimation technique is at work here?
224   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Contingency Reserve Analysis. There are the following two problems
      associated with estimates:
             *    Estimates are approximations, and approximations imply
                  uncertainty, which means risk.
             *    There may be a risk not yet identified at the time of
                  making the estimates; i.e., cost amount is unknown.
      You will need some funds to deal with this situation. What comes to your
      rescue here is called the contingency reserve. The contingency reserve, in brief,
      is an amount of a resource--e.g., funds, time, etc.--allocated in addition to
      the calculated estimates to reduce the risk arising from various sources; for
      example, from overruns of the project objectives to a level acceptable to the
      performing organization because there was known uncertainty in estimating
      the cost of a few components. In other words, the contingency reserves are
      the funds reserved to deal with the events that are anticipated but not certain:
      known risk with unknown cost.
      Depending upon the project, the contingency reserve amount may be
      determined as a certain percentage of the total project cost estimate, or you
      can use analytical methods.


      Caution! Contingency reserves, also called contingency allowances, usually become part of
      the project budget, project funding requirements, and cost baseline.


      Alternatives Analysis, Decision Making, and Project Management
      Information System (PMIS). All these techniques have been discussed
      before in this book, such as in Chapter 5. In similar ways, you use alternatives
      analysis to choose one or a few out of many available options of alternative
      cost estimate methods; use decision making to take one path when many
      are available; and use PMIS to facilitate multiple and alternative methods
      to estimate cost; e.g., spreadsheets, simulations, statistical cost analysis, and
      graphics.
      Cost of Quality. This is the cost of implementing the conformance to the
      planned quality objectives and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
      Three-point Estimates. Three-point estimates discussed in Chapter 5 for
      duration estimates can be applied in the same way to cost estimates; replace
      time duration with cost.
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth         225




Tip Because cost depends on other estimates, the accuracy of cost estimates depends on
many other estimates, such as the activity duration estimates and resource requirement estimates,
which go into developing the schedule baseline used for making cost estimates. It is important to
keep this dependency in mind just in case you need to change any of these other estimates.



                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.3

    The pessimistic cost estimate for an activity is $5,000, the optimistic estimate is
    $3,000, and the most-likely estimate is $4,000. Calculate the expected estimate by
    using the PERT technique, where the most-likely scenario is given a weight of 4 as
    compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios.


By using some of these tools suitable to our project, we get cost estimates.

Output of the Estimate Costs Process
The output of the Estimate Costs process consists of the items discussed in
the following paragraphs.
Activity Cost Estimates. These are the quantitative estimates of various
costs required to complete the project work. Depending on the project and
the stage of the project, the cost estimates may be documented in summary
form or in detail. These estimates include costs for all resources needed to
complete the project work, including team members, equipment, facilities,
information technology, labor directly applied to the project work, material,
and services. Indirect costs and special categories such as allowances and
contingency reserves must also be included.
Estimate Bases. It's important to document what the bases of the cost
estimates were. These may highly depend on the application area of the
project. At a higher level, the following elements must be included in the
documentation:
        *    Assumptions made in making the estimates; for example,
             the labor rate and where this data came from
        *    Constraints that affected the estimates; for example, a
             milestone must be met by a certain date
        *    The methods used to develop the estimate; for example,
             three-point estimate
        *    The uncertainty level, such as 10%, and the confidence
             level must be assigned to an estimate.
        *    How risks were included in the cost estimates
226   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Updates. During this process, some existing assumptions and constraints
      may no longer be true, and some new assumptions and constraints may
      appear, leading to the need to update the assumptions log. This will also affect
      the risks, leading to risk register updates. Of course, we should always update
      the lessons learned register with important lessons learned in performing the
      process; e.g., in this case, the cost-estimating techniques that worked the best.
      In a nutshell, the outcome of estimating costs will include a cost estimate for
      each project activity and the basis for that estimate, which can be used to
      determine the project budget.


      Determining Project Budget
      Determining the project budget is the process of aggregating the cost
      estimates for all project activities and assigning a timeline to it. Table 6-8
      presents the Determine Budget process in terms of its input, tools and
      techniques, and output. Most of the items in the input column for this process
      have already been described in this chapter. Organizational process assets
      may include organizational policies and tools for determining the budget.
      As far as business documents, the business case collects information about
      financial factors that are critical for project success, and information about
      target benefits--e.g., timeframe for materializing the benefits, benefit matrix,
      and values calculations--can be extracted from the benefit management plan.
      Both of these business documents were covered in Chapter 2.

      Table 6-8. The Determine Budget Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                Tools and Techniques          Output
      1.Project management plan:           1.Cost aggregation            1.Cost baseline
        *Cost management plan              2.Reserve analysis            2.Project funding
        *Resource management plan          3.Historical information        requirements
        *Scope baseline                      review                      3.Updates to project
                                           4.Reconciliation of funding     documents
      2.Project document
                                             limits                        *Cost estimates
        *Cost estimates
                                           5.Financing                     *Project schedule
        *Bases of estimates
                                           6.Expert judgment               *Risk register
        *Project schedule
        *Risk register
      3.Business documents
        *Business case
        *Benefit management plan
      4.A greements
      5.Enterprise environmental factors
      6.Organizational project assets
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      227



Cost aggregation is the technique used to calculate the cost of a whole by
summing up the costs of the parts that make up the whole--i.e., the project
work. You can use the bottom-up estimation technique in WBS to aggregate
the costs of all the components and activities to calculate the total cost of
the project, as was explained in the previous section. The timeline assigned to
this cost will be important when reconciling the expenditure with the funding
limits along the timeline. The reconciliation may require rescheduling some
activities, hence requiring updates for the project schedule documents.
In the previous section, we discussed using analogous estimates and parametric
estimates to estimate the cost of project activities using parameters from
historic information. The models can be built based on these methods to
estimate the total cost of the project. The accuracy and reliability of these
models depend on the accuracy of the historic parameter information,
whether the parameters can be quantified, and whether the models built on
these parameters are scalable; i.e., they work for projects of all sizes.
The reserve analysis at the budget level includes a management reserve in
addition to a contingency reserve, and you must understand the difference
between the two. Contingency reserves are the funds that can be used to
deal with unplanned events that can potentially transpire--e.g., in case one or
more identified risks occur--whereas management reserves are funds that
can be used if unplanned but future changes occur that are within the project
scope but were missed during planning.
Both contingency reserves and management reserves are part of the
project budget and budgeting requirements. The approved budget minus the
management reserve is equal to what is called the cost baseline. You can add
the amount of management reserve to the cost baseline after it has been used.
The cost performance of the project is monitored, measured, and controlled
against this baseline.
Financing as a tool in budgeting refers to situations where funding is acquired
in stages along the timeline and you have to meet certain conditions, such
as showing certain project progress, to secure those funds at every stage.
Funding may not be uniformly distributed over time.
In order to avoid confusion, remember, in every stage or funding period:
      1. Cost baseline = anticipated expenditure + anticipated
         liabilities
      2. Funding requirements = cost baseline + management
         reserves
In the process of determining the budget, you may need to update the project
schedule, as already mentioned, as well as the cost estimates and risk register,
to respond to changes.
228   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement



      Caution! Both the contingency reserve and the management reserve are part of the project
      budget and budgeting requirements; cost baseline is the approved budget minus the management
      reserve. That means the management reserve will not be used in the calculations of earned value
      measurements.


      Once the project cost is determined and the budget is approved, you need to
      control the cost as the project progresses by using the Control Cost process
      discussed in the monitoring and controlling part of the book.
      Your organization may not have the resources to complete all parts of
      the project. For those parts of the project, you will need to use what is
      called procurement; obviously the project budget should include the cost of
      procurement.


      Procuring Project Resources or Components
      Procurement refers to obtaining--purchasing or renting--products, services,
      or results, collectively called procurement items, from outside the project
      team to complete the project. Accordingly, procurement management is
      performing a set of processes to plan and obtain (procure) items from outside
      the project team to complete the project.
      There are two main roles involved in Plan Procurement Management:
             *    Buyer. The party purchasing, i.e., procuring, the items
             *    Seller. The party delivering the procurement items
                  to the buyer
      As illustrated in Figure 6-4, procurement management includes the following
      components:
             1. Plan Procurements. This is the process of making
                decisions on what to procure, identifying potential sellers,
                determining the procurement strategy, and making the
                overall procurement management plan.
             2. Conduct Procurements. This is the process of
                soliciting seller responses, selecting sellers, and awarding
                contracts.
             3. Control Procurements. This is the process of
                monitoring and controlling the contract execution, making
                approved changes and corrections, managing relationships
                among the parties involved in the procurements, and
                obtaining the procurement items.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth         229




                                      W
                                    WZ

           WZ
          Z                                                   WZ
          ZZ                    WZ                            
                                


                                      WZ
           Z                          ZZ                          ZZ
         WZ                                                     WZ

Figure 6-4. Big picture of procurement management

Table 6-9 lists the processes of procurement management along with their
process groups and major output.

Table 6-9. Processes of Procurement Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Procurement Management         Process Group          Major Output
Process
Plan Procurements              Planning               Procurement management plan,
                                                      procurement including procurement
                                                      statement of work, and make-or-buy
                                                      decisions
Conduct Procurements           Executing              Selected sellers, agreements, and
                                                      change requests
Control Procurements           Monitoring and         Closed procurements, work
                               Controlling            performance information, change
                                                      requests




Caution! In Figure 6-4, procurement documentation refers to all the records of procurement;
it keeps on growing. So, this output item wouldn't be identical from the plan procurements and
conduct procurements processes.


Before you conduct procurements, you've got some planning to do.
230   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Planning for Procurement
      Planning procurements includes making and documenting purchasing decisions
      on what and when to acquire from outside of the project, identifying potential
      sellers, and developing a procurement approach. Although procurement
      planning should be done early in the project, like most of the planning, the
      need might also emerge at any stage of the project as a result of approved
      changes or other circumstances.

      Table 6-10. The Plan Procurement Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
      Output

      Input                             Tools and Techniques          Output
      1.Project charter                 1.Data gathering:              1.Procurement
      2.Business documents:               *Market research               management plan
        *Business case                  2.Data analysis:               2.Procurement strategy
        *Benefit management plan          *Make-or-buy analysis        3.Make-or-buy decisions
      3.Project management plan:        3.Source selection analysis    4.Statement of work (SOW)
        *Scope management plan          4.Expert judgment              5.Bid documents
        *Scope baseline                 5.Meetings                     6.Source selection criteria
        *Resource management                                           7.Independent cost
         plan                                                            estimates
        *Quality management plan                                       8.Change requests
      4.Project documents:                                             9.Project document
                                                                         update:
        *Milestone list
                                                                          *Milestone list
        *Project team assignments
                                                                          *Requirement
        *Requirement
                                                                           documentation
         documentation
                                                                          *Requirements
        *Requirements traceability
                                                                           traceability matrix
         matrix
                                                                          *Stakeholder register
        *Resource requirements
                                                                          *Risk register
        *Stakeholder register
                                                                          *Lessons learned
        *Risk register
                                                                           register
      5.Enterprise environmental
                                                                      10.Organizational project
        factors
                                                                         assets
      6.Organizational project assets
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth   231




Core of Performing Plan Procurement Management
Performing the Plan Procurement Management process can be explained in
the following steps in terms of the items from Table 6-10:
     1. Get High-level Project Information. Because you
        are considering acquiring a piece or component of the
        project, you better have a good overall understanding of
        your project. Get information about project objectives,
        milestone summary, approved resources, and description
        from the project charter; and learn what the project benefits
        are and when they are expected to be yielded from the
        benefit management plan. For example, the milestone list
        determines the delivery time from the sellers. Also, you
        will want to know about the project business case to keep
        the procurement strategy aligned with it.
     2. Fetch Information about Procurement Scope.
        From the scope baseline, draw the scope of the component
        to be procured, and from the scope management plan, you
        will know how this scope will be managed. This will help
        you to develop a statement of work (SOW) and terms of
        reference (TOR).
     3. Know What to Procure. Steps 1 and 2 will expose
        what needs to be procured. The resource management
        plan and resource requirements may already have
        information about resources that need to be procured.
        From the quality management plan, you can get quality
        information such as standards and codes that the project
        needs to follow; this information may be used in bidding
        documents, determining suppliers' prequalification, and
        determining selection criteria. Also, from information
        in the project team assignments, you can determine if
        some team members would be able to perform the
        procurement activities or if an additional resource needs
        to be acquired or procured.
     4. Get Requirements of the Procurement. From the
        requirement documentation, you can fetch the requirements
        for the items to be procured that you and the sellers will
        need to follow. These may include technical requirements
        and requirements with legal and contractual obligations,
        such as safety, security, permits, and intellectual property
        rights. You can use a requirements traceability matrix to
        link seller deliverables' requirements to the product
        requirements.
232   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


            5. Get Information about Relevant Risks and
               Stakeholders. From the risk register, get information
               about risks belonging to the items to be procured; these
               risks will need to be transferred to the procurement
               contract. Also, get information about contract and
               legal personnel, as well as regulatory agencies, from the
               stakeholder register.
            6. Consider Enterprise Environmental Factors.
               When handling procurement, consider relevant EEFs,
               such as market conditions; availability of the product in
               the market; past performance of the potential suppliers;
               unique local conditions regarding regulation, labor, sellers,
               etc.; contract management and payment systems; and
               financial accounting systems.
            7. Consider Organizational Process Assets. When
               handling procurement, also consider relevant OPAs,
               such as the procurement policies and procedures of the
               performing organization; the approved list of sellers; and
               different contract types supported by the organization,
               which may include fixed price (FP) contracts, cost-
               reimbursable contracts, and time and material (T&M)
               contracts.
            8. Decide Whether to Make or Procure. Information
               collected during steps 1 through 7 will also help in
               determining whether an item is to be made or a piece of
               work to be performed by the project team or procured.
      To determine what type of contract you will use for the procurement, you
      need to be aware of what contract types are supported by the organization
      and what they are.


      Determining Contract Types
      A contract is a mutually binding agreement between a buyer and a seller that
      obligates the seller to provide the specified product, service, or result and
      obligates the buyer to make the payment for it. Contracts generally fall into
      the three categories discussed in this section.
      Fixed-price Contracts. A fixed-price contract is a contract that contains a
      fixed price and is used for a well-defined product with the expectation that the
      project scope will not change. Actually, this contract may contain another cost
      component in addition to the fixed price. This gives rise to various subtypes
      of fixed-price contracts:
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth   233



     *   Firm Fixed Price (FFP). Also sometimes called a
         lump-sum contract, this is an agreement that specifies the
         fixed total price for the product, service, or result to be
         procured. The price is set in the beginning and is not
         subject to change unless the scope of the product or
         the service changes. This type is commonly used, and is
         preferred by buyers. An example of a firm fixed-price
         contract is a purchase order for the specified item to be
         delivered by a specified date for a specified price. This
         contract category is generally used for products and
         services that are well-defined and have good historical
         information. A firm fixed-price contract for a poorly
         defined product or a service with a very little historical
         record is a source of high risk for both the seller and the
         buyer.
     *   Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment
         (FPEPA). This is a fixed-price contract that contains a
         special provision to adjust the price according to changes
         in external conditions, such as inflation or price changes
         for some specific commodities relevant to the product
         or service to be procured. The adjustments are well
         defined at the start. For example, this contract type is
         useful when the seller delivers over a long period during
         which external conditions such as inflation or currency
         rate may change.
     *   Fixed Price Incentive Fee (FPIF). This is a fixed-price
         contract that contains extra rewards for the seller tied
         to achieving the agreed-upon metrics, the quantitative
         measures of performance used to express progress or
         achievement against the planned goals. These metrics
         or performance targets are defined at the beginning
         (outset), and the total price including the incentives will
         be determined at the end of the work. The performance
         metrics may include cost and schedule in addition to other
         factors, such as technical performance. This contract type
         offers some flexibility in deviating from the target goals.
Cost-reimbursable Contracts. A contract in this category includes two
kinds of costs:
     1. Actual Cost. This is the payment (reimbursement) to
        the seller for the actual cost of the item or work.
     2. Fee. This typically represents the seller's profit.
234   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      This contract type is used when the work scope is expected to change. As
      discussed in the following list, there are three types of cost-reimbursable
      contracts:
             *     Cost Plus Fixed Fee (CPFF). The payment to the seller
                   includes the actual cost and a fixed fee. The fixed fee can be
                   calculated as a percentage of the initially estimated project
                   cost. In this case, the CPFF is sometimes also called a cost
                   plus percentage of cost (CPPC) contract. The fee is fixed
                   and does not vary unless the scope changes.
             *     Cost Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF). The payment to the
                   seller includes the actual cost and a predetermined incentive
                   bonus based on achieving certain objectives. If the actual
                   cost is predetermined in the contract, and the final cost
                   deviates from the estimate, the buyer and seller usually split
                   the difference based on the pre-determined formula.
             *     Cost Plus Award Fee (CPAF). In structure, this
                   sounds pretty much like CPIF. The payment to the seller
                   includes all the legitimate costs and award fee. However,
                   the award fee may be based on meeting the broadly
                   defined performance objectives. If the performance is
                   broadly defined, the determination of the award fee may
                   depend on the subjective judgment of the buyer; it is not
                   subject to appeals.

      Note Both fixed-price contracts and cost-reimbursable contracts can optionally include
      incentives--for example, a bonus from the buyer to the seller if the seller meets certain target
      schedule dates or exceeds some other predetermined expectations.


      Time and Material (T&M) Contracts. Also referred to as time and means,
      this type of contract is used in situations where both cost-reimbursement
      and fixed-price features need to be applied. In other words, this is a hybrid
      that contains some aspects from both the fixed-price category and the cost-
      reimbursable category. The contracts in this category resemble the contracts
      in the cost-reimbursable category because the total cost and the exact quantity
      of the items is not fixed at the time of the agreement. The contracts resemble
      fixed-price contracts because the unit rates can be fixed in the contract.
      These types of contracts are useful when you do not know the quantity of
      the procured items. For example, you do not know how much time a contract
      programmer will take to develop a software program, so you determine the
      hourly rate in the contract, but not the total cost for writing the program. In
      this category of contracts, the risk is high for the buyer because the buyer
      agreed to pay for all the time the seller takes to produce the deliverables.
      Table 6-11 presents a list of risk bearers for various types of contracts.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth       235




Table 6-11. List of Risk Bearers for Various Types of Contracts

Contract type                  Risk bearer             Explanation
Fixed price (FP)               Buyer and seller        The cost overrun is borne by the
                                                       seller, whereas having the price fixed
                                                       higher than the actual cost hurts the
                                                       buyer.
Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)     Buyer                   Cost overrun is paid by the buyer.
Cost plus award fee (CPAF)     Seller                  Award fee is usually the major part
                                                       of cost and is based on the subjective
                                                       determination of the seller's
                                                       performance by the buyer.
Cost plus incentive fee (CPIF) Buyer and seller        Cost overrun is shared by the buyer
                                                       and the seller
Time and material (T&M)        Buyer                   The increased cost due to the
                                                       increased quantity of resources, such
                                                       as work hours by a contractor, is
                                                       borne by the buyer.



                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.4

    Rajinder, the project manager, is now working on procurement planning for a portion
    of the project. She is looking at the following options for procuring different pieces.
    Match each consideration in the first column with the corresponding contract type in
    the second column of the following table.

    Consideration                                                  Contract type
    A.Rajinder will pay $3,000 for the use of a facility and       1.Fixed price (FP)
      $5,000 per month for the employees working on the
      procured piece for the duration of work. However, there
      is a cap of $50,000 for the maximum cost.
    B.Rajinder will pay for the labor of the cost and a lump sum 2.Time and material
      of $5,000.                                                   (T&M)
    C.Rajinder will pay $50,000 to maintain the website for the    3.Cost plus fixed
      project for two years.                                         fee (CPFF)
    D.She will provide $10,000 for developing a software           4.Cost plus
      program and an extra $1,000 if less than 10 bugs are           percentage of
      discovered in the program in the first year of its use.        cost (CPPC)
    E.She will pay the labor cost each month plus 5% of this    5.Cost plus incentive
      cost as coffee and snacks at work and for recognition and   fee (CPIF)
      rewards for the labor.
236   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Tools and Techniques for Planning Procurement
      Management
      Various tools can be used in planning procurement management, such as
      market research, make-or-buy decision analysis, and source selection analysis.
      Market Research Analysis. Market research, in this process, is a conducted
      data-gathering technique focused on the industry and seller qualifications
      regarding the items to be procured. For this analysis, the sources of information
      that can be used include relevant conferences, web reviews, and industry
      magazines. In your analysis, you must consider and balance various factors,
      including options of technology and sellers, maturity of technology, and risks
      to meet the procurement objectives.
      Make-or-Buy Decision Analysis. Obviously, procurement refers to buying
      something as compared to making it in-house; i.e., in the project. Make-or-buy
      decision analysis can be used to determine if the item should be procured or
      made in-house by the project team. The factors considered in this analysis
      include the organization's current resource allocation, the availability of
      resources with the right skills and abilities, the need for special and rare
      expertise, and risks. An example of factors is listed in Table 6-12.

      Table 6-12. Some Factors and Reasons to Make or Buy

      Factor                  Reasons to Make In-house          Reasons to Buy
      Cost                    Less cost                         Less cost
      Skills availability     Use in-house skills               In-house skills don't exist or
                                                                are not available
      Skills acquisition      Learn new skills, which will be   These skills are not
                              used even after this project      important to the organization
      Risks                   Deal with the risk in-house       Transfer the risk
      Work                    Core project work                 Not core project work
      Resource availability   Staff available                   Vendor available


      Make-or-buy decision analysis may also use techniques like cash flow, net
      present value, cost-benefit analysis, and return on investment. This analysis
      will generate a make-or-buy decision, an output item of this process.
      Source Selection Analysis. This analysis in performed by the buyer
      during procurement planning to develop source selection criteria, also called
      evaluation criteria, to rate responses from the sellers. Depending on the
      procurement needed, the evaluation criteria could be as simple as the price
      for off-the-shelf standard items, or it could be a combination of factors for
      a more complex proposal. The common methods used in this analysis are
      explained in Table 6-13.
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth          237




Table 6-13. Methods to Be Considered in Source Selection Analysis

Selection Method         Why                                Summary
Least cost               Procurement is of a routine        Items with different prices will
                         nature with a well-established     generate the same well-defined
                         standard.                          output.
Quality based            High-quality technical solution    Seller with highest-ranked
                         is main priority                   technical proposal is selected given
                                                            that the related cost is accepted
                                                            after possible negotiations.
                                                            Also called the highest technical
                                                            proposal score
Quality and cost         Cost matters in addition to        Strike the right balance between
based                    quality.                           quality and cost--e.g., for a
                                                            high-risk project, quality will have
                                                            higher priority than cost.
Qualifications only      The value of the procurement       Bidder with best relevant
                         is relatively low.                 expertise, capabilities, skills,
                                                            experience, and qualifications is
                                                            selected.
Sole source              The seller is a given.             A particular seller is asked to
                                                            submit the technical and financial
                                                            proposals, which are negotiated.
                                                            Since there is no competition,
                                                            seller must be justified.
Fixed budget             Cost constraints                   Fixed budget must be disclosed
                                                            to the sellers. Seller with highest-
                                                            ranked technical proposal within
                                                            the budget is selected.
                                                            Caution: To ensure that scope
                                                            and quality are not compromised,
                                                            SOW must be precise and must
                                                            be checked against the proposal.



Caution! Selections are made based on the needs and priorities of procurement. In a
competitive bidding scenario, all the sellers should be provided with the same required information,
such as the proposal evaluation methods to be used in selection.
238   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      As said earlier, source selection analysis in performed to develop source
      selection criteria, during which process the seller's factors could also matter,
      as follows:
            *   Business Aspects. This can include the following
                factors:
                *    Business Size and Type. Does the business size
                     or type meet a condition set forth in the contract,
                     such as being a small business or a disadvantaged
                     small business?
                *    Financial Capacity and Stability. Does the seller
                     have the financial capacity to do the job, or is the
                     seller in a position to obtain the necessary financial
                     resources to do the job?
                *    Production Capacity and Interest. Does the
                     seller have the capacity and interest to meet future
                     potential requirements?
            *   Technical Aspects. This includes the technical approach
                and capability, as follows:
                *    Technical Approach. Will the technical
                     methodologies, techniques, solutions, or services
                     proposed by the seller meet the procurement
                     requirements, or will they provide more than the
                     expected results?
                *    Technical Capability and Expertise. Does the
                     seller have or is the seller capable of acquiring the
                     technical skills and knowledge required to produce
                     the deliverables?
            *   Other. Delivery date, specific relevant expertise and
                experience, right management experience, and knowledge
                transfer and training.
      The major output of procurement planning is the procurement management
      plan.


      Output of Planning Procurement Management
      There is a host of output items generated by this process largely addressing
      the different aspects of how to perform procurement management.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      239




Make-or-Buy Decision and Source Selection Criteria
The source selection criteria, generated by source selection analysis, already
discussed, guides you on how to select sellers from whom to buy procurement
items. Also called evaluation criteria, this is basically developed by the buyer
during procurement planning to rate responses from the sellers.
Even before that, make-or-buy analysis, already discussed, will generate a make-
or-buy decision as to whether an item should be made by the project team or
be procured.
After selecting an item for procurement, you need a procurement strategy.


Procurement Strategy
The purpose of this document is tri-fold:
      1. Determine the Delivery Methods. The delivery
         methods depend on the kind of procurement--e.g., will
         subcontracting be allowed in procuring a professional
         service; or, in the case of procurement in the construction
         field, what the delivery method would be: build your own
         operate transfer (BOOT), design-build-operate (DBO),
         or turnkey.
      2. Determine How's of Phase Management. How's
         of sequencing procurement phases; performance
         indications and milestones in each phase; monitor each
         phase, evaluating and tracking progress; criterion to meet
         before procurement will go to next phase; and knowledge
         transfer.
      3. Determine the Contract Payment Types. There
         was already a discussion on contract types--e.g., lump
         sum, firm fixed price, cost plus award fees, cost plus
         incentive fees, etc.
After we have decided to procure an item or items and have some strategy in
place, we need to start looking for sellers, which requires you to put together
documents--the bidding documents.
240   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Bidding Documents
      This is the set of procurement documents put together during procurement
      planning. The buyer structures these documents with two goals in mind:
             *    To facilitate an accurate and complete response from
                  each potential seller
             *    To facilitate easy evaluation of the responses
      These documents include the following:
             *    A description of the desired form of the response
             *    A relevant contract statement of work (SOW)
             *    Any required contractual provisions, such as a copy of a
                  model contract, and non-disclosure provisions

      Tip In government contracting, some or all of the content and structure of a procurement
      document might already be defined by regulations.


      What Are These Documents Called? Different terms are used for these
      documents for different purposes:
             *    A term such as bid, tender, or quotation is used when the
                  seller-selection decision will be based on the price when
                  buying commercial or standard items.
             *    A term such as proposal is used when multiple factors
                  are considered, such as cost, technical skills, and technical
                  approach.
      What Do These Documents Include? Depending on the kind of
      procurement, these documents may include the items shown in Table 6-14.

      Table 6-14. Specifics Bidding Documents

      Document Name                    Use
      Request for information (RFI)    Get more information from sellers on the procurement
                                       items.
      Request for quotation (RFQ)      Get more information on how the sellers would meet
                                       the procurement item requirements; e.g., price.
      Request for proposal (RFP)       Get more information on how the sellers would solve a
                                       given problem.
      Statement of work (SOW)          Can involve parts of the above documents
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth        241




Note These bidding documents travel from buyer to seller, whereas the responses to these,
such as bids, quotations, and proposals, travel from seller to buyer.


What Is Statement of Work (SOW) Listed in Table 6-14?
Statement of Work (SOW) and Term of Reference (TOR). The
purpose of the SOW is to provide enough information about the procurement
item to enable the seller to provide back the completed item. The SOW
might change in the back-and-forth between the buyers and the sellers until
it goes into the contract. It's developed from the portion of the project scope
belonging to the procurement item. It describes the item in sufficient detail
that the seller will be able to figure out what exactly is wanted. The definition
of sufficient detail depends upon the specific item, buyer's need, and the contract
form. In general, it can include the following:
       *    Specifications
       *    Quality level
       *    Quantity, if applicable
       *    Performance data
       *    Performance period
       *    Work location, if applicable
It should be specific and precise as opposed to vague, and concise yet complete.
The term Term of Reference (TOR) is used instead of SOW when the
procurement item is a service.


Independent Cost Estimates
During the conduct procurement process, sellers will respond to bidding
documents with a proposal. How will we know that the price in the proposal
is reasonable? The answer is: independent cost estimates. Depending on the
size and need of the project, an independent cost estimate can be performed
for procurement items. The procuring organization prepares the independent
estimate in-house or has it done by a third party. Then they can use it as a
benchmark to evaluate the proposed cost.
How overall procurement works and would be coordinated and integrated
with project work and related issues is discussed in the procurement plan.
242   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Procurement Management Plan
      This document describes the activities for how procurement will be managed
      throughout the project. Depending on the project need, it can be brief or
      detailed, and informal or formal. The plan may include the following:
              *    How the make-or-buy decisions will be made and handled
              *    Contracts:
                   *    What types of contracts will be used for this project
                   *    The form and format for the statement of work
                        related to a procurement or a contract
                   *    Metrics to be used to evaluate potential sellers and
                        to manage contracts
                   *    Requirements for performance bonds or insurance
                        contracts that might be put in place to mitigate
                        some project risks
              *    Management and Coordination:
                   *    Timetable of procurement activities
                   *    How to manage multiple sellers
                   *    How to coordinate procurement with other aspects
                        of the project, such as the project schedule, scope,
                        budget, and status progress reporting
                   *    Evaluation criteria for selecting sellers and
                        measuring their performance; e.g., source selection
                        criteria
                   *    How to handle legal and currency issues
                   *    Making use of pre-qualified sellers
              *    A list of assumptions and constraints that could affect the
                   procurement
              *    Any needed standardized procurement document

      Caution! The procurement management plan should describe whether to conduct local,
      national, or international competitive bidding. If the project is financed externally, make sure the
      three elements are properly aligned: funding, project schedule, and procurement management plan.


      The decision to procure and other decisions that would follow may generate
      change requests, which would cause the need to update some documents,
      such as those listed in the output column of Table 6-10.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   243



In a nutshell, the major tasks of procurement planning are to perform the
make-or-buy analysis to make buy-or-make decisions; if a procurement decision
is made, determine a procurement strategy; perform source selection analysis to
determine the source selection criteria; prepare bidding documents, including
statement of work (SOW), for getting bids and proposals from the sellers, which
would then be evaluated while conducting procurement using the source
selection criteria; and to determine other "how to's" about overall coordination
and integration of procurement work with the project and related issues,
develop a procurement plan.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.5

   In the following table, match each item in first column to one or more items in the
   second column.

   Document                           Include or discuss
   1.Procurement management plan        1.Request for information (RFI)
   2.Procurement strategy               2.Delivery methods
   3.Statement of work (SOW)            3.Request for quotation (RFQ)
   4.Bid documents                      4.Integrating procurement with project work
                                        5.Performance data
                                        6.Request for proposal (RFP)
                                        7.Stakeholders' procurement responsibilities
                                        8.Procurement phase management
                                        9.Key procurement activities
                                      10.Contract payment types
                                      11.Performance period
                                      12.Work location


With procurement planned out, you are ready to actually conduct the
procurements.
The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      *    Project resources refers to both physical and human or
           team resources.
      *    Estimating activity resources and estimating cost are
           inherently related, yet they belong to different knowledge
           management areas.
      *    The project budget            also    supports      the     project
           procurements.
244   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Summary
      To execute the project, you need to put together a project team that will
      perform the project work, and you and your team will need physical resources
      do the project work.To accomplish these tasks, you use the processes of project
      resource management. First, you develop the resource management plan,
      which contains the roles to perform the project, the responsibilities assigned
      to the roles, and a guide on how to perform other processes in resource
      management. To start with, you estimate the team and physical resources for
      each project activity defined by using the Estimate Activity Resources process.
      For team and physical resources, you need financial resources.To that end, you
      develop the cost management plan, and according to this plan you perform
      two processes: Estimate Cost, to estimate costs for all the project activities
      to be scheduled; and Determine Budget, to aggregate the cost estimates for
      all project activities and assign a timeline to it.This budget will also include the
      project procurements.
      Road Ahead. So far in this book, you have come across project assumptions
      and estimates; e.g., cost and resource estimates. Uncertainties arising from
      sources such as assumptions and estimates may lead to project risks. You
      have also come across the concepts of requirements for the completeness
      of the project, which are connected with the concept of quality. Project risks
      and quality need to be managed. To that end, we will discuss planning risk and
      quality in the next chapter.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend

      *Human or team resource planning is used to determine the roles that will perform the
       schedule activities and to develop the staff management plan to fill the roles with the
       team members.
      *The project charter, project schedule management plan, and project risk management plan
       are used to develop the project cost management plan.
      *The scope baseline, schedule baseline, and resource requirements are the main input to
       making cost estimates for activities, which are aggregated to determine the project budget.
      *The accuracy of cost estimates depends on the accuracy of other estimates, such as
       activity duration estimates and activity resource requirements estimates.
      *The project budget includes the aggregated cost with timeline, contingency reserve, and
       management reserve; this composition also makes budgeting requirements.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth    245




Look Out

*Planning resource management includes both human and physical resources.
*Information about responsibility assignments among human resources will be scattered
 across different parts of the project management plan, including the quality, risk, and
 communication plans.
*Planning resource management does not assign the resources; assignments happen in the
 Acquire Resources process.
*The probability of influencing the project cost is at a maximum early in the project.
* The approved budget minus the management reserve is equal to what is called the cost
  baseline. You can add the amount of management reserve to the cost baseline after it has
  been used.
*Bidding consists of request for information (RFI), request for quotation (RFQ), and
 request for proposal (RFP). These may include SOW.

Memorize

*A responsibility assignment matrix (RAM), is a matrix used to specify the relationships
 between schedule activities, roles to perform those activities, and team members assigned
 to the roles.
*Resource breakdown structure is an output of the Estimate Activity Resources process.
*Project budget is the time-phased project cost obtained by aggregating the individual
 activity costs.
*Contingency reserves are the funds that can be used to deal with the unplanned events
 that can potentially transpire--e.g., in case one or more identified risks occur--whereas
 management reserves are the funds that can be used in case of unplanned but future
 changes that are within the project scope but were missed during planning.
*Three-point estimation and analogous estimation usually are less time consuming but also
 less accurate than parametric estimation and bottom-up estimation.
*In every stage or funding period:
  *Cost baseline = anticipated expenditure + anticipated liabilities
  *Funding requirements = cost baseline + management reserves
246   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


      Review Questions
           1. Management has asked you to produce a chart that
              depicts the resource needs for all the activities in the
              project. Which of the following charts is management
              referring to?
               A. The project organizational chart
               B. WBS
               C. The roles and responsibilities chart
               D. The responsibility assignment matrix
           2. Which of the following is not an output of the Plan
              Resource Management process?
               A. Project organizational chart
               B. Roles and responsibilities
               C. Resource requirements
               D. Team charter
           3. Which of the following is a true statement about the
              team charter?
               A. It is an output of the Develop Team process.
               B. It is an output of the team management process.
               C. It is an output of the resource planning process.
               D. It is an input of the resource planning process.
           4. Your project is in the planning stage. You first want to
              make the cost estimates for the planned project activities,
              and then you want to aggregate those costs. Which
              process will you perform first?
               A. Determine Budget
               B. Plan Resource Management
               C. Estimate Costs
               D. Plan Cost Management
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   247



5. Which of the following processes will you perform first?
    A. Estimate Activity Resources
    B. Determine Budget
    C. Estimate Costs
    D. Develop Schedule
6. Your supervisor has asked you to put a contingency
   reserve into your project plans. Which of the following is
   not true about contingency reserves?
    A. These are the funds and not the time.
    B. These are included in the cost baseline.
    C. These are included in the budget.
    D. These are included in the project funding requirements.
7. You are in the process of developing the cost baseline for
   your project. What is the name of this process?
    A. Determine Budget
    B. Develop Cost Baseline
    C. Estimate Costs
    D. Control Cost
8. The cost of a project activity is estimated to be $500 with
   10% accuracy. What is the estimated range of the cost?
    A. $450-$550
    B. $490-$510
    C. $475-$525
    D. $500-$550
9. Which of the following is not listed as an input item in
   PMBOK to developing the cost management plan?
    A. Project charter
    B. Schedule management plan
    C. Risk management plan
    D. Quality management plan
248   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


          10. You are a project manager at a company that is a seller
              for another company. You are coordinating efforts to bid
              on a contract with the other company to sell the product
              of your company. Which of the following contract types
              carries the most risk for your company?
               A. CPIF
               B. T&M
               C. CPFF
               D. FFP
          11. Ron Collins is the project manager for a biotechnology
              company. He is outsourcing a part of the project to a
              foreign company. The foreign company will charge Ron
              $10 per hour for each employee that will be involved
              in the outsourced part of the project. Ron will also be
              charged an extra amount of $100 per month for other
              charges, such as using the facilities for the duration of the
              project. What type of contract is it?
               A. T&M
               B. FP
               C. CPPC
               D. CPIF
          12. Which of the following is not true about planning
              procurements?
               A. Scope baseline is an input to planning procurements.
               B. SOW is an input to planning procurements.
               C. Make-or-buy decisions are an output of planning
                  procurements.
               D. The project charter is an output of planning
                  procurements.
          13. In procurement, which of the following contract types
              presents the highest risk for the buyer?
               A. Firm fixed-price
               B. Cost plus fixed fee
               C. Cost plus percentage of cost
               D. Cost plus incentive fee
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   249



14. You are managing a software project. The project is
    already in the execution stage when you discover that
    a whole software module is missing from the work
    breakdown structure (WBS). Your company does not
    have the programmers to write the module in a timely
    fashion, so you decide to procure this piece of work. The
    module will have a number of small programs working
    together, and it will take almost the same effort to write
    any of these programs. The software experts have given
    you an estimate of how much that effort will be. However,
    it is not clear at this stage how many programs will be
    needed. Which type of contract will you choose in this
    situation?
     A. Time and material
     B. Cost plus fixed fee
     C. Cost plus percentage of cost
     D. Firm fixed-price
15. Your company is outsourcing a part of your project and
    therefore is preparing the procurement documents.
    Which of the following is not a bidding document?
     A. Request for information (RFI)
     B. Request for quotation (RFQ)
     C. Request for proposal (RFP)
     D. Seller proposal
16. Your organization is playing the seller role in doing a part
    of a project for another company, the buyer. The buyer
    has incomplete specifications for the work involved at
    this stage and wants you to start the work after signing
    the agreement. Which of the following contract types will
    be the most beneficial for your organization?
     A. Fixed-price
     B. Time and material
     C. Cost plus percentage of cost
     D. Cost plus time
250   Chapter 6 | Planning for Project Resources, Cost, and Procurement


          17. The analysis to make a buy-or-make decision is performed
              during which of the following procurement process?
               A. Conduct Procurements
               B. Administer Procurements
               C. Plan Procurements
               D. Control Procurements
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                             7

Planning
Quality and Risk
Management
PMP Exam Objectives            What It Really Means
2.8 Develop the quality        Develop the quality management plan and define the
management plan                quality standards for the project and its products based
                               on the project scope, risks, and requirements in order to
                               prevent the occurrence of defects and control the cost of
                               quality.
                               Understand that the Plan Quality Management process
                               generates two main output documents: the quality
                               management plan and quality metrics. Know how the
                               risk management plan is input to this process and can be
                               modified during the process, and details like that.

                                                                              (continued)




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_7
252   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      PMP Exam Objectives             What It Really Means
      2.10 Plan for risk management   Plan for risk management by developing a risk management
                                      plan; identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing project risk;
                                      creating the risk register; and defining risk response
                                      strategies in order to manage uncertainty and opportunity
                                      throughout the project lifecycle. That covers all the risk
                                      processes discussed in this chapter.
                                      It's enough to just remember the names of the input, tools
                                      and techniques, and output. You should know what is in
                                      a given input item that the given process uses and how it
                                      helps in generating the output, as well as what a given tool
                                      or technique does in a given process.
                                      You should understand very well how to apply risk tools
                                      and methods, such as probability and impact matrices, risk
                                      breakdown structure (RBS), SWOT analysis, root-cause
                                      analysis, decision-tree analysis, and EMV analysis. Know
                                      how to perform simple risk calculations.

      Quality and risk are interrelated aspects of any project and need to be man-
      aged. While quality refers to the degree to which a set of completed charac-
      teristics of project deliverables and objectives fulfills the project and product
      requirements, risk refers to an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs,
      has a positive or negative effect on meeting the project objectives. Project
      work is incomplete without implementing quality, and an incomplete project
      is obviously a failed project. It is about delivering the complete and correct
      product in the right way. The "right way" refers to the project quality; e.g.,
      according to planned schedule and cost. In other words, the core objective
      of quality management is to ensure that the project will satisfy the needs and
      requirements for which it was undertaken. Accordingly, quality management
      consists of three core elements: planning quality management, managing the
      quality, and controlling the quality. Quality management includes managing the
      quality of both the project and its product. Whereas the techniques of prod-
      uct quality management, such as measuring the quality, may depend on the
      type of product, the techniques for project quality management are indepen-
      dent of the type of product. Quality is affected by uncertainties.
      Uncertainties are all around us and in our projects. After the project starts
      executing, you will not have enough time to plan a response to a risk if it
      occurs, so you need to plan the risk responses before the project starts exe-
      cuting. To do that, you need to identify the risks and analyze them. Not all
      risks are equal. You prioritize the risks based on the analysis, plan responses
      accordingly, and implement the risk response plan. Also, you need to monitor
      the risks and their overall management. In this chapter, besides presenting the
      big picture of quality and risk, we will discuss the planning processes of both
      quality and risk management.
                                                                   PMP(R) in Depth   253



The core question in this chapter is: How do you plan for quality and risk man-
agement? In search of an answer, we will explore three avenues: planning qual-
ity, identifying and prioritizing by analyzing risks, and planning risk responses.

Managing Quality: Big Picture
The knowledge area covering quality has three processes as explained in the
following list:
       *       Plan Quality Management. This process is used to
               identify which quality requirements and standards are rel-
               evant to the project at hand and how to determine that
               the project and its deliverables meet these requirements
               and conform to the standards.
               Key: Identify (quality requirements)
       *       Manage Quality. This process develops tests, evalua-
               tion procedures, and other activities based on the qual-
               ity management plan and quality control measurements
               taken in the Control Quality process.
               Key: Develop tests and evaluations
       *       Control Quality. This process executes the activities
               developed in the Manage Quality process to verify that
               the project and its deliverables meet the quality require-
               ments and conform to the quality standards.
               Key:Verify by executing the activities
Table 7-1 presents the list of processes of quality management along with the
major output of each process and the process group to which it belongs.

Table 7-1. Processes of Quality Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Quality Management Process Group         Major Output              Performed
Process
Plan Quality            Planning         Quality management plan   Once or at pre-
Management                               Quality metrics           defined points

Manage Quality          Executing        Quality reports           Throughout the
                                         Test and evaluation       project
                                         documents
                                         Change requests
Control Quality         Monitoring and   Quality control           Throughout the
                        Controlling      measurements              project
                                         Verified deliverables
                                         Change requests
254   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management



      Caution! In addition to the three quality management processes shown in Table 7-1, the
      performing organization might have its own quality policies and procedures, which will need to be
      and are incorporated into quality management by the Manage Quality process.


      The big picture of quality management is presented in Figure 7-1, where two
      processes named in oval-shaped boxes do not belong to quality management
      but, as shown, interact with it in an important way.



                                             WY
                                             D


                   Y     Y
                   Y   Y 
                       
                     YZZ
                  D      ZZ
                       Y                                                    Y
                                            dZ
                                             Z
                                                                                    
                                            
                                                                  tZ
                                            
                                                                  Z
                                                                  
                  WZ                                                     
                 /                                                       D
                                                  Z
                 ZZ                                                     WZtZ
                                                  

      Figure 7-1. Processes of quality management in a big picture



      Two outputs, quality reports and verified deliverables, of quality management are used by processes
      in other knowledge areas.


      Before talking about quality planning, let's take a look at a few quality concepts.
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth       255




Some Concepts in Quality
In this section, we will discuss some general concepts in quality. While deal-
ing with quality, you should be able to distinguish between the terms in the
following pairs:
       *    Grade and Quality. Grade is a category assigned to
            products with the same overall functional use but that dif-
            fer in their technical characteristics and features, whereas
            quality is the degree to which the inherent characteristics
            of a product meet the requirements. Number of defects
            is an example of poor quality, whereas a limited number
            of features is an example of low grade.
       *    Precision and Accuracy. Precision is the spread of dif-
            ferent measurements of the same quantity, constant, or
            variable, such as gravity or cost. The smaller the spread
            of measured values is, the better the precision. Accuracy
            is a measure of how close the measured values are to the
            true value of the quantity. The closer the measured value
            is to the actual (or true) value, the better the accuracy of
            measurements.
       *    Prevention and Inspection. Prevention is a direction
            to perform an activity that will keep an error from enter-
            ing the product and the process. Inspection is a technique
            to examine whether an activity, component, product,
            result, or service complies with the planned require-
            ments. So, the goal of inspection is to ensure that errors
            do not reach the customer.


Note Although quality treatment in PMBOK does not talk about precision and accuracy that
much, we have discussed these concept here due to its importance for project managers.


Project management and quality management have come a long way as sepa-
rate disciplines of knowledge and practice. It should not come as a surprise
that quality management is one of the ten knowledge areas in standard project
256   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      management. In a complementary way, both modern quality management and
      project management recognize the importance of the following critical issues:
                Continuous Improvement. Continuous improve-
                ment means to keep improving the quality through
                a process of planning for quality, implementing qual-
                ity, auditing quality, and re-planning based on lessons
                learned or auditing. So, really, quality improvement is
                an endless cycle, called the plan-do-check-act cycle,
                as defined by Shewhart and modified by Deming.
                Performing organizations can also use techniques
                such as Six Sigma TQM to improve the quality.
                Customer Satisfaction. Customer satisfaction
                can be a very vague notion that could mean differ-
                ent things to different parties. However, in project
                management and quality management, customer sat-
                isfaction means that planned customer requirements
                are met. To achieve customer satisfaction in the real
                world, you need to understand, define, and evaluate
                the customer's expectations and also manage those
                expectations, in addition to meeting the planned
                requirements. Otherwise, you might meet the planned
                requirements, and the customer might still be dissatis-
                fied. Bypassing the proper quality procedure will cost
                customer satisfaction and lead to more being spent
                on rework.
                Management Responsibility. This refers to the
                responsibility of the management to provide the
                resources needed for the project team to succeed.
                Although all team members should be responsible for
                the success of their parts of the project, they cannot
                succeed without management responsibility.
                Prevention over Inspection. One of the funda-
                mental tenets of modern quality management is plan,
                design, and build in quality as opposed to inspect in.
                The cost of preventing mistakes is much less than fin-
                ding them through inspections and then fixing them.
                Therefore, cost of quality (COQ) is less via preven-
                tion than through inspection. The COQ is defined as
                the total cost of quality-related efforts throughout the
                product lifecycle.
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth     257




                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.1

   You are trying out a Monte Carlo simulation program that estimates the value of a
   parameter by using some random variables. You know through the data that the exact
   value should be 40. You ran the program three times, and it gave you three values: 50,
   51, and 52. Based on these values, answer the following questions:
   Q1. How precise is the program in making the estimates?
   Q2. How accurate are the estimates?
   Q3. Are the values generated by the program more accurate or more precise?


The process for managing quality is part of executing the project, quality con-
trol is part of monitoring and controlling the project, and quality planning is
performed during the project planning stage and is discussed next.


Planning Quality
Plan Quality Management is the process used to accomplish the following:
      *    Identify quality requirements and standards for the proj-
           ect and its deliverables.
      *    Determine how to test and verify that the quality require-
           ments have been implemented and that the standards
           have been conformed to.
Table 7-2 presents the Plan Quality Management process in terms of input,
tools and techniques, and output.
258   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      Table 7-2. The Plan Quality Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                        Tools and Techniques          Output
      1.Project charter            1.Data gathering:             1.Quality management plan
      2.Project management plan:      *Benchmarking              2.Quality metrics
        *Scope baseline: scope        *Brainstorming             3.Project management plan:
         statement, WBS, WBS          *Interviews                   *Scope baseline
         dictionary
                                   2. Data analysis:                *Risk management plan
        *Stakeholder
                                      *Cost-benefit analysis     4. Project document updates:
         management plan
                                      *Cost of quality              *Requirements
        *Requirement plan
                                   3. Decision making:               traceability matrix
        *Risk management plan
                                      *Multicriteria decision       *Stakeholder register
      3.Project documents:
                                       analysis                     *Risk register
        *Requirement
                                   4. Data presentation:            *Lessons learned register
         documentation
                                      *Flow charts
        *Requirements
         traceability matrix          *Matrix diagrams
        *Assumptions log              *Logical data model
        *Risk register                *Mind mapping
        *Stakeholder register      5.Test and inspection
                                     planning
      4.Enterprise environmental
        factors                    6.Expert judgment
      5.Organizational project     7.Meetings
        assets



      Core of Planning Quality Management
      As discussed earlier, planning quality management consists of identifying
      quality requirements and standards for the project and its deliverables and
      determining how to test and verify that those quality requirements have been
      implemented. To make sense of the following material, you should know the
      story of how quality management involves the project and its stakeholders.
      The stakeholders have some project and product needs and requirements,
      including quality requirements, the fulfillment of which is affected by qual-
      ity-related assumptions and constraints. In light of this, performing the Plan
      Quality Management process may be explained in the following steps in terms
      of the items from Table 7-2:
                                                           PMP(R) in Depth   259



1. Get Background and Reference "How to"
   Information. From the requirement management plan,
   extract the information on how the requirements were
   identified, analyzed, and managed. As stakeholders' needs
   and expectations are crucial to managing quality, get the
   information from the stakeholder engagement plan on
   what methods were used to document the stakeholders'
   needs and expectations. As risk and quality are closely
   related, get information from the risk management plan on
   how risks were identified, analyzed, and monitored.
2. Determine Quality Standards. Quality standards and
   quality objectives can, at least partially, be determined by
   using the WBS and the deliverable section of the proj-
   ect scope statement, which are parts of the project scope
   baseline. The acceptance criteria for deliverables is the scope
   baseline, and measurable project objects linked to project
   success criteria in the project charter will also help with this
   determination as well as influence the quality management.
3. Get Information about Deliverables and Quality
   Requirements. Fetch the quality requirements for the
   project and its product from the requirement documenta-
   tion. Then, link the product requirements to deliverables
   using the requirements traceability matrix. This helps make
   sure that each requirement is tested through the Manage
   Quality process. The requirements will be compared with
   the actual project results in the Control Quality process.
4. Get Quality Assumption and Risk Information.
   Extract quality-related assumptions and constraints from
   the assumptions log; get the risks and opportunities that
   can influence or impact quality from the risk register. These
   assumptions and risks are used to determine how to per-
   form the Manage Quality and Control Quality processes.
5. Get Stakeholder Information. Use the stakeholder
   register to identify the stakeholders with a specific inter-
   est in a specific quality item. This will help with prioriti-
   zation; e.g., quality interests, customers, and the project
   sponsor will be high in the priority list. This information
   will also help to determine how to perform the Manage
   Quality and Control Quality processes.
6. Use the tools and techniques listed in Table 7-2 to con-
   vert the information from steps 1 through 5 into quality
   metrics and a quality management plan.
260   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      If the performing organization lacks a quality policy, the project team will need
      to develop a quality policy for the project. Once a quality policy is in place, it
      is your responsibility to ensure that the project stakeholders are aware of it
      and are on the same page.
      Some of these tools are explained in the next section.


      Tools and Techniques Used for Quality Planning
      The tools and techniques used for quality planning include benchmarking,
      cost-benefit analysis, experiment design, brainstorming, and more.


      Data-Gathering Techniques.
      The following data-gathering techniques can be used to gather data in order
      to identify quality requirements and standards and for other matters regard-
      ing planning quality management.
      Benchmarking. Benchmarking is comparing the practices, products, or ser-
      vices of a project with those of some reference projects for the purpose of
      learning, improving, and creating the basis for measuring performance. These
      reference projects might be previous projects performed either inside or out-
      side of the performing organization. Improvement and performance are of
      course quality-related factors, in this case. For example, you might have per-
      formed a similar project in the past that accepted no more than two defects
      in each feature. You might use that as a quality criterion--a benchmark--for
      your current project. The benchmarked project could be in the same or a dif-
      ferent industry as your project is in, in the same or a different application area,
      and inside or outside the performing organization.
      Brainstorming and Interviews. Brainstorming and interviews, covered in
      Chapters 3 and 4, can also be used for data gathering in this process. For
      example, brainstorming sessions in a group environment can be held with
      team members and quality experts while developing the quality management
      plan. Similarly, interviews can be conducted with appropriate stakeholders
      to collect information regarding planning quality matters, such as project and
      product quality needs.


      Data Analysis
      To select the best of the alternatives available when implementing quality, the
      following data-analysis techniques can be used.
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth       261



Cost of Quality. Cost of quality is the total quality-related cost during the
lifecycle of the project and its product. That includes the costs incurred
in implementing conformance to the requirements as well as the cost of
nonconformance.
The cost of conformance consists of prevention costs and appraisal costs.
Prevention costs include the costs of implementing quality, such as for appro-
priate equipment, documenting and performing processes, time and effort
needed to perform the project work the right way, and any necessary train-
ing of the team members. The appraisal costs include the cost of inspecting,
testing, and loss due to destructive testing. Destructive testing refers to tests in
which the product under test is destroyed or harmed by design.
Cost of nonconformance refers to the cost of failure--both the internal fail-
ure and external failures. Internal failures, or failures found during the project,
include rework and waste; e.g., product is rejected internally because it did
not meet the quality standards, so it's now scrap. External failures, or failures
found by the customers, include warranty work and more-fatal consequences,
including liabilities and loss of business.
Cost-Benefit Analysis and Decision-making Techniques. During qual-
ity planning, you must consider the tradeoff between the cost and the benefit
of implementing quality, then strike the appropriate balance for a given project.
Cost-benefit analysis is performed to choose the best of several alternatives
available in implementing quality. The chosen alternative will have minimum
work and cost, and maximum productivity and rise in stakeholder satisfaction
and expected benefit.
The decision-making technique of multicriteria decision analysis can be com-
bined with cost-benefit analysis to help select the best of the alternatives avail-
able in implementing quality. This decision-making technique can be used for
decision making in other quality planning matters, such as prioritizing quality
metrics.


Data Presentation
Data presentations are used for various purposes: 1) examine data integrity;
2) find the key quality metrics and quality requirements; 3) understand and
estimate the cost of quality for a process; 4) improve the process; and 5) iden-
tify points where quality defects may occur.
Some of these ideas are discussed next.
Matrix Diagrams. This method is used to explore the strength of the rela-
tionships between different entities, such as objectives and causes, by display-
ing these entities in a matrix, with the cells of the matrix representing the
262   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      relationships. These relationships are explored to find the key quality metrics
      important for project success.
      Logical Data Model. In this technique, the relevant data from the organiza-
      tion is visually presented in business lingo and does not depend on any specific
      technology. This is visual display of how quality-related logical loopholes such
      as data integrity are discovered.
      Mind Mapping. This is a diagram technique, explained in Chapter 4, in which
      ideas from information collected through various means and methods are
      mapped around a central or key concept to expose commonalities and dif-
      ferences among them. In quality planning, each key concept would be a single
      quality concept linked to various ideas around it. This technique may help
      with figuring out quality requirements, constraints, and relationships, such as
      dependencies.
      Test and Inspection Planning. When, during the planning stage of your
      project, you are planning the tests and inspections of the project outcome to
      see if it meets the stakeholders' needs and expectations, as well as the project
      and outcome goals, ensure that these tests and inspections cover the qual-
      ity aspect as well. These quality-related tests and inspections would depend
      on which industry the project belonged to; e.g., field test in some sciences,
      inspection in manufacturing, strength test in construction and manufacturing,
      and alpha beta tests in software engineering.
      Flowcharts. Also called process maps, flowcharts visually display the
      sequence of steps of a value chain, including the process converting input into
      output. As in a value chain, flowcharts, in general, may include activities, deci-
      sion points, branching possibilities, and parallel paths. As a simple example of
      a flowchart, Figure 7-2 presents a version of a value chain called SIPOC, which
      stands for supplier, input, process, output, and customer. How do you obtain
      information from these flowcharts? The answer: 1) figure out the frequencies
      associated with the workflow branches, e.g., probability of cost of quality con-
      formance being $10,000, and probability of cost of quality non-conformance
      being $15,000; and 2) use these frequencies to estimate the monetary value
      of quality conformance, as well as the cost if rework is needed in case of
      nonconformance.

                             /                              K
         ^               &ZZ                WZ           &ZZ              Z
                        Z                              Z

      Figure 7-2. The SIPOC value chain flowchart
                                                                               PMP(R) in Depth          263



These flowcharts have multiple uses, including 1) understanding and estimating
the cost of quality for a process; 2) improving the process; and 3) identifying
points where quality defects may occur.
Of course, you will be holding meetings to collect information and develop
the quality management plan.


Caution! Part of the cost of quality is the failure cost, which is the cost of the rework needed
because of the failure to meet the requirements during product development. Failure cost, also
called cost of poor quality, is grouped into two categories: external failure cost, which is the cost
of fixing problems found by the customer, and internal failure cost, which is the cost of fixing
problems found within the project. Failures that occur at the hands of the customers can also result
in fatal consequences, including law suits and loss of business.


You usually use more than one of these techniques to generate the output of
quality planning.


Output of Quality Planning
Major outputs of the quality planning process are the quality management plan
and quality metrics.
Quality Management Plan. The quality management plan contains the fol-
lowing information:
        *    What are the quality-related roles and responsibilities
             assigned to each role?
        *    What are the project and deliverable quality require-
             ments and standards for this project?
        *    Describes what and how the quality-related policy, pro-
             cedure, and guidelines will be applied in order to achieve
             the project quality objectives; e.g., procedures to deal
             with continuous improvement, nonconformance, and
             corrective action.
        *    What resources will you or project management need
             in order to meet the project quality objectives; e.g., the
             quality tools to be used.
        *    What are the quality objectives for this project?
264   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


             *    Describes activities of the quality management and qual-
                  ity control processes for this project.
             *    Which deliverables and processes will go under quality
                  review?
      This plan becomes a component of the overall project management plan.


      Tip Whether the quality management plan is informal and high-level or formal and detailed
      depends upon the size, complexity, needs, and requirements of the project.


      Quality Metrics. A metric in quality metrics is a product attribute accom-
      panied by the information on how the quality control process will verify its
      quality conformance. For example, it is not specific enough to say that the
      defects in the product will be minimized. Rather, specifying something, such
      as that no feature will have more than two defects, is a measurable criterion
      and hence a metric. Some examples of quality metrics are cost performance
      in CPI; schedule performance--e.g., percentage of task completed in time;
      defect frequency--e.g., number of defects experienced per day; failure rate;
      and downtime per week. The metrics that you set during quality planning will
      be used in quality management and quality control.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.2

         Knowing the Plan Quality Management process, answer the following:
         Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
         Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
         Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of Table 7-2 will be
             updated.


      Note that quality planning might influence other planning processes. For
      example, implementing the identified quality standards will impact the cost
      and the schedule directly or indirectly. Furthermore, the implementation of
      a quality characteristic might require a risk analysis of the problem that the
      quality characteristic addresses. This is reflected in the fact that the risk man-
      agement plan is an input to the quality management plan, which also shows
      that in-synch development and implementation of the quality management
      plan and the risk management plan is crucial for project success by delivering
      the right and complete product.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      265




Managing Risks: The Big Picture
To most of us, risk means danger--if it happens, it will result in negative, unde-
sired consequences. However, in project management, risk is an uncertain
event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a negative impact on
meeting the project objectives related to components such as schedule (time),
cost, scope, or quality. Negative impact poses a threat, and positive impact
offers opportunity. For example, one of the obvious schedule objectives for a
project is to complete the project by the scheduled deadline. If a risk related
to the schedule occurs, it can delay the completion of the project, or it can
make it possible to finish the project earlier. So, the two characteristics of a
risk in project management are the following:
       *   It stems from the elements of uncertainty.
       *   It might have negative or positive effects on meeting the
           project objectives.
Risk management includes planning risk management, identifying and analyz-
ing the risks, planning and preparing risk responses, implementing the risk
response if the risk occurs, and monitoring the risks. Figure 7-3 shows the
corresponding processes used to accomplish these tasks, which are also
explained in the subsequent list.




                              DZZZ


                    Z                           h
                                                 Z

                                                Z              /
                               WZ                
                                                                Z
                              D
                                                               ZZ
           Z                                      Z                  h
                                                                     
                                 Z                                   Z
                                  
                         WZ                  WZ
    /                                                           WZ
                        Y                   Y
     Z                                                         ZZ
                       Z                    Z

              Z                    h                 h
               Z                    Z                 Z


Figure 7-3. Processes used in risk management
266   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


              *    Plan Risk Management. A process to determine
                   the hows of risk management, such as how to conduct
                   risk management for the project at hand; e.g., what will
                   the risk management activities be and how will they be
                   performed.
              *    Identify Risks. A process to identify and document
                   the risks that might occur for the given project, and also
                   sources of overall project risk.
              *    Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. A process used
                   for estimating the overall probability that risks will occur,
                   as well as their impact, and prioritizing them accordingly
                   for further analysis.
              *    Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. A process used
                   to analyze numerically the effect of identified risks on
                   meeting the project objectives.
              *    Plan Risk Responses. A process used to prepare a risk
                   response plan in order to increase the positive impact
                   and decrease the negative impact of risks on the project.
              *    Implement Responses. The process Implement
                   Responses makes sure that all the planned risk responses
                   are executed as planned.
              *    Monitor Risks. This process is used for tracking identi-
                   fied risks, identifying new risks, and executing and evaluat-
                   ing the effectiveness of the risk management processes.

      Tip The data flow between the different processes shown in Figure 7-3 is true in general.
      However, note that depending upon the project and the experience of the risk management team,
      shortcuts can be taken. For example, you can go directly from risk identification to quantitative
      risk analysis, or even to risk response planning; or you need only qualitative risk analysis and not
      quantitative risk analysis.
                                                                    PMP(R) in Depth     267



These processes are listed in Table 7-3 with the major output from each process.

Table 7-3. Processes of Risk Management Mapped to the Process Groups

Risk Management Process Process Group Major Output                 Performed
Plan Risk Management        Planning         Risk management       Once or at
                                             plan                  pre-defined points
Identify Risks              Planning         Risk register         Throughout the
                                             Risk report           project

Perform Qualitative Risk    Planning         Risk register and     Throughout the
Analysis                                     risk report updates   project
Perform Quantitative Risk   Planning         Risk register and     Throughout the
Analysis                                     risk report updates   project
Plan Risk Responses         Planning         Risk register and     Throughout the
                                             risk report updates   project
Implement Risk Responses    Executing        Risk register and     Throughout the
                                             risk report updates   project
Monitor Risks               Monitoring and   Work performance      Throughout the
                            Controlling      information           project
                                             Risk register and
                                             risk report updates


The Implement Risk Responses and Monitor Risks processes are part of the
executing process group and the monitor and control process group, respec-
tively, whereas all other risk management processes belong to the planning
process group. It's evident that planning risk management demands a consider-
able effort.


Planning Risk Management
Risk management planning is the process used to determine how the risk
management activities for the project at hand will be performed. The major
goals for planning the risk management are threefold: Ensure that the type,
level, and visibility of risk management fit with the actual risk involved in the
project and the importance of the project to the organization; secure suf-
ficient resources, including time for risk management activities; and set up an
agreed-upon basis for evaluating risks. In a nutshell, you use the risk manage-
ment planning process to determine the following:
        *    The risk management activities for this project
        *    How to execute the risk management activities
268   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      Table 7-4 presents the Plan Risk Management process in terms of input, tools
      and techniques, and output.

      Table 7-4. The Plan Risk Management Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                 Tools and Techniques     Output
      1. Project charter                    1. Data analysis:        1. Risk management plan
      2. Project management plan:             Stakeholder analysis
        * Core and all subsidiary plans     2. Expert judgment
      3. Project documents:                 3. Meetings
        * Stakeholder register
      4. Enterprise environmental factors
      5. Organizational project assets




      Developing the Risk Management Plan
      You perform risk management planning to develop a document called the
      risk management plan. Take a closer look at the input column of Table 7-4,
      but ignore item 2. We have the project charter, used to start the project; the
      stakeholder register, which contains information about project stakeholders;
      and the project environment in terms of the enterprise environmental factors
      and organizational project assets. In other words, we have a project, with its
      environment and stakeholders, that has just started. Now, add item 2; i.e., all
      the plans from the start to the completion of the project. That is what it takes
      to manage risks, the whole project; risks could be anywhere, and you should
      look for them in all aspects of the project.
      As risk management should initially be planned very early in the project, we
      need the project charter, which contains a description of the project and its
      scope, including boundaries, requirements, and risks. From the project register,
      you can learn about what roles different stakeholders are playing in the proj-
      ect and what their attitude is toward and relationship is with different types of
      risks. This will help in planning risk management; i.e., determining risk manage-
      ment roles and responsibilities and risk threshold by performing stakeholder
      analysis as described in Chapter 8.
      The enterprise environment factors relevant to risk planning include the over-
      all risk threshold set by the organization or the key project stakeholders. The
      organizational process assets relevant to risk planning include organizational
      risk policy--i.e., approaches toward risk management; definitions of concepts
      and terms about risk used within the organization; standard risk templates
      you can use; a roles and responsibilities list; authority levels for decision mak-
      ing; and lessons learned from similar projects.
                                                                  PMP(R) in Depth       269



You develop the risk management plan by holding planning meetings with
relevant stakeholders, such as:
       *   Project manager
       *   Selected members from the project team
       *   Selected stakeholders
       *   Any member from the performing organization who has
           responsibility for risk planning and executing
All these efforts generate a document called the risk management plan.


Risk Management Plan
The only output of the Plan Risk Management process is the risk management
plan, which includes the following elements.
Strategy and Methodology. The strategy refers to the general approach
of handling risks for the project underway, while the methodology speci-
fies the system of approaches, tools, and data sources that will be used to
perform risk management on the project at hand. Note that these tools and
approaches might vary over different projects, so you have to make the best
selection for the given project.
Identifying and Assigning Resources. This identifies the need for the
resources for risk management, such as human resources, cost, and time:
       *   Roles and Responsibilities. This specifies the roles
           and responsibilities for each role involved in risk manage-
           ment. These roles are or will be assigned to the members
           of the risk management team.
       *   Funding. The cost of risk management activities needs
           to be estimated and included in the budget and the proj-
           ect cost baseline.
       *   Timing and Scheduling. The plan specifies how often
           the risk management processes should be run and what
           activities executed in these processes should be, which
           will be included in the project schedule that is planned and
           developed by using the processes discussed in Chapter 5,
           "Project Schedule Management."

Tip It's a good idea for the risk management team to include members from outside the
project team to ensure unbiased risk evaluations.
270   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      Stakeholders' Risk Tolerance. For each key stakeholder, the risk tolerance
      in terms of measurable threshold of objection, i.e., the point beyond which
      complains would start coming in, should be recorded. These threshold values
      should be taken into account when assessing the priority of individual risks.
      Risk Categories. This element, to facilitate the identification of individual
      project risks, specifies how the risks will be categorized. The risk catego-
      ries typically correspond to the sources of risks. Depending upon the size
      and complexity of the project, you might need to develop a risk breakdown
      structure (RBS), which is a hierarchical structure that breaks the identified
      risk categories into subcategories. In developing this structure, you will end
      up identifying various areas and causes of potential risks. The performing
      organization might already have prepared a categorization of typical risks.
      However, you need to examine this categorization for each project and tailor
      it according to the needs of the project at hand. The risk categorization helps
      you identify risks to the extent that you will be identifying various areas and
      causes of potential risks for your project.


      Caution! Some project management literature uses the terms risk sources and risk
      categories synonymously; be ready to handle it if it happens in the PMP exam questions.


      Definition of Risk Probability and Impact. Defining different levels of
      risk probabilities and impacts is necessary to ensure the quality and credibil-
      ity of the qualitative risk analysis, which we will discuss later in this chapter.
      The basic issues are defining the scale of likelihood that the risk will happen
      and defining the scale of the strength of its impact if the risk occurs. These
      definitions, even if they already exist in the organization, must be examined
      and tailored to the needs of the specific project. In qualitative analysis, we are
      talking about relative impact levels.
      As an example, Table 7-5 shows the risk impact definitions for four project
      objectives: cost, quality, scope, and time. Note that this example only shows
      the negative impact. The first row of the table presents the impact scale,
      and each cell in the following rows from column 2 to column 6 specifies the
      impact on a specific objective corresponding to a point on the overall impact
      scale. For example, the cell corresponding to second row and fifth column
      reads that high impact (0.65) means a 50 to 80 percent increase in cost.
Table 7-5. Risk Impact Definitions for Four Project Objectives

Risk Impact on        Very Low (0.05)      Low (0.10)             Moderate (0.35)           High (0.65)            Very High (0.90)
Project Objectives
Cost                  Less than 1% cost    1-20% cost increase    20-50% cost increase      50-80% cost increase   80-100 % cost increase
                      increase
Time                  Insignificant time   1-10% time increase    10-30% time increase      30-60% time increase   60-100% time increase
                      increase
Scope                 Scope decrease       Scope of only a few    Sponsor approval          Scope reduction        Project and item are
                      unnoticeable         minor areas affected   necessary for scope       unacceptable to the    effectively useless
                                                                  reduction                 sponsor
Quality               Unnoticeable         Only a few applications Quality requires sponsor Quality reduction      Project and item are
                      quality reduction    will be affected        approval                 unacceptable           effectively useless
                                                                                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth
                                                                                                                                              271
272   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      You can define the risk probability scale from very unlikely to almost certainly,
      called the relative scale. As an alternative, you can define a numerical scale in
      which the probability is represented by numbers, so a value close to 0.0 means
      very unlikely and a value close to 1.0 means almost certainly. The impact scale
      represents the size of the risk impact on the given project objective should
      the risk occur. Just like the probability scale, you can define the impact scale
      relatively or numerically. The relative scale can range from very low impact to
      very high impact, with points in the middle such as low, moderate, and high. As
      an alternative, you can define the impact numerically; it might be linear, such
      as the first point at 0.1, the second point at 0.2, and the tenth point at 1.0, or
      it might be nonlinear, such as the first point at 0.001, the second point at 0.01,
      and the third point at 0.1.
      Probability and Impact Matrix. Risks are prioritized according to the val-
      ues of the probability of risk occurrence and the sizes of their impact on
      the project objectives, as estimated; e.g., qualitative analysis. The values are
      recorded in what is called a probability-impact matrix. For a given risk, its
      priority is determined by comparing its value in this probability-impact matrix
      with the value in the reference probability-impact matrix used as a lookup
      table. Even if your organization already has this reference matrix, you should
      examine it and tailor it to the needs of the specific project at hand. I will dis-
      cuss the probability-impact matrix in more detail later in this chapter.
      Risk Reporting and Tracking. The risk reporting part of the risk manage-
      ment plan describes what kind of content each output of the risk processes,
      e.g., risk register and risk report, will contain, and in what format. This is about
      how to document the output of the risk management processes. It may also
      include how these outputs will be communicated.
      Risk tracking describes how each risk management project used in the proj-
      ect would be audited. Obviously, should the performing organization decide
      to audit the risk management process, one should be able to track these
      activities.
      During the process of planning risk management for a specific project, you
      revisit the tolerance levels of the stakeholders for certain risks, and these lev-
      els may be revised. So, risk management planning is the process that generates
      the risk management plan document, which contains information that will be
      used in risk identification, risk analysis, and risk response.
      You cannot manage a risk if it's not identified.
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth     273




Identifying Risks
Risks are identified by using the risk identification process. An unidentified
risk is a danger lurking out of your sight and waiting to attack the project. The
significance of the risk identification process cannot be overemphasized. You
use the risk identification process to accomplish the following tasks:
        *    Identify the individual risks that might affect the project at
             hand, and also identify the overall sources of project risks.
        *    Document the characteristics and other information
             about the identified risks in a document called the risk
             register.
Table 7-6 presents the Identify Risk process in terms of input, tools and tech-
niques, and output.

Table 7-6. The Identify Risk Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                Tools and Techniques          Output
1.Project management plan:           1. Data gathering:            1. Risk register
  * Risk management plan               * Checklists                2. Risk report
  * Requirement management             * Interviews                3. Project document updates:
    plan                               * Brainstorming               * Assumptions log
  * Schedule management plan         2. Data analysis:               * Issues log
  * Cost management plan               * Document analysis           * Lessons learned register
  * Quality management plan            * Root-cause analysis
  * Resource management plan           *Assumptions and
  * Scope baseline                      constraints analysis
  * Schedule baseline                  * SWOT analysis
  * Cost baseline                    3.Interpersonal and
2. Project documents:                  team skills: Facilitation
  *Cost and duration estimates       4. Prompt lists
   for project activities            5. Expert judgment
  * Requirement documentation        6. Meetings
  * Resource requirements
  * Assumptions log
  * Issues log
  * Stakeholder register
  * Lessons learned register
3. Agreements
4. Procurement documentation
5.Enterprise environmental factors
6. Organizational project assets
274   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      We can use the items in this table to perform the Identify Risk process.


      Performing Risk Identification
      Remember, the goal of this process is to identify the individual project risks
      and overall sources of project risks. The risk management plan will give basic
      guidance on how to perform this process for your project, while here we will
      discuss in general how to do it. As the long list of input items in Table 7-6
      indicates, risks are hiding in almost all areas of the project. The key to finding
      them is the uncertainty coming from various sources; e.g., assumptions, ambi-
      guity, estimates, ranges. That uncertainty gives rise to risks.
      So, as a starting point in identifying risk, you look for areas of assumptions,
      ambiguity, and estimates in the agreement, procurement documentation, and
      project documents and plans listed in Table 7-6. For example, the cost and
      duration estimates for project activities and the assumptions log are obvious
      places to start. You can use document analysis, discussed in Chapter 4 and
      other places in the book, to identify individual project risks. Furthermore, the
      knowledge base related to risk management from previous projects can also
      be reviewed with this technique.
      To identify the individual project risks and overall sources of project risks, you
      can also use other tools and techniques listed in Table 7-6, as discussed next.


      Data-Gathering Techniques
      To identify risks and project risk sources, you need to gather risk-related
      information from a variety of sources. The following are some of the informa-
      tion-gathering techniques used for this purpose.
      Checklists. A checklist is a kind of to-do list--a list of actions to be taken
      or points to be considered. It can be used as a tool in this process, such as
      a checklist of all the documents that must be checked off to look for risks.
      Carefully prepared checklists in any process are great no-brainer timesavers.
      Projects in the same organization will more often than not have similarities.
      As a result, you can develop a risk identification checklist based on the infor-
      mation gathered from a similar set of projects previously performed. Also, if
      you developed the risk breakdown structure (RBS) in risk planning, the lowest
      level of the RBS can often be used as a checklist, which should be the list of
      risk categories.


      Note Risk identification checklists are rarely exhaustive. Always explore what is left out of
      the checklist you are using. Also, make sure the checklist is up-to-date when you close the project
      to enhance its value for future projects.
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth      275



Interviewing. This is one of the common methods used for information-
gathering for risk identification. You interview the appropriate stakeholders
and subject-matter experts to gather information that will help identify risks
for the project at hand.
On the information gathered from different sources, you can conduct brain-
storming sessions.
Brainstorming. This technique, defined in Chapters 3 and 4, can be used to
identify risks and risk sources. The goal here is to get a comprehensive list
of potential risks so that no risk goes unidentified. The project team, along
with relevant experts from different disciplines, can participate in the brain-
storming session. Brainstorming is better performed under the guidance of a
facilitator. You can use the categories of risks or the RBS as a framework to
keep the session focused on the issue.
Once you have gathered the risk-related data, you can analyze it to identify the
individual project risks and overall sources of project risks.


Data-Analysis Techniques
The data-analysis techniques used to identify the individual project risks and
overall sources of project risks may include those discussed in the following
paragraphs.
Assumptions and Constraint Analysis. Assumptions in the project, by
definition, represent uncertainty, hence, risk. You analyze these assumptions
to identify the risks. Assumptions and constraint analysis is the technique used
to examine the validity of the assumptions and constraints and thereby iden-
tify the risks resulting from the inaccuracies, inconsistencies, or incomplete-
ness of each assumption. For example, assume that there is only one person
in the organization who has a rare skill needed for the project. An obvious
assumption would be that the person will not quit the organization before
completing the assignment. The likelihood of this assumption's being false--
i.e., the inaccuracy of this assumption--amounts to the risk. Constraints, by
their limiting factor, also create uncertainty, and thus risk.
Root-Cause Analysis. Discussed in Chapter 10, root-cause analysis is a
powerful way to identify new risks by identifying the root cause of known
ones. After you spot a potential cause for risks, it's simple to identify the risks
resulting from that cause. Furthermore, if you know the cause of a risk, it helps
to plan an effective response. In this technique, you obviously end up identify-
ing the sources, i.e., causes, of project risks.
You can also look for risks by starting with their impacts.
276   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      SWOT Analysis. While the root-cause analysis technique looks into the
      causes of the risks to identify the risks, a SWOT analysis looks at the poten-
      tial impacts of the risks to identify the risks. If you examine the strengths,
      weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of a given project, you will
      be exposing the risks involved. Remember that a strength is an opportunity,
      a weakness is a threat, and opportunities and threats are posed by risks. This
      helps broaden the spectrum of risks considered. For example, a strength of
      your project might be that most of its parts are well understood from previ-
      ously executed similar projects. Therefore, the risks involved in those parts
      will be easy to identify. A weakness of your project might be that one of the
      parts involves new technology that is not well tested. So, this is a source of
      unknown risks. An opportunity might be that your organization will be the
      first one to take this product to the market. An example of a threat might
      be that the government is considering a bill that, if it becomes law, will have
      profound implications for your project.


      Note A prompt list is a predetermined list of risk categories that can be used to generate
      ideas to identify individual project risks, and also is the lowest level in the risk breakdown
      structure (RBS).


      Of course, you can always use the judgment of experts on the topic. You will
      generally be using more than one of these tools and techniques to identify the
      risks. During risk identification, you might discover the causes of the risks, and
      you might even think of some potential risk responses. All of this is part of the
      output of the risk identification process.


      The Output of Risk Identification
      Two documents, the risk register and the quality report, are initiated with the
      results of the Identify Risks process and are completed by other risk manage-
      ment processes.


      Risk Register
      The risk register is a document that contains the risk output of the risk iden-
      tification process; i.e., information about the individual project risks. You will
      see later in this chapter that the risk register, which is initiated in the risk
      identification process, will also contain the information or results from other
      risk management processes. To begin, you store the following information
      from the risk identification process in the risk register:
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth     277



      *    List of Identified Risks. These are the individual risks
           that you identified in the risk identification process, each
           risk with a unique ID. These risks should be described in
           reasonable detail, which may include the following:
           *   The Risks. The definition and nature of each risk
               itself and the causes that will give rise to that risk.
           *   List of Root Causes of the Risks. This is a list
               of events or conditions that might give rise to the
               identified risks.
           *   Updates to Risk Categories. Risk categories
               were originally identified in the risk management
               planning process. However, in the process of
               identifying risks you might discover new categories
               or modify the existing categories. The updated risk
               categories must be included in the risk register.
           *   Risk Owner. Each risk must be assigned an
               owner. If not identified yet, it will be in the Perform
               Qualitative Risk Analysis process. If the owner is
               known, it should be confirmed during the Perform
               Qualitative Risk Analysis process.
      *    List of Potential Responses. Risk response planning
           is a separate process that is performed after risk analy-
           sis. However, during risk identification, you might identify
           potential risk responses, which you must document in
           the risk register. These responses can be further exam-
           ined and planned in the risk response planning process.

Risk Report
From this process, the risk report will have 1) information about sources of
overall project risks, answering the questions: what are the main risk drivers
for this project? and 2) summary of individual project risks stating their distri-
bution across the risk categories, threats and opportunities that are present,
their impact, and trends from them. Some results from other risk manage-
ment processes are added to this report.

                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.3

   Knowing the Identify Risks process, make lists of some EEFs and OPAs that can
   influence this process.
278   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      The results of the risk identification process usually lead to the qualitative risk
      analysis. However, depending upon the project and the experience of the risk
      management team, risk identification might lead directly to the quantitative
      risk analysis and even to risk response planning.


      Analyzing Risks
      Once the risks have been identified, you need to answer two main questions
      for each identified risk: What are the odds that the risk will occur, and, if it
      does, what will its impact be on the project objectives? You get the answers by
      performing risk analysis, which comes in two forms: qualitative and quantitative.
            *    Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. This is used to
                 prioritize the identified individual project risks by esti-
                 mating the probability of their occurrence, their impact
                 on the project objectives, and other risk factors.
            *    Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. This is used to
                 perform the numerical analysis to estimate the combined
                 effect of identified individual project risks and other
                 uncertainty sources on the overall project objectives.
      Usually, you prioritize the risks by performing qualitative analysis on them
      before you perform quantitative analysis.


      Qualitative Risk Analysis
      Because the qualitative analysis is an estimate, it is less precise than the quan-
      titative analysis, which is based on numbers from detailed analysis and hence
      is more precise. However, qualitative analysis is quick and cheaper. It gives you
      some feel for the risks, and then you can determine which risks need to be
      analyzed further using quantitative analysis.
      Table 7-7 presents the qualitative risk analysis process in terms of input, tools
      and techniques, and output.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth      279




Table 7-7. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, And
Output

Input                              Tools and Techniques         Output
1.Project management plan:         1. Data gathering:           1. Project document updates:
  Risk management plan               Interviews                   * Risk register
2. Project documents:              2. Data analysis:              * Risk report
  * Risk register                    * Assessments of risk        * Assumptions log
  * Assumptions log                    data                       * Issues log
  * Stakeholder register             * Assessments of risk
                                       probability and impact
5.Enterprise environmental
  factors                            * Assessments of other
                                       risk parameters
6. Organizational project assets
                                   3. Data presentation:
                                     * Probability and impact
                                       matrix
                                     * Hierarchical charts
                                   4. Categorization of risks
                                   5. Interpersonal and team
                                      skills: Facilitation
                                   6. Expert judgment
                                   7. Meetings



We can use the items in this table to perform the qualitative risk analysis
process.


Performing Qualitative Risk Analysis
Recall that the goal of this process is to prioritize risks by estimating the prob-
ability of their occurrence, their impact on the project, and other risk factors.
To do that, you get needed information from the items in the input column
of Table 7-7. For example, the risks that need to be prioritized are in the risk
register, along with information about them. The information about assump-
tions and constraints in the assumptions log will help prioritize the risks, and
information about stakeholders in the stakeholder register will help with assign-
ing owners to each risk.
280   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      "How to" information for the qualitative risk analysis can be obtained from
      the risk management plan, which also contains other useful information for this
      process, such as the following:
            *    Roles and responsibilities for performing risk management
            *    Budgeting for risk management
            *    Definitions of probabilities and impacts
            *    The probability and impact matrices
            *    Risk categories
            *    Risk timing and scheduling
            *    Stakeholders' risk tolerances
      If any of these input items was not developed during risk management plan-
      ning, it can be developed during this process.
      With this information at hand, you can use some tools and techniques to gen-
      erate the output of this process.

      Tools and Techniques for Qualitative Risk Analysis
      Prioritizing risks based on their probability of occurrence and their impact if
      they do occur is the central goal of qualitative risk analysis. Accordingly, most
      of the tools and techniques used involve estimating probability and impact.
      Assessment of the Risk Data Quality. Qualitative risk analysis is per-
      formed to analyze the risk data so as to prioritize risks. However, before you
      do it, you must examine the risk data for its quality, which is crucial because
      the credibility of the results depends upon the quality of the risk data. If the
      quality of the risk data is poor, you might decide to gather better-quality data.
      The technique used to assess the risk data quality involves examining the
      accuracy, reliability, and integrity of the data, and also examining how good that
      data is relevant to the specific risk and project for which it is being used. Biases
      in the attitudes of the data sources, e.g., people, must be collected and used as
      a corrective factor applied to the raw data to improve the quality.
      Assessment of Risk Probability and Impact. Risk probability refers to
      the likelihood that a risk will occur, and impact refers to the effect the risk will
      have on a project objective if it occurs. The probability for each risk and its
      impact on each project objective, such as cost, quality, scope, and time, must
      be assessed. The definitions of probability and impact used in this assessment
      come from the risk management plan. Note that probability and impact are
      assessed for each identified risk.
      Methods used in making the probability and impact assessment include holding
      meetings, interviewing, considering expert judgment, and using an information
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth          281



base from previous projects. The assessed levels of probability and impact for
each risk are recorded with the assumptions made in assessing. To prioritize
the risks, you need to look at both probability and impact.


Caution! Remember, the impact might be negative, posing a threat, or positive, representing
an opportunity. Also, a risk with a high probability might have a very low impact, and a risk with a
low probability might have a very high impact, and vice versa.


Assessments of Other Risk Parameters. In addition to probability and
impact, you may consider other risk factors in prioritizing risks; e.g., risk
urgency; manageability, i.e., ease of managing risk; controllability, i.e., how much
the risk owner is able to control the risk's output; and connectivity, i.e., how
many other risks this risk is connected to. For example, a risk that is going to
occur now is more urgent to address than a risk that might occur a month
from now. Similarly, the higher the value of the mentioned factor, such as con-
trollability, the higher the risk priority is.
Probability and Impact Matrix. Risks need to be prioritized for entry into
the quantitative analysis, response planning, or both. The prioritization can be
performed by using the probability and impact matrix--a lookup table that can
be used to rate a risk based on where it falls both on the probability scale and
on the impact scale, combined. There are multiple ways of forming a probability
and impact matrix and determining the risk priority, such as the following:
        *    You can have a separate probability and impact matrix for
             each project objective.
        *    Determine the priority for each risk by doing the
             following:
             a. Combining the impact of a given risk on each objec-
                tive; e.g., weighted average
             b. Taking the highest value of impact on any objective as
                a final overall value
Table 7-8 presents an example of a probability and impact matrix by showing
both the probability scale and the impact scale. Here is an example of how
to read this matrix: risk R45 has a probability of 0.70 (that is, seven out of 10
chances) for occurrence and an impact of 0.45 on the project objective for
which this matrix is prepared. How to calculate the numerical scales for the
probability and impact matrix and what they mean depends upon the proj-
ect and the organization, and they are defined in the risk management plan.
However, remember the relative meaning: a higher value of a risk on the prob-
ability scale means a greater likelihood of risk occurrence, and a higher value
282   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      on the impact scale means a greater effect on the project objective, should
      the risk occur. The higher the value for a risk, the higher its priority is. For
      example, risk R38 has a higher priority level than risk R23.

      Table 7-8. A Risk Probability and Impact Matrix for an Objective*

      Probability      Impact
      0.00             0.05     0.15     0.25      0.35      0.45        0.55       0.65      0.75     0.90
      0.10             R11      R12      R13       R14       R15         R16        R17       R18      R19
      0.30             R21      R22      R23       R24       R25         R26        R27       R28      R29
      0.50             R31      R32      R33       R34       R35         R36        R37       R38      R39
      0.70             R41      R42      R43       R44       R45         R46        R47       R48      R49
      0.90             R51      R52      R53       R54       R55         R56        R57       R58      R59

      *Rij , where i and j are integers, represents risks in the two-dimensional (probability and impact) space.



      Note By priority value, in this discussion, we mean the priority level, as in qualitative analysis
      we are interested only in relative level. However, each risk cell in Table 7-8, e.g., R14, can have a
      value computed from corresponding values of probability and impact, using the formula given in
      the risk management plan.


      According to the scheme in Table 7-8, each risk is rated (prioritized) based on
      the probability and the impact value assigned to it, separately for each objec-
      tive. Generally, you can divide the matrix in Table 7-8 into three areas--high-
      priority risks represented by higher numbers, such as R59, medium-priority
      risks represented by moderate numbers, such as R23, and low-priority risks
      represented by lower numbers, such as R12. However, each organization has
      to design its own risk score and risk threshold to guide the risk response plan.
      Note that impact can be a threat (a negative effect) or an opportunity (a
      positive effect). The same matrices will work for both threats and opportuni-
      ties, but the interpretations will be different. Threats in the high-priority area
      might require priority-related actions and aggressive responses. Also, you will
      want to capitalize on those opportunities in the high-priority area, which you
      can do with relatively little effort. Risks posing threats in the low-priority area
      might not need any response, but they must be kept on the watch list.
      Hierarchical Charts. When you use not just probability and impact, but
      more than two parameters, for assessments of risk priority, then two-dimen-
      sional probability-impact matrices, like a table, would not be enough. You will
      need multi-dimensional graphical techniques to assess priority for individual
      risks. For example, for two parameters in addition to impact, you can repre-
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      283



sent the values of the two parameters using the x- and y-axes, and the impact
values can be expressed by the size of the data symbol representing the values
of the two parameters. One such plot, where data points are disk shaped, is
called a bubble chart. All the multi-dimensional charts used to assess risk pri-
ority are collectively called hierarchical charts.
Risk Categorization. You defined the risk categories during the risk man-
agement planning and risk identification processes. Now you can assign the
identified risks to those categories. Because you now have more information
about the risks for the project, you can also revisit the categorization schemes:
categorization by risk sources, such as RBS, by risk-affected project area, such
as WBS, or by root causes. Categorizing risks by their causes often helps you
develop effective risk responses.
Expert Judgment. You may need expert judgment to assess the probability
and impact of each risk. To find such expertise, look for people who have had
experience with similar projects in the not-too-distant past. While weighing
the expert judgment, look for possible biases. Often, experts are biased for
their area against other areas.
Of course, you will be using meetings in this process.
You need to update the risk register and risk report with the result of the
qualitative risk analysis.


Output of the Qualitative Risk Analysis
Updated Risk Register
The risk register was initiated during the Identify Risks process and is updated
with the new information or results from the qualitative risk analysis. The
updates include the following:
      *    Probability, Impact, and Priority. Each individual risk
           is assigned an assessment for probability, impact, and pri-
           ority of risk as estimated in this process.
      *    Owner. Each individual risk is assigned an owner.
      *    Risk Urgency Information.
      *    Risks Categorizations. Make sure that each risk has
           category information assigned to it. This helps in various
           ways; e.g., you can identify the common root causes of
           the risks and the areas of the project that might require
           special attention. Furthermore, categorizing risks can
           bring order to a chaotic situation and makes the manage-
           ment of these risks easier and more effective.
284   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


             *     List of Risks. Using some criteria, you can make different
                   lists of risks for effective management. The following are
                   some examples:
                   *    Further Analysis. List of risks for additional
                        analysis and response, such as quantitative analysis.
                   *    Watch List of Low-priority Risks. This list
                        contains the risks that are deemed unimportant
                        by the qualitative risk analysis, but that need to be
                        monitored continually.
                   *    List of Risks with Time Urgency. This list
                        includes urgent risks that require attention now or
                        in the near future.


      Tip Trends in the Analysis Results. By examining the results from the qualitative risk analysis,
      you might recognize a trend for specific risks. That trend might suggest further analysis or a
      specific risk response.




      Updated Risk Report
      The risk report is updated with the following information:
             *     A list of the most important individual project risks; e.g.,
                   risks at the top of the priority list based on the prob-
                   ability and impact matrix discussed earlier in this chapter
             *     Priority list of all identified risks in the project
             *     Summary conclusion
      The assumptions log will be updated with new assumptions made or found
      in this process or old assumptions that changed, and the issues log will be
      updated with the addition of new issues or changes in the existing issues.
      The main result of qualitative risk analysis is the prioritization of risks based
      on a probability and impact matrix for each objective. So, each objective can
      have its own prioritized list of risks.
      Qualitative risk analysis is a relatively quick and cost-effective way to prioritize
      risks for risk planning. It also lays the groundwork for the quantitative risk
      analysis if one is required for some risks, as listed in the risk register.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth     285




Performing Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative risk analysis is generally performed on the risks that have been
prioritized in the qualitative risk analysis. However, depending upon the expe-
rience of the team and their familiarity with the risk, it is possible to skip the
qualitative risk analysis and move directly, after the risk identification, to the
quantitative risk analysis. The quantitative risk analysis has three major goals:
        *   Assess the probability of achieving specific project
            objectives.
        *   Quantify the aggregated effect of the individual risks
            and other uncertainty sources on the overall project
            objectives.
        *   Prioritize risks by their contributions to the overall
            project risk.
Table 7-9 presents the quantitative risk analysis process in terms of input,
tools and techniques, and output.

Table 7-9. The Quantitative Risk Analysis Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                Tools and Techniques                  Output
1. Project management plan:          1. Data gathering:                    Risk report
  * Risk management plan                * Interviews                       update
  * Scope baseline                   2. Representations of uncertainty
  * Schedule baseline                3. Data analysis:
  * Cost baseline                       * Simulations
2.Project documents:                    * Sensitivity analysis
  * Risk register                       * Decision-tree analysis
  * Risk report                         * Influence diagrams
  * Resource requirements            4.Interpersonal and team skills:
  * Schedule forecast                  Facilitation
  * Milestone list                   5. Expert judgment
  * Duration estimate
  * Cost forecast
  * Cost estimates
  * Bases of estimates
  * Assumptions log
5.Enterprise environmental factors
6.Organizational project assets


We can use the items in this table to perform the quantitative risk analysis process.
286   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      Nutshell of Performing Quantitative Analysis
      The fact that most of the input items for this process are related to project
      scope, schedule, and cost, the three fundamental components of the project
      base, is a reflection that risks can affect all aspects of the project. These input
      items also hold information about three key items that we need in order to
      start performing the quantitative risk analysis: individual project risk, refer-
      ence points to measure the effect of individual risks, and reference points to
      measure the variability, i.e., uncertainty, as will be explained shortly. In light of
      this, performing the quantitative risk analysis process may be explained by the
      following steps in terms of the items from Table 7-9:
             1. Get Risk and "How to" Information. The "how to"
                information about this is found in the risk management
                plan, which also explains the resources, such as analysis
                tools to use, and how often the process should be run.
                The needed information about individual project risks
                and about the sources of overall project risk can be found
                in the risk register and risk report, respectively.
             2. Get Information about Reference Points to
                Measure Effect of Individual Risks. The reference
                points, or starting points, as PMBOK calls them, refer to
                the planned values to build a component (perhaps $700),
                and the effect of the related individual risk is the devia-
                tion from the planned values, such as $100 more, if the
                risk occurs. The information about reference points can
                be obtained from the cost baseline. The information about
                other reference points can be obtained from some other
                inputs: scope baseline and schedule baseline.
             3. Get Information about Reference Points to
                Measure Variability. Even before, or without any, indi-
                vidual project risk occurrence, the project has built-in
                uncertainties in the form of estimates. Therefore, the
                deviation or variability should be measured in reference
                to these built-in uncertainties. The information about
                these reference points used to measure variability can
                be obtained from cost estimates, duration estimate, and
                resource requirements. Also, the basis of estimate for
                uncertainties due and relevant entries in the assumptions
                log should be modeled in the quantitative analysis.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth     287



      4. Check the Result of Quantitative Analysis. When
         you use statistical methods in an analysis, there should
         always be a way to determine how believable the results
         from the analysis are; i.e., the confidence level. In our case,
         we can determine the confidence level by comparing the
         different parts of the analysis results with the information
         from the targets in the milestone list and schedule forecast,
         as well as the values of the quantities predicted in the cost
         forecast; BAC, EAC, ETC, and TCPI, etc. were covered in
         Chapter 7.
      5. Model Individual Project Risks Effects and Other
         Uncertainty Sources. In steps 2 and 3, we discussed
         measuring the effects of individual project risks on proj-
         ect objectives, such as cost and schedule, and measur-
         ing other uncertainty sources, such as assumptions, bases
         of estimates, and estimates. For quantitative analysis, we
         model uncertainty as probability distributions.The effects
         of individual project risks may be included in these dis-
         tributions or can be modeled separately as probability
         branches.
With this information at hand, you can use some tools and techniques to gen-
erate the results of quantitative risk analysis.


Tools and Techniques for Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative risk analysis can be looked upon as a two-step process--gather-
ing and representing the data, and analyzing and modeling the data. Accordingly,
all the techniques fall into two categories: data gathering and representation
techniques, such as interviewing, probability distributions, and expert judg-
ment; and analysis and modeling techniques, such as sensitivity analysis, EMV
analysis, decision-tree analysis, and modeling and simulation.
Interviewing. This technique is used to collect data for assessing the prob-
ability of achieving specific project objectives. You are looking for results
such as: We have a 70 percent probability of finishing the project within the
schedule desired by the customer. Or perhaps: We have a 60 percent prob-
ability of finishing the project within the budget of $100,000. The goal is to
determine the scale of probabilities for a given objective; for example, there
is a 20 percent probability that the project will cost $50,000, a 60 percent
probability that it will cost $100,000, and a 20 percent probability that it will
cost $150,000.
288   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      The data is collected by interviewing relevant stakeholders and subject-mat-
      ter experts. Most commonly, you will be exploring the optimistic (best-case),
      pessimistic (worst-case), and most-likely scenarios for a given objective. For
      example, for the project cost, the optimistic estimate might be $10 million, the
      pessimistic estimate might be $50 million, and the most-likely estimate might
      be $25 million.
      Representation of Uncertainty: Probability Distributions. The risks
      and uncertainty found in the input into the quantitative risk analysis, discussed
      in the previous section, need to be modeled. In step 5 of the previous section,
      we discussed that uncertainty can be modeled as probability distributions, and
      the effects of individual project risks can be included in these distributions or
      be modeled separately as probability branches. The data on meeting the proj-
      ect objectives can be presented in a probability distribution for each objective
      under study. Note that, by definition, a distribution represents uncertainty,
      and a risk also represents uncertainty. For example, if you know for sure the
      project will cost $25 million, there will be no distribution because it is only
      one data point.
      Probability distribution comes into the picture when you have several pos-
      sible values, with a probability assigned to each value. There are distributions
      of different shapes in which the data can be presented. The commonly used
      distributions, according to PMBOK, Sixth Edition, are uniform, beta, triangu-
      lar, normal, lognormal, and discrete distributions. The uniform distribution is
      used when all the values of an objective have the same chance of being true.
      Figure 7-4 shows some of them for the cost objective. The x-axis represents
      the cost, and the y-axis represents the corresponding probability that the
      project will be completed within that cost.
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth         289




Figure 7-4. Examples of probability distributions commonly used in the quantitative risk analysis

We do all this modeling for analysis.
Sensitivity Analysis. This is a technique used to determine which individual
risk or other source of uncertainty has the greatest impact on the project
outcome. Just for the sake of understating, imagine you study the impact of
one risk or uncertain element on a project objective by keeping all other
uncertain elements fixed at their baseline values. You can repeat this analysis
for several objectives, one at a time. You can also repeat this study for several
uncertain elements (creating risks), one element at a time. This way, you can
see the impact of each element (or risk) on the overall project separate from
other elements (or risks).
Practically, you will be using a software package to run this analysis. The
strength of impact is measured by investigating the correlation of the variation
in project outcome with the variations in different elements of the analysis
model; e.g., various risks and other uncertainty sources. A higher value for
the correlation coefficient of an element indicates a higher impact of that ele-
ment in the project outcome. The analysis may generate plots of correlation
290   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      coefficients of elements; e.g., a tornado diagram, which has one bar for each
      element with a non-zero impact on the project outcome along the x-axis, with
      the height of the bar along the y-axis representing the value of the correlation
      coefficient for that element.
      Modeling and Simulation. A model is a set of rules to describe how some-
      thing works; it takes input and makes predictions as output. The rules might
      include formulas and functions based on facts, assumptions, or both. A simula-
      tion is any analytical method used to imitate a real-life system. Simulations in
      risk analysis are created using the Monte Carlo technique, which is named
      after Monte Carlo, France--known for its casinos, which present games of
      chance based on random behavior. Monte Carlo simulation models take ran-
      dom input iteratively to generate output for certain quantities as predictions.
      This technique is used in several disciplines, such as physics and biology, in
      addition to project management.
      In risk analysis, Monte Carlo is used to simulate the combined effect of identi-
      fied individual project risks and other uncertainty sources on project outcomes,
      leading to their impact on meeting the various project objectives. The input
      is taken randomly from a probability distribution; e.g., about cost and duration
      estimates, and the output for impact on the project objectives is predicted. The
      name "Monte Carlo" refers to the random behavior of the input, i.e., input can
      be selected randomly. (In that spirit, it could easily be called Las Vegas.)


      Tip S-curve, Simulation analysis can generate cumulative probability diagrams, called
      S-curves, in which the x-axis represents the predicted value of a project variable such as cost,
      while the y-axis represents the cumulative probability for the predicted values.


      As already mentioned, the effects of individual project risks may be included in
      these distributions or can be modeled separately as probability branches. We
      now will discuss the probability branches, for which you need to understand
      the concept of expected monetary value.
      Expected Monetary Value Analysis. Expected monetary value (EMV)
      analysis is used to calculate the expected value of an outcome when differ-
      ent possible scenarios exist for different values of the outcome with some
      probabilities assigned to them. The goal here is to calculate the expected final
      result of a probabilistic situation. EMV is calculated by multiplying the value
      of each possible outcome by the probability of its occurrence and adding the
      results. For example, if there is 60 percent probability that an opportunity will
      earn you $1,000 and a 40 percent probability that it will only earn you $500,
      the EMV is calculated as follows:

                     EMV = 0.60 x 1000 + 0.40 x 500 = 600 + 200 = 800
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      291



So, the EMV in this case is $800. When you are using opportunities and
threats in the same calculation, you should express EMV for an opportunity as
a positive value and that for a threat as a negative value. For example, if there
is a 60 percent chance that you will benefit from a risk by $1,000 and a 40
percent probability that you will lose $400 as a result of this risk, the EMV is
calculated as follows:

             EMV = 0.60 x 1000 - 0.40 x 500 = 600 - 200 = 400

Therefore, the EMV in this case is $400.
The concept of EMV can be presented in a decision-making technique, such
as a decision-tree analysis.
Decision-tree Analysis. This technique uses the decision-tree diagram
to choose from different available options; each option is represented by a
branch of the tree. This technique is used when there are multiple possible
outcomes with different threats or opportunities with certain probabilities
assigned to them. EMV analysis is done along each branch, which helps you to
make a decision about which option to choose.
Figure 7-5 presents a very simple decision-tree diagram that depicts two
options: updating an existing product or building a new product from scratch.
The initial cost for the update option is $50,000, whereas the initial cost for
the build-from-scratch option is $70,000. However, the probability for failure
is 40 percent for the update option, compared to 10 percent for the build-
from-scratch option, and the impact from failure in both cases is a loss of
$200,000. As Study Checkpoint 7.4 shows, even though the initial cost for the
update option is less than the initial cost for the build-from-scratch option, the
decision will be made in favor of the build-from-scratch option because when
you combine the initial cost with the EMV resulting from the probability of
failure, the build-from-scratch option turns out to be a better deal.
292   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management




      Figure 7-5. Example of a decision-tree diagram


                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.4

         Perform the EMV analysis of the decision tree presented in Figure 7-5 to make a
         decision on which option to take.


      Influence Diagram. An influence diagram is a graphical representation of
      uncertain situations that shows relationships among various variables and
      outcomes, such as causal influences and time-ordering of events. By examin-
      ing these diagrams, the risk management team can recognize the potential
      problem areas and thereby identify risks in various options and make the right
      decisions under uncertainty.
      Interviews and Expert Judgment. In quantitative risk analysis, interviews
      can be used as a data-gathering tool, such as to get information from experts,
      and expert judgment can be used to, for example, select appropriate risk-
      modeling techniques, validate the collected risk data and the analysis used for
      the project at hand, and so forth.
      The risk register is updated with the results of the quantitative risk analysis.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      293




Output of the Quantitative Risk Analysis: Updated Risk
Report
The risk report that is used as an input item to the quantitative risk analysis
is updated with the results of this analysis. The updates include the following:
      *   Project Success: probability of achieving the
          project objectives. Chances of project success are
          reported and evaluated by factoring in the project risks
          and estimating the probability of meeting project objec-
          tives, such as cost and schedule, set forth by the current
          project plan. For example, the likelihood of completing
          the project within the current budget plan of $2 million
          is 70 percent.
      *   Overall Project Risk Effect: probabilistic analy-
          sis of the project. This includes the key outputs from
          quantitative risk analysis with some details--e.g., esti-
          mates of the project schedule and cost with a confidence
          level attached to each estimate. Confidence level can be
          expressed in percentage form, such as 95 percent, and
          it represents how certain you are about the estimate.
          You can compare these estimates to the stakeholders'
          risk tolerances to see whether the project is within the
          acceptable limits. The detail can also include S-curve, tor-
          nado diagrams, etc.
      *   Prioritized List of Risks. The risks are prioritized
          according to the threats they pose or the opportunities
          they offer. The risks with greater threats (or opportu-
          nities) are higher on the list. The priorities are deter-
          mined based on the total effect of each risk on the overall
          project objectives. The purpose of prioritizing risks is to
          help with planning the response efforts to eliminate (or
          minimize) the impact of the threats and capitalize on the
          opportunities.
      *   Trends in the Results. By repeating the analysis several
          times and by examining the results, you might recognize a
          trend for specific risks. That trend might suggest further
          analysis or a specific risk response.
      *   Risk Response Recommendations. The risk report
          can recommend specific responses to key risks based on
          their overall effect on the project.
294   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      The emphasis in quantitative analysis is on two tasks: assess the probability of
      meeting each project objective and prioritize the risks based on their total
      effect on the overall project objectives. Subsequently, the resultant prioritized
      list of risks can be used to prepare the risk response plan.


      Planning the Risk Response
      The Plan Risk Response process develops the risk response plan, which
      includes options, actions, and strategies for responding to risks at both levels:
      individual project risks and overall project risks.
      Accordingly, the central task in risk response planning is to develop actions
      and options to meet the following goals:
              *    Minimize threats to meeting project objectives
              *    Maximize opportunities
              *    Reduce the overall project risk effect

      Tip Remember the five-prong golden rule for risk response planning, AARCO: A risk response
      must be appropriate in matching to the significance of the risk, agreed upon, realistic within the
      context of the project, cost effective, and owned by the appropriate stakeholder.


      Table 7-10 presents the Plan Risk Response process in terms of input, tools
      and techniques, and output.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth      295




Table 7-10. The Plan Risk Response Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques            Output
1. Project management plan:     1. Data gathering:             1. Change requests
  * Risk management plan          * Interviews                 2. Management plan updates:
  * Resource management         2. Data analysis:                * Schedule management
    plan                          * Cost-benefit analysis          plan
  * Cost baseline                 * Alternatives analysis        * Cost management plan
2. Project documents:           3. Multicriteria decision-       * Quality management plan
  * Risk register                  making analysis               * Resource management
  * Risk report                 4. Strategies for negative         plan
  * Resource calendars            risks: threats                 * Procurement
                                                                   management plan
  * Project schedule            6. Strategies for positive
                                                                 * Scope baseline
  * Project team assignments      risks: opportunities
                                                                 * Schedule baseline
  * Stakeholder register        7. Strategies for overall
                                   project risk                  * Cost baseline
  * Lessons learned register
                                8. Strategies for contingent   3. Project document updates:
5. Enterprise environmental
   factors                         response                      * Risk register
6. Organizational project       9. Interpersonal and team        * Risk report
   assets                          skills: Facilitation          * Cost forecasts
                               10. Expert judgment               * Project schedule
                                                                 * Project team assignments
                                                                 * Assumptions log
                                                                 * Lessons learned register



Core of Risk Response Planning
Performing the Plan Risk Response process includes the following steps:
        1. Determine the responses to individual project risks and
           overall project risk.
        2. Determine the strategy to implement the responses.
        3. Determine the response implementation-related activi-
           ties and manage inserting them in appropriate project
           and plan documents.
In light of this, performing the Plan Risk Response process may be explained
in the following steps in terms of the items from Table 7-10.
296   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


            1. Get Information about Risks and Response
               Strategy. From the risk report, you can obtain a priori-
               tized list of individual project risks, overall project risk,
               the specific response recommendations for key risks, as
               well as the overall response strategy. More-detailed infor-
               mation about any identified risks can be obtained from
               the risk register, such as priority, owner, cause, and other
               data that may help to determine a response.
            2. Get Information about Risk Owners and Roles.
               The owner of each is assigned in the risk register. The
               risk management plan contains the information on risk
               management roles and the responsibilities assigned to
               each role, as well as the risk threshold. The owner and
               persons assigned to roles will play an important role in
               finding and allocating resources for implementing the risk
               responses.
            3. Use Information about Risks to Determine Risk
               Response Strategies. Use these strategies to develop
               risk response activities.
            4. Get Information about Resources to Implement
               Risk Responses. From the project team assignments
               and resource calendars, you can get information on
               resources responses and their availability. Information on
               the contingency funds allocated to risk responses can be
               found in the cost baseline.
            5. Integrate the Risk Response Activities with
               Project. From the resource management plan, get infor-
               mation on how the resources allocated to risk response
               activities will be coordinated with other project
               resources. You will need the project schedule to sched-
               ule risk response activities with other scheduled project
               activities.
      For step 3, considering different risk response strategies and selecting appro-
      priate ones for the project, we will need to use some tools and techniques.


      Tools and Techniques for Risk Response Planning
      The main goal of this process is to determine the appropriate risk response
      strategies and schedule the related activities. When developing risk responses,
      you can interview the appropriate stakeholders to collect needed information
      or data and use interpersonal and team skills like facilitation to help risk owners
                                                                  PMP(R) in Depth    297



understand the risk and appropriate response strategy, and you can also use
exert judgment on topics of different risk strategies.
To understand the risk strategies, let's start from risk, which, as you have
already learned, can come in two categories: negative risks, which pose threats
to meeting the project objectives, and positive risks, which offer opportuni-
ties. The goal here is to minimize the threats and maximize the opportuni-
ties. In project management, there are three kinds of possible responses to
risks--take an action, take no action, or take a conditional action. When you
want to take an action, different response strategies for negative and positive
risks need to be planned. Also, we want to strategize the responses to overall
project risk. Accordingly, there are three kinds of strategies available to handle
three kinds of scenarios:
      *    Strategies to respond to negative risks (threats) when
           action is required
      *    Strategies to respond to positive risks (opportunities)
           when action is required
      *    Strategies that can be used to respond to overall project risks


Response Strategies for Threats
There are two strategies in which no proactive action is taken:
Escalate. The risks that are out of the scope of project or project team
authority are escalated to a higher level; e.g., program, portfolio, or some
other part of the organization. It is done with the consent of the project spon-
sor or another authorized person.
Accept. This strategy is usually applied to low-priority risks or risks for
which there is no viable response. Here, the risk is accepted without taking
any proactive action. In passive mode, nothing except periodic review is done
until the risk priority gets higher. In active mode, some contingency resources
are reserved to handle the situation if the risk occurs, called a contingent
response.
For risks that need action by the project team, there are only three com-
monsense ways to take action against a potential problem: Get out of harm's
way, pass it to someone else, or confront it to minimize the damage. In project
management, these three strategies are called avoid, transfer, and mitigate--the
ATM approach.
Avoid. This is used for high-priority threats with high impact and a high prob-
ability of occurring. The goal is to eliminate the risk or impact on the project;
e.g., you avoid the risk by changing your project management plan in such
298   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      a way that the risk is eliminated. Depending upon the situation, this can be
      accomplished in various ways, including the following:
            *   Obtaining information and clarifying requirements for
                risks based on misunderstanding or miscommunication.
                This answers two questions: Do we really have this risk
                and, if yes, how can we avoid it?
            *   Removing the cause of the risk
            *   Acquiring expertise for risks that exist due to a lack of
                expertise
            *   Isolating the project objectives from the risk whenever
                possible
            *   Relaxing the objective that is under threat, such as
                extending the project schedule or adding resources
      Transfer. Risk transfer means you shift the responsibility for responding to
      the risk (the ownership of the risk) and the negative impact of the risk to
      another party. Note that transferring the risk transfers the responsibility for
      risk management and does not necessarily eliminate the risk. Risk transfer
      almost always involves making payment of a risk premium to the party to
      which the risk has been transferred. Some examples include buying an insur-
      ance policy, contracting out the tasks involving risk, and include risk owner
      transfer.
      Mitigate. Mitigation in general means taking action to reduce or prevent the
      impact of a disaster that is expected to occur. Risk mitigation means reduc-
      ing the probability of risk occurrence, reducing the impact of the risk if it
      does occur, or both. A good mitigation strategy is to take action early on to
      first reduce the probability of the risk happening, and then to plan for reduc-
      ing its impact if it does occur, rather than letting it occur and then trying to
      reduce the impact or repair the damage. The following are some examples of
      mitigation:
            *   Adopting less-complex processes
            *   Conducting more tests on the product or service of the
                project
            *   Choosing a more stable supplier for the project supplies
            *   Designing redundancy into a system so that if one part
                fails, the redundant part takes over, and the system keeps
                working
      Each of these strategies has a counter-strategy to deal with the opportunities.
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      299




Response Strategies for Opportunities
There are two strategies, escalate and accept, in which no proactive action is
taken, and they are applied the same as in the case of threats.
For risks that need action by the project team, just like in the case of threats,
you have three strategies to deal with opportunities. Not surprisingly, each
response strategy to deal with an opportunity is a counterpart of a response
strategy to deal with a threat--a one-to-one correspondence:
      *    Share corresponds to transfer
      *    Exploit corresponds to avoid
      *    Enhance corresponds to mitigate
You use the SEE (share, exploit, enhance) approach to deal with the opportu-
nities presented by the positive risks.
Share. Sharing a positive risk that presents an opportunity means transfer-
ring the ownership of the risk to another party that is better equipped to
capitalize on the opportunity. Some examples of sharing are:
      *    Forming risk-sharing partnerships
      *    Starting a joint venture with the purpose of capitalizing
           on an opportunity
      *    Forming teams or special-purpose companies to exploit
           opportunities presented by positive risks
Exploit. This is used for high-priority opportunities with high impact and a
high probability of occurring. Exploiting an opportunity means ensuring that
the opportunity is realized--that is, that the positive risk that presents the
opportunity does occur. This is accomplished by eliminating or minimizing the
uncertainty associated with the risk occurrence. An example of exploiting is
assigning more-talented resources to the project to reduce the completion
time and therefore to be the first to market. Another example could be to
provide better quality than planned to beat a competitor, and doing so by
using a new technology. Whereas exploiting refers to ensuring that the posi-
tive risk occurs, enhancing refers to increasing the impact of the risk once it
occurs.
Enhance. This strategy means increasing the size of the opportunity by
increasing the probability, impact, or both. You can increase the probability by
maximizing the key drivers of the positive risks or by strengthening the causes
of the risks. Similarly, you can increase the impact by focusing on the factors
that drive the risk impact.
300   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      You have just learned the different strategies that you need in order to plan
      for negative and positive risks if you intend to take action. If, on the other
      hand, you intend to take no action or a conditional action, then the response
      planning strategies for both negative and positive risks are the same.


      Response Strategies for Overall Project Risk
      An overall project risk, like an individual risk, can be a threat or an opportunity.
      So, the same strategies as in threat and opportunity can be applied to overall
      project risk. These strategies are share/transfer, exploit/avoid, enhance/miti-
      gate, and accept.


      Contingency
      Generally speaking, contingency means a future event or condition that is pos-
      sible but cannot be predicted with certainty. So, your action will be contingent
      upon the condition; that is, it will be executed only if the condition happens.
      In risk management, a contingent response is a response that is executed only
      if certain predefined conditions (or events) happen. These events trigger the
      contingency response. Some examples of such triggers are missing a mile-
      stone or a customer's escalating the priority of a feature. The events that can
      trigger a contingency response must be clearly defined and tracked.


      Caution! While designing a response to a risk, also design a backup plan in case the
      response does not work. Also, think through and plan for responding to the risks that the response
      to the original (primary) risk may cause. These risks are called secondary risks.


      To select which of the strategies to apply to your project, you use data-analy-
      sis and decision-making techniques.


      Data Analysis and Decision Making
      Already discussed in this book more than once, alternatives analysis, cost-benefit
      analysis, and multicriteria decision-making analysis can be used to select the appro-
      priate risk response strategy in a given situation. In this process, alternatives
      analysis is applied by comparing the features and requirements of risk response
      strategies, and in this way can help you decide which strategy is the best. In
      cost-benefit analysis, the cost effectiveness of a response is computed as

      cost effectiveness = (change in risk impact level) / (response implementation cost)
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth     301



The higher the cost-effectiveness value is, the better the risk response strat-
egy is.
In multicriteria decision-making analysis, the response strategies are selected
by ranking them on several criteria; e.g., resource availability, response effec-
tiveness, creation of secondary risks by the response, and time constraints.

                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.5

    You are the project manager of a movie shooting project. The first column lists some
    actions you are taking to deal with risks. Match each item in the first column with one
    item in the second column of this table.

Action                                                              Risk Response Type
A.One of the scenes is to be shot in a country that has           1. Avoid
  enormous bureaucracy and red tape. They possibly can create
  roadblocks and make it difficult for you. There is nothing much
  you can plan about it.
B.The jungle where you are going to shoot a few scenes is a     2. Accept
  wetland and very hot and humid, and the probability of damage
  happening to the equipment is very high. So, you have decided
  to buy insurance to protect you against this possible damage.
C.You have learned that during a certain time of the year, the      3. Exploit
  locals come to hunt in the jungle in big numbers. So, you have
  decided not to do the shoot during that part of the year.
D.Although the movie does not depend on it, it will add a lot of    4. Share
  marketing value to the movie if your cameras could capture
  an endangered species of birds that live in the jungle. You are
  choosing the time of the year for shooting and taking some
  other actions to increase the probability that the birds will
  show up.
E.The movie has something to do with Thanksgiving Day. You          5. Mitigate
  have put in some extra resources to ensure that the movie is
  completed in a timely manner for a release on Thanksgiving
  Day.
F.You have learned that there could be mosquitoes in the area       6. Enhance
  in which you are going to shoot. So, you have planned to take
  plenty of mosquito repellant and other products to prevent
  mosquito bites.
G.You know another movie team that's going to shoot some            7. Transfer
  scenes in the same jungle during a different time of the year.
  You have signed a contract with them to share or trade the
  shots of the endangered bird species.
302   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      You use these strategies to generate the output of the risk response planning
      process.


      Output of Risk Response Planning
      The main output of this process is appropriate risk response and strategies,
      and the related schedule activities with assigned resources. The Plan Risk
      Responses process does not create any document such as a risk response
      management plan. Instead, its output is inserted into already existing project
      plans and project documents as discussed in the following paragraphs.
      Risk Register and Risk Report Updates. The appropriate risk responses
      and strategies planned and agreed upon by the risk management team are
      included in the risk register. The responses to high-priority and moderate-
      priority risks are entered in detail, while the low-priority risks can be put on
      a watch list for monitoring. Other items added to the risk register as a result
      of this process may include the following:
            *   Planned and agreed-upon risk response strategies and
                specific actions to implement each strategy
            *   Symptoms and warning signs of risk occurrences; contin-
                gency plans and triggers for contingency risks
            *   Budget and schedule activities to implement the planned
                responses, including the contingency reserve, which is the
                amount of funds, time, or both needed.
            *   Fallback plans in case the planned responses prove to be
                inadequate
            *   A list of risks to remain, which include the following:
                *    Passive, accepted risks
                *    Residual risks that will remain after planned
                     responses have been performed
            *   A list of secondary risks that will arise as a result of imple-
                menting the responses. You must plan for these risks like
                any other risk.
      Similarly, the risk report can be updated with planned responses to the over-
      all project risk and the resulting impact changes that are expected from the
      implementation of these responses.
      Other Document Updates. The documents that may change as a result
      of this process are listed in the output column of Table 7-10. The change
      or update is triggered by the action of inserting the output of this process
      into project plans and project documents. For example, scheduling the risk
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth         303



response-related activities updates the project schedule and project team assign-
ments. These changes may require or lead to changes in or updates to the
scope baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline, and other items listed in the
output column of Table 7-10.
Change Requests. For proposed changes to any component of the proj-
ect plan, such as scope baseline, schedule baseline, and schedule management
plan, change requests must be generated and processed through the Perform
Integrated Change Control process.


Note A residual risk is the remains of a risk on which a response has been performed,
whereas a secondary risk is a risk that is expected to arise as a result of implementing a risk
response; therefore, a response for a secondary risk must also be planned.


In a nutshell, risk response planning examines and selects the risk response
strategies, uses these strategies to plan responses to individual project risks
and overall project risk, assigns resources to these response activities, and
schedules them.
Once risk responses have been planned, you need to implement them and
control this implementation, which will be discussed in the execution and
monitoring and controlling parts of the book.
The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
       1. The goal for quality planning is twofold: Identify quality
          requirements and standards for your project, and specify
          how to determine whether the project and its product
          satisfy these requirements and standards.
       2. Planning risk involves developing the risk management
          plan, identifying risks, prioritizing risks, and preparing risk
          responses.
       3. The in-synch development and implementation of the
          quality management plan and risk management plan is
          crucial for project success as it delivers the right and
          complete product.
304   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      Summary
      Quality management includes planning quality, managing quality, and controlling
      quality. The quality management plan and quality metrics are the major output
      items of the quality planning process called Plan Quality. Quality and risk are two
      interrelated aspects of any project and need to be managed. Risk refers to an
      uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on
      meeting the project objectives, hence posing threats or offering opportunities,
      respectively. Risk management includes planning risk management, identifying
      and analyzing the risks, planning and preparing the risk responses, implementing
      the risk response if the risk occurs, and monitoring the risks. The only output of
      risk management planning is the risk management plan, which includes elements
      such as a list of tools and approaches to be used for risk management, identifica-
      tion and assignment of resources for risk management, defining risk categories,
      risk probabilities and impacts, and the format of risk reporting and tracking. This
      information is used in the remaining processes of risk management--Identify
      Risks, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis,
      Plan Risk Responses, Implement Risk Reponses, and Monitor Risks.
      The risk identification process initiates two documents as output: the risk
      register, which contains information about identified individual project risks,
      and the risk report, which contains information about overall project risk. Both
      of these items are added to or modified by other risk management processes.
      The main output of qualitative risk analysis is the prioritization of risks based
      on a probability and impact matrix for each objective. Each objective might
      have its own prioritized list of risks. However, the emphasis in quantitative
      analysis is on two things--assessing the probability of meeting each project
      objective and prioritizing the risks based on the total impact of each risk on
      the overall project objectives. Subsequently, the resultant prioritized list of
      risks can be used to prepare the risk response plan.
      Risk response planning examines and selects the risk response strategies, uses
      these strategies to plan responses to individual project risks and overall proj-
      ect risk, assigns resources to these response activities, and schedules them.
      This risk response plan is executed to minimize the impact of threats and
      maximize the impact of opportunities on the project, which is discussed in the
      execution part of the book.
      Road Ahead: In Chapter 2, we talked about project stakeholders in some
      detail, and all through the book we have been making references to them. As
      you know, starting from the project sponsor to you, to your team, to the cus-
      tomer, and so forth, everybody is a stakeholder. Without stakeholders, there
      would be no project. This underlines the importance of stakeholder man-
      agement. You need to communicate with stakeholders, and communication
      needs to be managed. In the next chapter, we will discuss the planning of these
      two closely tied aspects of project management: stakeholder management and
      communication management.
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth       305




Exam's Eye View
Comprehend

*Quality management has two quality components to manage: project quality and project
 product quality, which is linked to project deliverables.
*Planning quality is all about identifying quality requirements and standards for the project
 and its deliverables, and then determining how to test and verify that they have been
 implemented.
*Risk categorization is a part of the risk management plan and it helps in the risk
 identification process, which can modify the categories.
*Defining the risk probability and risk impact are parts of the risk management plan; they
 are assessed in the qualitative risk analysis to prioritize risk.
*Risk identification is performed before any risk analysis, and the qualitative risk analysis, if
 performed, is performed before quantitative risk analysis because it takes less effort and
 time and its results can be used for quantitative analysis.
*The emphasis in quantitative analysis is on two tasks: assess the probability of meeting
 each project objective and prioritize the risks based on their total effect on overall project
 objectives.
*An important update added to the risk register by the qualitative and quantitative risk
 analyses is the prioritized list of risks.

Look Out

*Quality is not only about defects in the products; it also includes things like process
 improvement, completing tasks on time, cost, and other aspects of project performance.
*Risk stems from elements of uncertainty and can have a negative or positive effect on
 meeting the project objectives. A positive effect is called an opportunity.
*The risk register and risk report are initially prepared during the risk identification
 process, and some results from the other risk management processes are added to them.
*Depending upon the experience of the team and the nature of the risk, a risk can be moved
 directly after identification to quantitative risk analysis or even to risk response planning.
*For a simple project, quantitative risk analysis may not be needed.
*There is no document called the risk response management plan. The risk response-
 related activities are inserted into the appropriate project and plan documents.

Memorize

*The output of the Plan Quality Management process includes quality metrics in addition to
 the quality management plan.
*A prompt list is a predetermined list of risk categories that can be used to generate ideas
 to identify individual project risks.
*The risk register contains information about individual project risks, and the risk report
 contains information about the sources of overall project risks and a summary of
 individual project risks.
306   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


      Review Questions
           1. Which of the following is a false statement about project
              risks?
               A. A risk arises out of uncertainty.
               B. A risk can only have a negative effect on a project.
               C. Identified risks are usually listed in a document called
                  the risk register.
               D. Risks can be categorized by developing a risk break-
                  down structure (RBS).
           2. The risk register is not an input to which of the following
              processes?
               A. Identify Risks
               B. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
               C. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
               D. Implement Risk Responses
           3. Which of the following is not an information-gathering
              technique listed in PMBOK, Sixth Edition for use in the
              risk identification process?
               A. Brainstorming
               B. Delphi technique
               C. SWOT analysis
               D. Root-cause analysis
           4. Which of the following statements about risk analysis is
              false?
               A. Quantitative risk analysis can only be performed on
                  risks on which a qualitative risk analysis has already
                  been performed.
               B. Qualitative risk analysis is usually performed before
                  quantitative risk analysis.
               C. An updated risk report is the output of both qualita-
                  tive risk analysis and quantitative risk analysis.
               D. The risk register is an input to both qualitative risk
                  analysis and quantitative risk analysis.
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   307



5. You are managing a project to set up data servers to sup-
   port a website for an enterprise customer. The location
   for the servers has been placed close to the customer
   due to their requirements. However, this location is
   prone to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and flood-
   ing. You have decided to install some extra servers in
   another city that will act as backup if a disaster happens.
   This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Risk avoidance
    B. Risk mitigation
    C. Risk acceptance
    D. Risk transfer
6. The risk management team of a software project has
   decided that due to the lack of adequate talent in your
   company, development of a specific part of the system
   is under high risk, so they have decided to outsource it.
   This is an example of which of the following?
    A. Risk avoidance
    B. Risk mitigation
    C. Risk acceptance
    D. Risk transfer
7. You are in the process of evaluating the probability and
   impact of a risk by assigning numbers, such as expected
   monetary value. This is an example of which of the
   following?
    A. Monte Carlo simulation
    B. Qualitative risk analysis
    C. Quantitative risk analysis
    D. Risk response planning
8. Consider Figure 7-6. Assume that the risk has a 50 per-
   cent probability of occurring. If the risk does occur, it
   could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to
   $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities
   shown in the figure.
308   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management




      Figure 7-6. Example of positive and negative risk impact

             What is the EMV for the positive impact?
                  A. $80,000
                  B. $200,000
                  C. $50,000
                  D. $40,000
             9. Consider Figure 7-6. Assume that the risk has a 50 per-
                cent probability of occurring. If the risk does occur, it
                could have a positive or a negative impact equivalent to
                $200,000 or $50,000, respectively, with the probabilities
                shown in the figure. What is the EMV for the risk?
                  A. $25,000
                  B. $55,000
                  C. $110,000
                  D. $50,000
            10. Which of the following is a correct statement about sec-
                ondary risks?
                  A. These are the residual risks.
                  B. These are the risks that have medium or low priority.
                  C. These are the risks that will be avoided.
                  D. These are the risks that can result from responses to
                     the identified risks.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   309



11. Which of the following is not a valid risk response?
     A. Risk acceptance
     B. Risk sharing
     C. Risk mitigation
     D. Risk rejection
12. Which of the following is a valid statement about SWOT?
     A. It is an analysis technique to identify risks.
     B. It refers to the analysis of scope, work, options, and
        timing.
     C. It is a technique used to plan a risk response.
     D. It is a technique used to perform quantitative risk
        analysis.
13. Which of the following is not an output of qualitative risk
    analysis?
     A. A prioritized list of risks for a given project objective
        based on the probability and impact matrix of the
        objective
     B. A watch list of low-priority risks
     C. A list of risks prioritized based on the total effect of
        each risk on the overall project objectives
     D. A list of trends in the analysis results
14. Which of the following is not an output of quantitative
    risk analysis?
     A. Probability of meeting the project objectives, such as
        cost and schedule
     B. A list of risks prioritized based on the total combined
        effect of each risk on the overall project objectives
     C. A list of trends in the analysis results
     D. Decision about a risk-related contractual agreement
310   Chapter 7 | Planning Quality and Risk Management


          15. What is the name of a quality planning technique that
              involves comparing the results of similar activities?
               A. Brainstorming
               B. Benchmarking
               C. Cost-benefit analysis
               D. Quality metrics
          16. What about matrix diagrams is not true:
               A. It is used in planning quality management.
               B. It is used in managing quality.
               C. It is used to explore the effects of defects.
               D. It helps to find the key quality metrics important for
                  project success.
          17. What about quality metrics is not true:
               A. A metric in quality metrics is a product attribute
                  accompanied by the information on how the quality
                  control process will verify its quality conformance.
               B. They are an output of planning quality.
               C. They can be used as a reference or basis for develop-
                  ing the test for quality and for suggesting improve-
                  ment; e.g., change request.
               D. They help to find the key quality metrics important
                  for project success.
          18. What about flowcharts is not true?
               A. They can be used to understand and estimate the
                  cost of quality for a process
               B. They can help in improving processes.
               C. They can be used to identify points where quality
                  defect may occur.
               D. They help in figuring out the frequency of defects from
                  different attributes of the product during inspection.
                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   311



19. What about mind mapping is not true?
    A. This technique is used in the Perform Quality
       Assurance process.
    B. This technique may help in figuring out quality
       requirements.
    C. It can be used to find constraints.
    D. It can help to find relationships such as dependencies.
20. The plan-do-check-act cycle of quality management was:
    A. Defined by Shewhart and modified by Deming
    B. Originally defined by Deming and then modified by
       Shewhart
    C. Defined by Crosby and modified by Deming
    D. Defined by Crosby and modified by Juan
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                            8

Planning for
Communication
and Stakeholder
Management
PMP Exam Objectives                    What It Really Means
1.3 Perform stakeholder analysis       Perform stakeholder analysis using appropriate
                                       tools and techniques in order to align expectations
                                       and gain support for the project.
                                       Develop the stakeholder engagement plan as
                                       discussed in this chapter.
2.6 Develop the communications         Develop the communications management plan
    management plan                    based on the project's organizational structure and
                                       stakeholder requirements in order to define and
                                       manage the flow of project information.
                                       Know the input documents really well and how
                                       they are used to develop the communication plan.
                                       Understand all the communication models.
                                                                                (continued)
(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_8
314   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      PMP Exam Objectives                      What It Really Means
      2.11 Present the project management      Present the project management plan to the
           plan to the relevant stakeholders   relevant stakeholders according to applicable
      2.12 Conduct kick-off meeting            policies and procedures in order to obtain approval
                                               to proceed with project execution.
      2.13 Develop the stakeholder
           management plan                     Conduct kick-off meeting, communicating the
                                               start of the project, key milestones, and other
                                               relevant information in order to inform and engage
                                               stakeholders and gain commitment.
                                               Develop the stakeholder management plan by
                                               analyzing needs, interests, and potential impact
                                               in order to effectively manage stakeholders'
                                               expectations and engage them in project decisions.
                                               Stakeholder management plan means stakeholder
                                               engagement plan as discussed in this chapter. Most
                                               of the stakeholder material referred to in these
                                               exam objectives is covered in this chapter; the rest
                                               is scattered over the other chapters.



      Without project stakeholders, there is literally no project. Your project
      is doomed to fail without successful project stakeholder management.
      Before asking what stakeholder management is, let's recall who the project
      stakeholders are. As discussed in Chapter 2, the amount of enthusiasm,
      anxieties, fears, and so forth varies with different stakeholders. Accordingly,
      they will have differing needs and expectations. One of the key project
      management focuses on which project success depends is achieving
      stakeholder satisfaction by meeting their needs and expectations while
      remaining aligned with project objectives. A key to keeping stakeholders'
      expectations aligned with project objectives and meeting those expectations
      is to keep stakeholders engaged in the project. Project managers have little,
      if any, control over the stakeholders. So, stakeholder management is all about
      stakeholder engagement.
      Stakeholder management and communication management are two inherently
      closely tied together project knowledge areas. As your project is doomed to
      fail without successful project stakeholder management, it requires successful
      communication management.
      Communication skills are critical for success not only in management, including
      project management, but also in a multitude of short-term and long-term
      tasks we perform each day. These skills can be applied to all communication
      techniques, such as verbal, written, video, and body language, as well as to
      listening. They are also an important component of other skills required for
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      315



effective project management, such as negotiating, influencing, and leadership
(which is one of the three skills that constitute the PMI's talent triangle for
project management). Other common uses for communication skills are
performing tasks such as fact-finding to develop or verify information; probing
or analyzing an idea or situation; holding meetings and conducting discussions;
setting and managing expectations; resolving conflict; and educating, coaching,
motivating, persuading, or reassuring a person or a group.
The central question in this chapter is: How do you plan for successful
stakeholder and communication management for the success of the project? In
search of an answer, we will explore three avenues: the big picture of stakeholder
management and communication management, plan communication, and plan
stakeholder engagement.


Project Stakeholder Management: Big Picture
Project stakeholder management is all about getting stakeholders engaged in
the project in order to get their support for the project. This knowledge area
comprises four processes, summarized in Table 8-1. A high-level and simple
view of the interaction between these processes is shown in Figure 8-1.



     WZDW
                                     ^Z
                                     
            /                                           W^Z
           ^Z                                            
                                  ^Z


                    ^Z                             ^Z
                                                   


            D                                              DZZ
           ^Z                                             ^Z
                                        /Z                


Figure 8-1. Big picture of managing stakeholders
316   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management



      Table 8-1. Processes of Project Stakeholder Management Mapped to the Process Groups of
      Major Outputs

      Stakeholder               Process Group       Major Output              Performed
      Management Process
      Identify Stakeholders     Initiating          Stakeholder register      Throughout the
                                                                              project as needed
      Plan Stakeholder          Planning            Stakeholder               Throughout the
      Engagement                                    engagement plan           project periodically
      Manage Stakeholder        Executing           Issues, change requests   Throughout the
      Engagement                                                              project
      Monitor Stakeholder       Monitor and         Work performance          Throughout the
      Engagement                Control             information               project




      Note With the exception of Integration Management, there is no knowledge area other than
      Stakeholder Management that has processes in all the project stages before closing the project.
      This reflects the significance of stakeholder management.


      Before we can get stakeholders engaged in the project, we need to identify
      them by using the Identify Stakeholders process, discussed in Chapter 1.
      Still, before you can manage them, you need to plan. As pointed out earlier,
      managing stakeholders is all about their engagement in the project. So, we
      want to plan stakeholder engagement.


      Planning Stakeholder Engagement
      Managing stakeholders is equivalent to managing their engagement in the
      project. So, the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process is all about developing
      a management strategy to keep stakeholders engaged in an effective way
      throughout the project. We have all the required information about the
      stakeholders, such as their needs, expectations, influence, and impact, in the
      stakeholder register. Based on this, you develop approaches to interacting
      with stakeholders effectively.
      You use some tools and techniques on this information, along with the project
      management plan, to crank out the stakeholder management plan. The inputs,
      tools and techniques, and outputs of this process are shown in Table 8-2.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   317




Table 8-2. The Plan Stakeholder Engagement Process: Inputs, Tools and Techniques,
and Outputs

Input                                 Tools & Techniques            Output
1. Project charter                    1. Data gathering             Stakeholder
2. Project management plan:              * Benchmarking             engagement plan
  * Communication management plan 2. Data analysis:
  * Resource management plan             * Assumption and
  * Risk management plan                   constraint analysis
3. Project documents:                    * Root-cause analysis
  * Project schedule                  3. Data representation:
  * Stakeholder register                 * Mind mapping
  * Change log                           * Stakeholder engagement
                                           assignment matrix
  * Issues log
                                      4. Decision making:
  * Assumptions log
                                         * Prioritizing/ranking
  * Risk register
                                      5. Expert judgment
4. Agreements
                                      6. Meetings
5. Enterprise environmental factors
6. Organizational project assets


As the project proceeds, the memberships, needs, and expectations may
keep changing, and hence this plan may need to be changed several times by
reiterating the Plan Stakeholder Management process.
The first step to developing a stakeholder engagement plan is to get the raw
data from the input items listed in Table 8-2.


Raw Data for Stakeholder Engagement Plan
From the input items for this process, you extract information about the
project and its stakeholders as raw data to help you develop approaches to
involving stakeholders in the project, as shown in the following paragraphs.
Information Project Level. From the project charter, fetch information
about the purpose, objectives, and success criteria of the project. Also, from
the project agreements, extract information on how to properly manage a
stakeholder, including contractor, suppliers, and procurement group.
Main Sources of Information about Stakeholders. The stakeholder register
is the main source of information about stakeholders, such as their identity,
needs, expectations, etc. Also, from the project schedule, extract information
about the project owner and executor; and from the resource management
plan, get information about the role and responsibilities of stakeholders.
318   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      Secondary Sources of Information about Stakeholders. Assumptions
      about certain stakeholders can be found in the assumptions log, and information
      on the risk owners and impactors can be found in the risk register. Information
      about stakeholders with issues and those who may help to resolve them can be
      found in the issues log. As an example, one need of stakeholders with issues will
      be that you communicate with them. You can learn about stakeholders' attitudes
      toward and tolerance of risk from the risk management plan. From the change
      log, extract information about those stakeholders who are sources of change
      requests and those who will decide to accept, reject, or postpone a given request.
      General Support Information for Stakeholder Management. As
      mentioned earlier, stakeholder management and communication management
      are tightly coupled. Communication strategies and their implementation from
      communication management would provide useful information for stakeholder
      management processes.
      It's critical that you adapt stakeholder management to the project environment.
      That's where enterprise environmental factors play a role as input to this process.
      The organizational structure and culture in conjunction with political climate
      and stakeholders' risk tolerance can be used to select better options so as to
      effectively adapt stakeholder management to the project environment. Factors
      like geographical distribution of facilities and resources, and local and global
      culture and trends may also influence the development of an engagement plan.
      The important organizational process assets in this process include the
      organizational policies and procedures about media, ethics, security, risk,
      communications, and so on.
      For effective and efficient stakeholder management, it's important to learn
      from experience. Therefore, the lessons learned database and historical
      information are especially useful organizational process assets used as input
      for the Plan Stakeholder Management process.
      You use the information discussed in this section as raw data for certain
      methods to develop the stakeholder engagement plan, as discussed in the
      next section.


      Tools and Techniques to Develop Stakeholder
      Engagement Plan
      To develop the stakeholder engagement plan, you do the following:
            1. Analyze the raw data discussed in the previous section.
            2. Compare the analysis results with benchmark.
            3. Prioritize stakeholders and their needs.
            4. Present the information in an easily useable form.
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth    319



These steps are elaborated in the following.
Data Analysis. There are usually multiple possible strategies to apply to
stakeholder engagement. These are tailored using analysis of assumptions and
constraints; e.g., about the stakeholders and their needs and expectations.
Furthermore, you need to find the fundamental reason for the current level of
support or opposition of the project by a stakeholder so that you can chose
appropriate strategies to bring the support or opposition to a desirable level.
This fundamental reason is found by conducting a root-cause analysis.
Comparing Results. You can compare the results from data analysis, just
described, with a suitable benchmark, such as results from a world-class project
in the application area of your project.
Decision Making. You can prioritize stakeholders and their needs or
requirements using decision-making techniques, such as prioritizing or ranking.
These decision-making techniques have been explained and used in several
chapters, such as Chapter 12.
Data Presentation. The data presentation should present the information
in an easily useable form. For example, mind mapping can be used to visually
display information about stakeholders and how they are related to each other
and to the organization. An important piece of information about stakeholders
is stakeholder engagement, which is the heart of stakeholder management, as
it's critical to project success. You can define different levels of engagement for
your project, such as those shown in Table 8-3.

Table 8-3. Levels of Stakeholder Engagement

Stakeholder Level of   Aware of Project and Action or Reaction
Engagement             Potential Impacts
Leading                Yes                    Actively working for project success
Supportive             Yes                    Supports the change to be caused by the
                                              impact
Resistant              Yes                    Resists the change to be caused by the
                                              impact
Neutral                Yes                    Neither supportive nor resistant
Unaware                No                     No intentional reaction to project


You should also always know what the current engagement level of a given
stakeholder is, and what level of engagement is required for that stakeholder
for the project to succeed. This information can be complied in the stakeholders'
engagement assessment matrix, as shown in a simple example in Table 8-4, which
compares each stakeholder's current engagement level with the desired one;
320   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      Current indicates the current engagement, and Desired indicates the desired
      engagement. The project team needs to identify the desired engagement level
      for the current phase of the project based on available information.
      The example in Table 8-4 shows that stakeholder Janet is at the desired
      engagement level, while stakeholders Shanti, John, and City Mayor require
      further communications and additional actions to move them to the desired
      level of engagement.

      Table 8-4. Stakeholders' Engagement Assessment Matrix

      Stakeholder   Leading       Supportive    Resistant     Neutral   Unaware
      Janet         Current,
                    Desired
      Shanti                      Desired                     Current
      John                        Desired                               Current
      City Mayor                  Desired       Current


      The stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix exposes the gaps between
      the current and desired engagement levels. Accordingly, you can act through
      the stakeholder management processes to close these gaps.
      In the process of analysis for engagement planning, you will be holding meetings
      with the relevant stakeholders and seeking their expert judgment as needed on
      relevant topics, such as understanding and dealing with internal and external
      politics, culture, and power structure; appropriate communication means and
      strategies under different situations; and strategies for stakeholders' project
      engagement.
      The output of this process is the stakeholder management plan, which contains
      strategies to implement and actions to perform to facilitate stakeholders'
      creative involvement in the project, such as making project decisions and
      project execution.
      The stakeholder management plan is implemented in the process of managing
      stakeholder engagement, which is discussed in the execution and monitoring
      and controlling parts of this book.
      As you saw, the communication management plan is an input to the Plan
      Stakeholder Engagement process, and it underlines the close connection
      between stakeholder management and communication management. After
      all, stakeholders need to be communicated with. Before we discuss how to
      develop the communication management plan, let's take a look at the big
      picture of project communication management.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth        321




Managing Project Communication: Big Picture
There is a common thread that runs through almost all activities and
processes in project management, and that is communication. The project
and its activities will fail without effective communication. Communication is
an exchange of information among persons and groups by using an effectively
common system of signs, symbols, and behavior. I use the term effectively
common to consider the fact that even if two communicating entities are using
two different systems, the "translators" between the communicating entities
produce the results as if the two entities were using a common system. For
example, I might be using a Windows computer, and you might be using
a Macintosh, but we can exchange emails without having to deal with the
differences between the two machines.


Tip Communication is a common thread that runs through almost all activities and processes
in project management. You manage communication using processes in the communication
management knowledge area, but communication itself permeates through almost every project
activity.


The importance of communication in project management cannot be
overemphasized. Even a well-scheduled and well-funded project can fail in
the hands of a hardworking team of experts due to the lack of proper and
timely communication. As a project manager, you may be dealing with a
wide functional variety of individuals, ranging from executives, to marketing
personnel, to sales folks, to technologists. You should be able to wear different
communication hats depending upon with whom you are communicating. For
example, you will not be talking in terms of technical jargon with executives or
marketing folks, and you will not speak marketing lingo to software developers.
You will be speaking to different stakeholders in their "language," while
filling the "language gap" between different functional groups and eliminating
misunderstandings due to miscommunication. The key point is that you put
on the appropriate communication hat depending on which individual or
group you are communicating with. Be able to switch communication hats
quickly and avoid technical jargon and acronyms that are not understood by
the person or the group you are communicating with. The goal is clarity of
language to convey the message accurately.
In a project, you will be communicating with project stakeholders. The
intrinsic connection between communication management and stakeholder
management is illustrated in Figure 8-2, with communication management
processes in black and stakeholder management processes in gray boxes.
322   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      As shown in Table 8-5, project communication management is constituted by
      the following three processes:
             *    Plan Communication. This is the process of determining
                  the project information needs and accordingly develop-
                  ing the project communication plan to meet those needs.
             *    Manage Communication. This is the process of
                  managing the distribution of relevant information to the
                  right stakeholders at the right time by using the right
                  methods. This managing of information covers creating,
                  collecting, storing, retrieving, and distributing needed
                  project information.
             *    Monitor Communication. This process oversees
                  the communication to make sure that the information
                  needs of stakeholders are adequately met throughout
                  the project as planned, and that the communication is
                  producing the desired impact.


      Tip The major goal of communication management is to deliver the right information to
      the right stakeholders at the right time by using the right methods to produce the desired
      impact.



                                              /
                    ^Z                       ^Z
                                                                          ^Z
                                                                          
                            ZZ                       ^Z
                                                     
                           ^Z                                 hZ
                                              D               
         W                                                                     DZZ
                                             ^Z
        ZZ                                                                    ZZ
                           ZZ                
                           

                                                    WZ
                                                    ZZ                     WZ
                  ZZ                                                       ZZ
                  
                                             D
                                            ZZ


      Figure 8-2. Big picture of project communication management
                                                                  PMP(R) in Depth   323



These processes are mapped to their process groups in Table 8-2.

Table 8-5. Processes of Project Communication Management Mapped to the Process
Groups of Major Outputs

Human Resource     Process Group       Major Output             Performed
Management Process
Plan Communication    Planning         Communication            Throughout the
                                       management plan          project
Manage                Executing        Project communications   Throughout the
Communication                                                   project
Monitor               Monitoring and   Work performance         Throughout the
Communication         Controlling      information              project
                                       Change requests


In a nutshell, communication in project management has much to do with
managing the information and delivering it to project stakeholders at the right
time by using the appropriate methods. We plan project communication for
the project stakeholders identified in the initiation stage.


Planning Project Communication
First, you should realize that communication activities may be performed
in many possible ways, from body language to word of mouth or written
formal documents; from with your peers to up the organizational hierarchy,
to the media; and from unofficial to official. You should be conscious of
using an appropriate way of communicating depending on the nature of the
communication task at hand and the person or group you are communicating
with.
In a project environment, communication means communicating with the
project stakeholders. Plan Communication is the process of determining the
information needs of the project stakeholders, which in general will be different
for different stakeholders, and accordingly designing the communication
approach within the constraints of available organizational assets to meet
those needs.
324   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      To be specific, communication planning determines the following:
             *    The communication and information needs of each
                  project stakeholder, individual, and group
             *    The few Ws: what information is needed, where it will be
                  stored, when it is needed, who needs it, who will deliver
                  it, who can access it, etc.
             *    How the information will be delivered--for example, by
                  email, phone call, or presentation
             *    Gap factors: Time zone differences, language barriers, and
                  cross-cultural barriers


      Caution! Planning communication is the process of determining the information needs
      of each project stakeholder and accordingly the communication approach. Poor planning
      will produce undesired results, such as the wrong individuals getting sensitive information,
      necessary information not getting to the right stakeholders in time, the wrong communication
      methods being used, and so on.


      As mentioned in the previous chapter, the stakeholder register is developed
      during the Identify Stakeholders process, which along with the project plan is
      the major input into the Plan Communication process presented in Table 8-6
      in terms of its inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. Also, because
      communication is the common thread running through the whole project,
      and because it must be adapted to the whole project environment, all the
      enterprise environmental factors and all the organizational process assets
      should be considered as input. Historical information and lessons learned are
      particularly important because they can be used when wisely planning the
      communication based on experience.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth      325




Table 8-6. The Plan Communications Management Process: Inputs, Tools and Techniques,
and Outputs

Input                         Tools & Techniques            Output
1. Project charter            1. Communication              1. Communication
2. Project management plan:      requirement analysis          management plan
  * Resource management       2. Communication              2. Project management
    plan                         technology determination      updates:
  * Stakeholder engagement    3. Communication methods        * Stakeholder engagement
    plan                         and models determination       plan
3. Project documents:         4. Interpersonal and team     3. Project document updates:
                                 skills:                      * Project schedule
  * Requirement
    documentation               * Communication style         * Stakeholder register
                                  assessment
  * Stakeholder register
                                * Cultural and political
4. Enterprise environmental
                                  awareness
   factors
                              5. Data representation:
5. Organizational project
   assets                       * Stakeholder engagement
                                  assignment matrix
                              6. Expert judgment
                              7. Meetings



Performing the Plan Communication Management
Process
The core of planning communication management can be expressed in the
following steps in terms of the inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs listed
in Table 8-6:
        1. From the resource management plan, get relevant "how
           to" information about resources, such as team mem-
           bers, other stakeholders, and communication resources,
           including how they are categorized, allocated, managed,
           and released. The info may help in determining their com-
           munication need and how to fulfill it.
        2. From the stakeholder engagement plan, learn about the
           stakeholder engagement strategies, which would need
           communication to be implemented.
        3. Find out about stakeholders from the stakeholder register
           and project charter, which identify the key stakeholders
           and possibly their responsibilities.
326   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


             4. Fetch stakeholders' communication requirements from
                the requirement documentation, if any.
             5. Determine the stakeholders' communication needs by
                performing a communication requirement analysis on the
                information or raw data collected in the preceding steps.
             6. Determine the communication technology to use to store
                and deliver the information.
             7. Determine the communication methods and models to
                communicate.
             8. Determine interpersonal and team skills data-presenta-
                tion techniques to be used in communication.
             9. Document all these determinations and "how to's" in the
                communications management plan.
           10. Update the documents that need to be updated as a
               result of this process, such as those listed in the output
               column of Table 8-6.
      The tools and techniques mentioned are explained in the following section.


      Tools and Techniques for Communication
      Planning
      Recall that communication is the transferral of information from one point
      to another. It expends resources. To optimize the use of resources and
      the benefits of communication, you need to analyze the communication
      requirements and determine the best communication technology to be
      used to facilitate information transfer. These and other relevant tools and
      techniques are discussed in the following sections.


      Communication Requirements Analysis
      Communication requirements needed for the communication planning process
      must be analyzed. This analysis will generate a list of the communication needs
      of the project stakeholders. For example, a communication requirement may
      specify the type of information and the format in which this information should
      be delivered. The analysis of this requirement will estimate the value of this
      communication requirement--for example, fulfillment of this requirement will
      significantly contribute to the success of the project, or the lack of it will result
      in the failure of the project or one of its components. So, one of the purposes
      of communication requirements analysis is to optimize the use of resources
      in communication by prioritizing requirements.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth        327




Tip Communication requirements need to be analyzed to determine the communication needs
of the project stakeholders. This is important for achieving optimal use of the communication
resources and for project success.


The following are some examples of what types of information and sources of
communication requirements you will need in order to analyze communication
requirements for your project:
       *    Input Documents. Type of information and sources of
            communication requirements mentioned in the previous
            section
       *    Relationships. Organizational and stakeholder respon-
            sibility relationships. Organizational charts can be helpful
            to figure out some of this information.
       *    Groups. Different groups, disciplines, departments, and
            specialties involved in this project--for example,
            marketing, sales, and engineering as departments and
            software engineering and testing as groups in the
            engineering department--and their interdependencies.
       *    Logistics. How many individuals and groups will be
            involved in the project and where they are located.
            Obviously, this information is necessary to plan
            communication.
       *    Information Needs. Communication is performed to
            deliver or exchange some kind of information. So, to plan
            communication effectively, it's important to know the
            following information needs:
            *    Information needs of the stakeholders
            *    Internal information needs--for example,
                 communication across the performing organization
                 and communication within the project team
            *    External information needs--for example,
                 communicating with contractors, media, and the
                 public
            *    Legal requirements, such as privacy of certain types
                 of information
            *    Number of communication channels or paths in
                 different modes such one to one, one to many, and
                 many to many
328   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      You can appreciate the complexity of communication by realizing that there
      are n(n-1)/2 possible communication channels among n stakeholders in
      many-to-many mode. You can derive this formula by realizing that each of
      n individuals can communicate with n-1 other individuals. If we multiply n
      by n-1, we are double counting each channel, and hence we divide by 2. For
      example, if there are 20 stakeholders, the possible number of communication
      channels is 20(20-1)/2 = 190.


      Caution! Note that PMI lists communication technology, communication models, and
      communication methods as Tools & Techniques in the Plan Communication Management process.
      Generally, we use the tools and techniques listed in a process to run the process. But in this case,
      we are determining, not necessarily using, the communication technology, models, and methods
      that will be needed to facilitate communication among stakeholders.


      Based on your project's communication needs, you can determine which
      communication technology, models, and methods will be appropriate to meet
      these needs.


      Communication Technology Determination
      Depending on the communication needs and the nature of the information, a
      communication technology may vary from a conversation in a hallway, to meetings,
      to a sophisticated information system. The following factors can contribute to
      determining the communication technology to be used for your project:
              *    Availability. If you are considering a number of options,
                   obviously the technology that's already in place is more
                   likely to be chosen.
              *    Project Environment. The project environment can
                   also affect the choice of communication technology. For
                   example, the communication technology requirements
                   for a project team that meets face-to-face will be different
                   from those of a virtual team.
              *    Project Length. The length of the project affects
                   communication technology requirements in the following
                   ways:
                   *    Is it worth it to spend on a technology for the given
                        length of the project?
                   *    Will the technology under consideration change
                        during the course of the project?
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth    329



If yes, that will mean extra cost for the new technology and for training team
members to use it.
      *   Urgency of the Information Need. How frequently
          the information needs to be updated will also play a role in
          determining the communication technology. For example,
          information that does not need to change frequently can
          be delivered in written reports, whereas information that
          can change very frequently can be delivered through web
          pages.
      *   Staffing Preparation Level. Another factor that can
          be considered in making the communication technology
          decision is the users' (project team and other stakeholders)
          level of preparation for using a given technology. Are the
          users already fluent in this technology or will they need
          to be trained? Training and learning for the project staff
          could be valid issues on the table.
      *   Confidentiality of Information. This will also influence
          what technology you can use.
      *   Organizational Policy on the Use of Social Media.
          This will affect what information you can put on social
          media.

Communication Models and Methods
Determination
If you have some experience in IT or in the field of communication, be aware
that when PMI refers to communication models and methods, it has very
specific things in mind. Although it's a very broad topic, we will confine our
discussion to what PMI means by communication models and methods, for
the purpose of the exam.
Communication Models. A general illustration of PMI's ideas of
communication models is in Figure 8-3, and the different components in the
path of communication are explained in the following list:
      *   Sender. The individual that initiates the communication
          by sending the original message.
      *   Message. An encoded piece of information that travels
          from one individual to another.
      *   Encode. To convert thoughts into a format that can be
          sent as a message to the receiver.
      *   Decode. To convert the encoded message back into
          thoughts and ideas upon which one could act.
330   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


             *    Medium. The means of communication used to send
                  and receive the message. Email, telephone, and face-to-
                  face conversation are some examples of media.
             *    Feedback Message. The response sent by the receiver
                  to the sender. It may be a simple acknowledgment, or it
                  may be a full message that requires a response.
             *    Receiver. The individual that receives the original
                  message sent by the sender.
             *    Noise. While the message travels through the medium, it
                  can be interrupted and modified by some interfering entity
                  called noise. Anything that interferes with the transmission
                  and understanding of the message is called noise. Some
                  examples are distance, lack of background information or
                  context in which the message is composed, and unfamiliar
                  technology being used. For example, emailing and texting
                  have their own lingo, acronyms, and symbols that can become
                  noise for people who are new to these technologies.




      Figure 8-3. A general illustration of a communication model as viewed by PMI

      The communication model presented in Figure 8-3 is very general, out of
      which we can slice PMI's models, as shown here:
             1. Eliminate feedback message and any consideration of
                noise from Figure 8-3, and you have got PMI's basic sender/
                receiver model of communication. In this model, a message
                can be sent, but it does not ensure that the message was
                understood by the receiver because there is no feedback.
                                                                           PMP(R) in Depth   331



      2. To the basic sender/receiver model, add a feedback
         message and noise consideration due to physical sources
         such as technology or infrastructure, and you have got the
         basic interactive model. It can be used to send a message
         with some assurance that the message is understood.
      3. To the basic interactive model, add human factors such
         as culture differences to the sources of noise, and you
         have got the more complex interactive model, as presented
         in Figure 8-3. It can be used to send a message with
         assurance that the message is understood.
For the communication to work, both the sender and the receiver have some
responsibilities. The responsibilities of the sender include ensuring that the
message being sent conveys the complete information clearly and that the
information is received correctly and understood properly by the receiver.
The responsibilities of the receiver include ensuring that the information
is received correctly and understood properly in its entirety and that it is
acknowledged.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.1

   Saira Bano is the project manager for the Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project.
   Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item in the
   second column.

   Term              Action
   A. Message        1. While developing the schedule, Saira realized that there was
                        a risk involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts into a
                        note that she wrote on her computer.
   B. Medium         2. She sent the note to the project sponsor.
   C. Encode         3. She used email to send the message.
   D. Noise          4. The sponsor received the message.
   E. Receiver       5. The sponsor could not understand some of the acronyms and
                        terms in the email message, such as variable number of tandem
                        repeats (VNTR), a central dogma of molecular biology.
   F. Feedback       6. The sponsor responded to Saira, expressing his concern that
                        he could not exactly understand her concerns.
332   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      Communication Methods. In its most basic form, communication is an
      exchange of information between two entities. Even communication among
      several entities is better handled by looking at it as a set of exchanges
      between two entities. For example, A communicating with B, C, and D is a
      set of exchanges between A and B, A and C, and A and D. In other words, an
      exchange between two entities is the basic building block of communication.
      So, we can always break down a communication into an exchange between a
      sender and a receiver.
      From the perspective of how the sender and the receiver are involved with
      each other through the communication system, communication can be
      classified into the following two main categories:
            1. Interactive Communication. In this type of commu-
               nication, the receiver receives the message and sends a
               response to it. This way, the communicating entities keep
               switching the roles of sender and receiver. There are two
               kinds of interactive communication:
                *   Asynchronous Communication. A communica-
                    tion in which the two communicating entities do not
                    have to be present on both ends of the communica-
                    tion line at the same time. Email is an example of asyn-
                    chronous communication because when the sender
                    of the email pushes the Send button, the intended
                    recipient of the email message does not have to be
                    logged on to the email server. The recipient can log
                    on later, retrieve the message, and read it.
                *   Synchronous Communication. A communication
                    in which the two communicating entities have to be
                    present on both ends of the communication line at
                    the same time. It's a live, real-time communication--
                    if you are not present when the sender is sending
                    the message, you miss the message. Speaking with
                    someone face-to-face and conversing with someone
                    on the phone are two examples of synchronous
                    communication.
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth          333



        2. One-way Communication. There are two kinds of
           one-way communication:
             *    Pull Communication. Pull communication is
                  used when it's up to the receivers to determine if
                  and when they need the information. In this kind of
                  communication, the receiver pulls the information from
                  a pool of information. Downloading from websites is
                  an example of this communication method.
             *    Push Communication. In this kind of communica-
                  tion, the sender broadcasts the information to a set of
                  entities without waiting for the request of information
                  and without the need to confirm that the information
                  reached its destination. Marketing emails and letters
                  are examples of push communication. Status reports
                  are another example.
The pull and push methods can also be used in conjunction with each other.
For example, the sender can also push the information to a pool, and the
receivers can pull it from there at their own convenience.
Communication types discussed here are called communication methods in the
PMI Standard. Depending on the purpose, the project manager can decide
which of these communication methods to use. Quite often a hybrid approach
is used in the real world--that is, a mix of more than one method.


Note Communication approaches, to be determined for communication plan, refers to the
setting or environment in which the information flows, such as interpersonal communication, e.g.,
face-to-face conversation; small group communication (many to many, e.g., a meeting); public
communication (one to many; e.g., one speaker addressing a gathering); mass communication
(one to many, e.g., broadcast or as press release); and network computing technology (e.g., online
social work sites).


Interpersonal and Team Skills. Interpersonal and team skills, including the
following, can be used when dealing with different aspects of communication,
as explained next.
        *    Political Awareness. Political awareness refers to
             recognizing and understanding the power structure
             of the organization and the influence of this structure
             on the relationships in the organization. This technique
             determines the proper communication approaches and
             strategies needed to operate within this power structure
             of the organization.
334   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


            *   Cultural Awareness. Cultural awareness refers to
                recognizing and understanding the cultural differences
                among stakeholders. This technique determines the
                proper communication approaches and strategies to
                needed to operate within the framework of cultural
                differences and sensitivity. This will help you avoid
                misunderstandings and resulting conflicts caused by
                poor understanding of cultural differences and cultural
                insensibilities.
            *   Communication-style Assessment. This technique
                refers to identifying proper content presentation and
                format and preferred delivery method for a planned
                communication activity. This is often used for less
                supportive stakeholders to fill the gap between their
                current support position and the desired one as recorded
                in the stakeholder engagement assignment matrix.
                To close this gap between current project support
                position and the desired one, the engagement assignment
                matrix can be reanalyzed to modify or identify new
                communication requirements. Of course, in the process
                of making these determinations, you will need to hold
                meetings with the project team and other stakeholders
                about communicating and other matters. You can also
                seek expert judgment on communications-related topics
                and matters.
      The result of the activities described in this and the previous sections is the
      generation of the project communication plan.


      Project Communication Plan
      The major output of communication planning is the communication
      management plan. This is the document that describes the communication
      expectations and needs and the plans for how these needs will be met. It
      includes the following:
            *   Communication requirements of the project stakeholders
            *   Information to be communicated: content, format, and
                level of detail
            *   Who will communicate the information, who will receive
                it, and why
            *   The person responsible for authorizing the release of
                confidential information
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth      335



      *   Methods of communication that will be used, such as
          email, presentation, and press release
      *   The frequency of communication, such as daily or weekly
      *   The method and procedure for escalating issues that
          cannot be resolved at a lower staff level, such as project
          level
      *   A glossary of common communication terminology
      *   Methods and procedures for updating and refining
          the communication management plan if needed as the
          program progresses
      *   Communication constraints
When executing a project in this Information Age, more likely than not you will
need multiple technologies for communication, such as email, web calendars,
and video conferencing. Therefore, it is important that you plan for the
communication technology requirements. This planning has two components:
the tools that are needed and the usage of those tools. To determine which
tools are needed, ask questions such as the following:
      *   How frequently do you need to update the information?
      *   Will the team hold face-to-face or virtual meetings?
For information that does not change often, written reports will be sufficient,
whereas information that needs to be updated frequently and on a moment's
notice needs web communication tools. To plan effective usage of the tools,
ask the following questions:
      *   Are the tools (communication systems) already in place
          and ready to be used?
      *   Will the available communication tools change before the
          program ends?
      *   Are the team members familiar with the tools or do they
          need training to use them?
Also, there will be methods and procedures for how to modify the plan, if
need be.


Updates to Project Documents
During communication planning, you might realize that you need to make
some changes in the project schedule and stakeholder register. Accordingly,
you will need to change these documents.
336   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management



      Tip While planning for communication (or doing anything, for that matter), pay attention to
      details, ask questions, and probe the situation to come to a better understanding. A well-understood
      problem is already half solved. Be an active and effective listener.


      Part of managing stakeholders' expectations is to keep them on the same
      page as you. To stay on the same page with the stakeholders, it's important to
      distribute the relevant information at the right time.

                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.2

          Knowing the Plan Communication Management process, answer the following:
          Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
          Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
          Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of Table 8-6 will be
              updated.


      With the communication plan in our hands, we are ready to make
      communication happen--e.g., implement the plan by managing and monitoring
      communications, which is covered in the execution and monitoring and
      controlling parts of this book.
      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
              *    Stakeholder management is about managing engaged
                   stakeholders in the project and monitoring that
                   engagement.
              *    Communication is a common thread that runs through
                   the project lifecycle. So, it's important to develop a
                   communication plan early in the project.
              *    Stakeholder management and communication manage-
                   ment are inherently closely tied, using each other's plans.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      337




Summary
Stakeholder management and communication management are two inherently
closely tied project knowledge areas. It is crucial for the success of the project
to get the support of stakeholders for the project, which is best done by
getting them engaged in the project at appropriate levels at appropriate times.
Project stakeholder management is all about stakeholder engagement, of which
the big part is managing stakeholders' needs, expectations, and concerns. In
stakeholder management, you first identify stakeholders using project business
documents and other items as input to produce a stakeholder register; then
you generate the stakeholder engagement plan by using the project charter
and other items as input.
Communication is the common thread that runs through almost all activities
and processes in project management. There are three communication
processes: plan communication to determine communication; manage
communication to make it happen; and monitor communication to ensure it
happened. The key to the project and the mantra of effective communication is
the distribution of the right information to the right stakeholders at the right
time by using the right communication methods to create the desired impact.
To determine how to do this, you need to plan communication, for which you
need to identify stakeholders and develop a stakeholder management strategy.
Because, the processes of generating the communication management plan
and stakeholder engagement plan are performed throughout the project, the
communication management plan can be used as an input to the process of
generating the stakeholder engagement plan, and the stakeholder engagement
plan can be and is used as an input to the process of generating the
communication management plan, as shown in Figure 8-1. This demonstrates
that stakeholder management and communication management are closely
tied project knowledge areas.
Road Ahead. In this part of the book, you learned how to scope and schedule
the project and plan for its different aspects, such as resources-- including
cost, risk, quality, procurement, stakeholders, and communication. With plans,
you execute the project, as we will discuss in the next part of this book.
338   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
       *The communication management plan is an input to all the stakeholder management
        processes, and the stakeholder engagement plan is an input to all the plan
        communications management processes.
       *Managing stakeholders includes identifying stakeholders, planning stakeholder
        engagement, and monitoring and controlling stakeholder engagement.
       *The stakeholder management plan contains strategies to implement and actions to
        perform to facilitate stakeholders' creative involvement in the project, such as making
        project decisions and project execution.
       *Plan Communication is the process of determining the information needs of the
        project stakeholders and accordingly determining which tools and methods to use to
        meet those needs by producing, storing, and delivering information.
       *Communication requirement analysis is performed to determine the communication
        needs of the project stakeholders and to optimize the use of the communication
        resources for project success.

      Look Out

       *There is no stakeholder management plan, only a stakeholder engagement plan.
       *Managing stakeholder expectations is crucial to the success of the project by keeping
        these expectations in line with the project management plan.
       *After the stakeholders have been identified, stakeholder management is all about
        managing and controlling stakeholder engagement.
       *A key purpose of the stakeholder engagement plan is to support the interaction with
        project stakeholders to serve the project's interests.
       *Communication plays a critical role in keeping the stakeholders engaged in the project.

      Memorize

       *Project stakeholder management consist of five processes: Identify Stakeholders, Plan
        Stakeholder Engagement, Manage Stakeholder Engagement, and Monitor Stakeholder
        Engagement.
       *The stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix is a table that compares individual
        stakeholders' current engagement level with the desired one.
       *Stakeholder management is not about managing or controlling the stakeholders; it is
        about managing or controlling their engagement in the project.
       *Mind mapping is a technique used to visually display information about stakeholders
        and how they are related to each other and to the organization.
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   339




Review Questions
   1. You have just joined a project that has already been
      planned. You want to take a look at strategies to imple-
      ment and actions to perform to facilitate stakeholders'
      creative involvement in the project, such as making
      project decisions and project execution. Where you
      will look?
      A. Stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix
      B. Mind mapping
      C. The stakeholder engagement plan
      D. Project stakeholder register
   2. Which of the following is not generated during the Plan
      Stakeholder Engagement process?
      A. Stakeholder register
      B. Stakeholder engagement plan
      C. Stakeholders' engagement assessment matrix
      D. Strategies about stakeholders' involvement
   3. The focus of the stakeholder management knowledge
      area is:
      A. Stakeholder management
      B. Managing stakeholder expectations
      C. Controlling stakeholders
      D. Stakeholder engagement
   4. Project business documents are input to which stake-
      holder process?
      A. Identify Stakeholders
      B. Manage Stakeholder Expectations
      C. Plan Stakeholder Management
      D. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
340   Chapter 8 | Planning for Communication and Stakeholder Management


           5. Which of the following communication skills are neces-
              sary for a project manager?
              a) Listening, b) negotiating, c) resolving conflict, d)
                 pursuing a team, e) setting expectations (Select the
                 most correct answer):
              A. All except a
              B. All except a and e
              C. All except d
              D. All
           6. You want to ensure that messages are delivered and
              understood. Which communication model would you
              implement for that to happen?
              A. Basic sender/receiver communication model
              B. Basic interactive communication model
              C. More complex interactive model
              D. B or C
           7. You are trying to understand the message sent to you
              by one of your team members, who lives on the other
              side of the globe.The team member has used lots of local
              phrases and acronyms that you are trying to understand.
              According to the basic communication model, what are
              you dealing with here?
              A. Noise and decoding
              B. Encoding and feedback
              C. Message and feedback
              D. Broken English
           8. Which of the following is not an output of communica-
              tion planning?
              A. Methods of communication
              B. Communication constraints
              C. Frequency of reporting the project status
              D. Stakeholder management strategy
                                                   PMP(R) in Depth   341



9. Which of the following is not a part of communications?
   A. Presentations
   B. Emails
   C. Risk reports
   D. To send an email message
                                                                PA R T


                                                               III

Executing the
Project
After the project has been authorized through initiation and planning, it's time
to begin executing. You will be directing and managing the project execution
throughout the lifecycle of the project. To perform the project work, you
will also need to acquire physical and team resources, develop the team, and
manage the project team. Furthermore, your organization might not have the
resources to finish certain parts of the project work.You will need to conduct
procurements for those parts of the work. In addition to managing the overall
project work to produce deliverables, project execution will also include
managing quality, the creation of knowledge in the project, communications,
and stakeholders' involvement in the project. Of course, you will also manage
the implementation of the responses to the risks.You will learn all about that
in this part of the book.
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                            9

Managing
Execution of
Project Work
PMP Exam Objectives            What It Really Means
3.2 Manage execution of        Manage task execution based on the project management
    project work activities    plan by leading and developing the project team to achieve
                               project deliverables.
                               In simple English, it means managing the scheduled project
                               work activities to implement the project management plan
                               in order to generate project deliverables with the aim of
                               meeting the project objective. Covered in two processes:
                               Direct and Manage Project Work and Manage Project
                               Knowledge.
                               You should understand that the project is executed to
                               implement the project management plan.
3.3 Implement the quality      Implement the quality management plan using the
    management plan            appropriate tools and techniques in order to ensure that
                               work is performed in accordance with required quality
                               standards.
                               Covered in the process of Manage Quality

                                                                                 (continued)

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_9
346   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      PMP Exam Objectives        What It Really Means
      3.4 Implement approved     Implement approved changes and corrective actions by
          changes                following the change management plan in order to meet
                                 project requirements.
                                 Covered in the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
                                 You must understand that implementing approved changes,
                                 including approved recommendations for actions and
                                 preventions, is part of the project execution and must be
                                 managed by using the Direct and Manage Project Work
                                 process.
      3.5 Implement approved     Implement approved actions by following the risk
          responses to risks     management plan in order to minimize the impact of the
                                 risks and take advantage of opportunities on the project.
                                 Study the Implement Risk Responses process.
      3.1 Acquire and manage     Acquire and manage project resources by following the
          project resources      human resource and procurement management plans in
                                 order to meet project requirements.
                                 The Conduct Procurements process is covered in this
                                 chapter, and other processes related to this objective are
                                 covered in the next chapter.

      After a project has been planned using the processes in the planning process
      group, it needs to be executed using the processes in the executing process
      group. The project team determines which of the processes in the executing
      process group are relevant to the project at hand. The goal of the execution
      stage is to complete the project work specified in the project management
      plan to meet the project requirements. To accomplish that, you will need to
      acquire physical and team resources and develop and manage the team. Your
      organization might not have the resources to finish certain parts of this work.
      You will need to use procurement for those parts of the work; i.e., conduct
      procurement. You also need to ensure that all the planned quality activities
      are performed. This is accomplished by using the quality assurance process.
      Planned risk responses will need to be implemented, as well.
      Directing and managing project work is the process of implementing the
      project management plan developed during project planning. It's an umbrella
      process over other execution processes and generates the end product of the
      process, the project deliverables. Another high-level or umbrella execution
      process is called Manage Project Knowledge. These processes are called high-
      level umbrella processes because other execution processes are performed
      under these, such as Manage Quality and Conduct Procurements.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth    347



So, the core question in this chapter is how to execute a project as planned. In
search of an answer, you will explore the following three avenues:
      *   Directing and managing project work, and managing
          project knowledge
      *   Managing quality and implementing risk responses
      *   Conducting procurements


Executing a Project: Big Picture
The project work defined in the project management plan is executed by
using the processes in the executing process group, shown in Figure 9-1. As I
said earlier, it is up to the project team to determine which of these processes
is relevant for the project at hand. The processes in this group are used to
accomplish a three-pronged goal:
      *   Coordinate team and physical resources used to perform
          the project activities.
      *   Integrate and manage the project activities being
          performed.
      *   Ensure the implementation of the project scope and
          approved changes.
The following list defines the processes shown in Figure 9-1:
      *   Direct and Manage Project Work. Manage various
          interfaces in the project execution to complete the
          project work smoothly, including approved changes, in
          order to produce the project outcome: deliverables.
      *   Manage Project Knowledge. The process used to help
          meet the project objectives and contribute to organiza-
          tional knowledge and learning by creating new knowledge
          and using existing knowledge.
      *   Acquire Resources. Obtain the project team and
          physical resources needed to perform the project work.
348   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


                                                      h
                                                      ZZW
                                 D                                         D^Z
                                ZZ                    h^Z
                                                                            
                                                      W

                                         WZ
                                         ZZ


                                                        
       DWZ
                                                       DWZ
        <Z
                                                        tZ


                                                Z
                              /Z                Z         D                        Z
          ZZ                   ZZ                         Y                      WZ


      ZZ         d
                 


                         d
                         Z
                         
        Zd                            Dd


      Figure 9-1. The processes used in executing a project. All of these processes shown belong
      to the executing process group.


             *    Develop Project Team. Improve the competencies of
                  the team and team members, and the interaction among
                  team members, to enhance project performance.
             *    Manage Project Team. Manage the project team, which
                  includes tracking the performance of team members,
                  providing feedback, resolving issues, and managing changes
                  to improve project performance.
             *    Manage Quality. The process that implements the
                  quality plan by executing some quality activities in light
                  of the organization's quality policies to examine quality
                  measurements.
             *    Implement Risk Responses. The process to make
                  sure that all the planned risk responses are executed as
                  planned.
             *    Conduct Procurements. Implement the procurement
                  plan by seeking out sellers, getting responses from them,
                  selecting sellers, and reaching an agreement with them.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth     349



      *    Manage Communication. This is the process of managing
           the distribution of relevant information to the right
           stakeholders at the right time by using the right methods.
      *    Manage Stakeholder Engagement. Stay on the
           same page with the stakeholders by communicating and
           working with them on their needs and issues.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.1

   Name the knowledge area for each executing process.


Now that you have a project management plan and the other needed project
documents developed as discussed in the previous part of this book, can you
start project execution? Yes, but once project execution starts, you need to
manage its various aspects, such as resources, quality, risk, and procurements,
all of which are integrated into project work and project knowledge, which
is accomplished by using the Direct and Manage Project Work and Manage
Project Knowledge processes. Each of these aspects is also managed individually
using its own process, such as Manage Quality, Implement Risk Reponses, and
Conduct Procurements. In this chapter, we will cover the all the processes
named in this paragraph.
Let's start with the Direct and Manage Project Work process.


Directing and Managing Project Work
The project work defined and scheduled in the project management plan is
performed using the Direct and Manage Project Work process. This is where
the rubber hits the road. This integrating process manages work planned in
all knowledge areas by interacting with processes across the process groups.
This process is used to manage various technical and organizational interfaces
in the project to facilitate the smooth execution of the project work.
The three main functions of directing and managing project work are as
follows:
      *    Execute the planned project activities to produce
           deliverables in order to meet the project objectives.
      *    Produce work performance and related change requests.
      *    Implement the approved changes, defect repairs, and
           other actions.
350   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Table 9-1 presents the Direct and Manage Project Work process in terms of
      input, tools and techniques, and output.

      Table 9-1. The Direct and Manage Project Work Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
      Output

      Input                              Tools and Techniques    Output
      1. Project management plan         1. Expert judgment      1. Project deliverables
      2. Project documents:              2. Project management   2. Project performance data
        * Project schedule                 information systems   3. Issues log
        * Milestone list                 3. Meetings             4. Change requests
        * Requirement traceability                               5. Project management plan
          matrix                                                    update
        * Project communications                                 6. Project documents update
        * Risk report                                               * Requirement
        * Risk register                                               documentation
        * Change log                                                * Activity list
        * Lessons learned register                                  * Assumptions log
      3. Approved change requests                                   * Risk register
      4. Enterprise environmental                                   * Stakeholder register
         factors                                                    * Lessons learned register
      5. Organizational project assets                              * Risk register
                                                                 7. Organizational process assets


      The key words during this process are implement, perform, and change.


      Input to Directing and Managing Project Work
      The input to directing and managing project work mainly consists of the items
      that need to be implemented--makes sense. Information on the project work
      that needs to be performed to produce the project deliverables is the major
      input to this process. The specific input items are discussed in the following
      paragraphs.
      Project Management Plan. Directing and managing project execution is
      all about implementing the project management plan, which contains all the
      major subsidiary plans, such as the scope management plan, cost management
      plan, and schedule management plan. Obviously, it will also include important
      outputs from other planning processes, such as the scope baseline, schedule
      baseline, and cost baseline. It also describes how the work will be executed to
      meet the project objectives and produce deliverables that satisfy the planned
      requirements.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      351



Project Documents. These include 1) milestone list, which shows scheduled
dates for specific milestones; 2) project schedule, which shows work activities,
their durations, needed resources, and scheduled start and finish dates;
3) project communication, which includes performance reports, deliverables
status, and other useful information; 4) requirements traceability matrix, which
traces whether the deliverables satisfy the planned requirements; 5) change
log, which contains the status of all change requests; 6) risk report, which
contains information on project risk sources and identified risks; and 7) risk
register, which provides information on threats and opportunities that could
possibly impact project execution.
We will explore these documents in upcoming chapters.
Approved Change Requests. As shown in Table 9-1, the Direct and
Manage Project Work process generates the work performance data, which
becomes an input item to the Monitor and Control Project Work process,
which in turn generates the change requests and performance reports, both
inputs to the Perform Integrated Change Control process. The Perform
Integrated Change Control process outputs the approved change requests,
which become an input item back into Direct and Manage Project Work.
The approved change requests include those reviewed and approved by the
project manager or change control board (CCB), depending on the nature of
each change request.
Enterprise Environmental Factors. Items in this category that can be of
influence or need to be considered in directing and managing project work
include organizational structure and culture; company infrastructure, such as
facilities and equipment; and stakeholder risk thresholds, such as allowable
cost overrun. Putting it in context, while executing this process, you will be
interacting with other processes and departments in your organization. In
general, a project team includes people from different departments. Usually,
the reporting relationships within the same department are very well defined
and structured. However, the relationships between different departments
(especially between individuals from different departments at the same level
of authority) are not well defined. So, managing such project interfaces in a
given organizational structure and culture is a crucial function of a project
manager during project execution. Generally speaking, project interfaces are
the formal and informal boundaries and relationships among team members,
departments, organizations, or functions--for example, how the development
department and the QA department interact with each other's departments
while working on the same project. The project manager has to manage these
interfaces,
352   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Organizational Process Assets. Items in this category that can be useful
      or need to be considered in directing and managing project work include the
      following:
            *    Management procedures and management databases with
                 historical information for defining, identifying, controlling,
                 and tracking issues and defects
            *    Performance measurement database used to store and
                 make available performance measurement data
            *    Procedures related to change control and risk control
            *    Information from previous projects that can be used in
                 this process, such as schedule, performance measurement
                 baselines, risk registers, risk reports, and lessons learned
                 repository
      For example, a defect management database may contain a list of validated
      defect repairs with information on whether a previously performed defect
      repair has been accepted or rejected. This will tell you whether you need
      to implement the defect repair again; of course, you have to look at that
      information in the context of that time and that project.
      In a nutshell, the project management plan and approved change requests are
      the major inputs to directing and managing project work because executing
      the project is all about implementing the project management plan along with
      the approved change requests.
      You direct and manage project work by using some tools, which will be
      discussed in the next section.


      Tools and Techniques for Directing and Managing
      Project Work
      The major tool used to direct and manage project work is the project
      management information system (PMIS), which is a collection of IT tools
      such as software to gather, integrate, and disseminate the output of project
      management processes; automated scheduling tools; a configuration
      management system; an information entry, storage, and distribution system;
      and interfaces to other online systems. This PMIS is used to facilitate processes
      from the initiation stage all the way to the closing stage. For example, Microsoft
      Project is a software tool that lets you create and manage a project schedule.
      Another tool used in directing and managing project work is expert judgment,
      which depends on the issue and the available resources. Expert advice
      or training relevant to this process may include topics such as technical
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth     353



knowledge on the industry with a focus area of the project; cost and budget
management, organizational governance, legal, and procurement; and legislation
and regulations.
Meetings can also be used as a tool for this process. There may be various
types of needed meetings, including kick-off, technical, iteration planning,
steering group, problem solving, and progress update.
The project is executed to produce some outcome, the deliverables, which
will be the output of directing and managing the project work.


Output of Directing and Managing Project Work
While the project is being executed, at each point in time there are some
deliverables with parts thereof completed, some issues that have arisen, some
performance data produced, and a status for the project that can be reported
to the stakeholders. These important output items, along with others, are
discussed in the following list.
Deliverables. A deliverable is a unique and identifiable project outcome
(i.e., product, service, or result) identified in the project management plan as
something that must be generated to complete the project. The core purpose
of executing the project management plan is to produce deliverables.
In order to produce the right deliverable, change control must be applied
regularly, starting from the first version of a deliverable. In addition to the
work that produces original deliverables, the following items are implemented
during project execution
Work Performance Data. When the project work is being performed, we
observe and take measurements of what we are doing. These observations
and measurements are called work performance data. This is raw data that can
be analyzed to draw out useful information. The following are a few examples:
      *    Deliverables status; e.g., completed or 30 percent done
      *    Overall schedule progress
      *    Schedule activities: actual start and finish dates
      *    Costs incurred: $100,000 spent so far
      *    30 change requests made, 10 defects found
Issues Log. Throughout the project, you will face issues--problems,
inconsistencies, and conflicts. These issues need to be resolved so they do not
start impacting the project negatively. To start this process, you enter an issue
into the issues log with the following information: issue type, who raised the
issue and when, issue description, priority, who the issue is assigned to, target
resolution date, status, and final resolution.
354   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      The issues log is updated during monitoring and controlling activities.
      Change Requests. During the execution of the project work, requests for
      changes may arise from sources such as issues and may affect certain aspects
      of the project, such as the following:
            *   Project scope
            *   Project cost
            *   Project schedule
            *   Policies or procedures
            *   Plan
      These change requests might come from inside or outside the performing
      organization and can be optional or mandated legally or contractually.
      These change requests must be approved before they can be processed and
      implemented. These change requests can include the following types:
            *   Direct Change Requests. These are changes that are
                not a result of any other action in the project; e.g., changed
                market conditions are demanding a new product feature.
                This may result in requests for changes to project plan,
                scope, schedule, or/and cost. Of course, these changes
                can also result from other change requests, listed next.
            *   Indirect Change Requests. These include the following:
                *   Defect Repairs. This is an deliberate action to
                    modify a nonconforming product component. For
                    example, there could be a list of the defects found
                    during the quality assurance (QA) process that seek
                    approval for repairs.
                *   Corrective Actions. This is an deliberate action to
                    bring the performance of the project work back on
                    track and in line with the project management plan. For
                    example, the QA process can recommend corrective
                    actions to improve quality that are directions for
                    executing the project work so as to bring expected
                    project performance into conformance with the
                    project management plan.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth       355



       *    Preventive Actions. These are directions to perform
            an activity so as to prevent something from happening
            in the future in order to bring the performance of the
            project work back on track and in line with the project
            management plan. For example, an activity that will reduce
            the probability of negative consequences associated
            with project risks; e.g., these preventive actions are
            recommended by the QA process during process analysis.
       *    Updates These change requests are made as part
            of controlling that a new or modified idea is being
            implemented. For example, the update request could be
            for a project document and plan with that intention.

Caution! Most of these change requests are to keep the project execution aligned with the
project management plan.


These change requests go to the Perform Integrated Change Control process,
and approved requests come back as input to the Direct and Manage Project
Work process for implementation.
Updates. After the implementation of approved change requests, you may
need to change some elements of the project management plan, such as any
project baseline, resource management plan, requirements management plan,
or communication management plan. You may also need a modify any of
the input process documents to reflect the project work done and changes
implemented.
The project work will produce documents and information that you will need
to store in the knowledge databases repository. This way, you will be updating
organizational process assets.


Note The key benefit of the Direct and Manage Project Work process is
that it provides overall management of the project work and the resulting
deliverables in an integrated way. This improves the odds of project success.


During process execution, lots of information leading to knowledge is being
created and needs to be managed. This information and knowledge should
be used to help this process achieve its objectives and be added to the
organization's existing knowledge.
356   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Managing Project Knowledge
      The Manage Project Knowledge process is used to help meet the project
      objectives and contribute to organizational knowledge and learning by creating
      new knowledge and using existing knowledge. Existing knowledge is also used
      in the process of creating new knowledge in the course of this process.


      Caution! From the definition of Manage Project Knowledge, it should be clear that managing
      knowledge is not just about recording or documenting the knowledge to share it, nor is it just about
      yielding the lessons learned to be used in future projects.


      In this chapter, we have introduced the concepts of data, information, and
      knowledge. When any confusion arises, let's ask a question: What is the
      difference between data, information, and knowledge? Figure 9-2 presents a
      simple illustration of the relationship between these three concepts. Data
      are raw facts, such as that an activity was finished in 30 days of work, while
      information is the processed or interpreted data that have some use and
      implications, such as that an activity was finished in 30 days of work while it
      was planned to be finished in 20 days of work. Both data and information can
      be presented in plots. Information combined with our experience, intuition,
      and existing knowledge produces knowledge with predictive ability, such as
      that an activity was finished in 30 days of work while it was planned to be
      finished in 20 days of work, so (adding other pieces of information) the project
      will be seven days late and will cost $2,000 more.


                              WZ                                   h
                                               /ZZ                                      <Z
                                                                      

      Figure 9-2. Relationship between data, information, and knowledge

      The Manage Project Knowledge process is performed throughout the project.
      The flow of knowledge is an important part of knowledge management. In
      fact, the most important task and challenge of knowledge management is to
      create an environment where people trust each other and are motivated to
      learn and share knowledge.
      Table 9-2 presents the Manage Project Knowledge process in terms of input,
      tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   357




Table 9-2. The Manage Project Knowledge Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                           Tools and Techniques        Output
1. Project management plan      1. Expert judgment          1. Lessons learned register
2. Project documents:           2. Information management   2. Updates:
  * Resource breakdown          3. Knowledge management       * Project management plan
    structure (RBS)             4. Interpersonal and team     * Organizational process
  * Source selection criteria      skills                       assets
  * Project team assignments
  * Stakeholder register
  * Lessons learned register
3. Project deliverable
4. Enterprise environmental
   factors
5. Organizational project
   assets




Input to Manage Project Knowledge
Project Management Plan and Project Documents. The project
documents relevant to this process that can be used include 1) the lessons
learned register to learn about effective practices in knowledge management
and add new ones; 2) project team assignments for information on the
skill set and experience currently available in order to figure out missing
knowledge needed for the project; 3) the resource breakdown structure
for information on the team composition; this may indicate the available and
missing but required knowledge for the project; and 4) the stakeholder
register for details about the already identified stakeholders that may reveal
what knowledge or skills they have.
Project Deliverables. These are needed to figure out what knowledge is
required to produce them, and also to figure out the lessons learned.
The Enterprise Environmental Factors. The enterprise environmental
factors that can influence the Manage Project Knowledge process include
1) knowledge expertise in the organization; 2) the culture of the
organization and project stakeholders will influence the evaluation and sharing
of knowledge; 3) geographic distribution of facilities and resources; this
will help determine tools and techniques for knowledge flow--e.g., obtaining,
providing, and sharing knowledge; 4) legal and regulatory requirements
and constraints--e.g., confidentiality of project information--will influence
the knowledge flow.
358   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      The Organizational Process Assets. Some organizational policies,
      processes, and procedures may influence knowledge management, such
      as authorized technology and social media; confidentiality and access to
      information; and use of copyrighted information. Also personnel administration,
      such as employee development and training records and skillset records,
      may reflect attitudes toward learning and sharing knowledge. Furthermore,
      organizational communication requirements may have an influence too. For
      example, formal and strict communication requirements help with learning
      and sharing knowledge, while an informal environment may be more effective
      for improving the existing knowledge, creating new knowledge, and integrating
      knowledge from diverse stakeholders. Knowledge and information transfer
      procedures apply to reviews before, during, and after projects and project
      phases to identify, capture, and share lessons learned from the current project
      and other projects.
      Obviously, the knowledge database repository is another organizational
      process asset that helps with knowledge management.


      Tools and Techniques for Managing Project
      Knowledge
      Two major types of tools and techniques for this process are information
      management and knowledge management. All of them, however, are discussed
      below.
      Expert Judgment. Expert judgment may be sought on topics in the areas of
      information and knowledge management, including the available tools in these
      areas and relevant information and knowledge from other projects.
      Information Management. This type of tool helps people connect to the
      information sources where they can store, obtain, and share information.
      Some examples are project management information; system library services;
      and lessons learned register and tools to store, edit, and retrieve entries in
      and from this register. Emails, web browsers, podcasts, online communities of
      subject matter experts, and other such web applications are some additional
      examples.
      Knowledge Management. This type of tool helps people connect to share
      data, information, knowledge, and work to create new knowledge. Some
      examples are meetings, including virtual or online meetings; networking,
      including face-to-face and online social media; online forums to ask and
      answer questions; online discussion forums; knowledge-sharing events such as
      seminars, conferences, and knowledge fairs; and learning workshops.
                                                                               PMP(R) in Depth          359



Interpersonal and Team Skills. These skills have already been discussed in
this and the previous chapter. However, leadership, networking, active listening,
facilitation, staying on the topic, and being respectful and courteous to people
are particularly important.


Output of Managing Project Knowledge
Lesson Learned. The main output from managing project knowledge is the
lessons learned from the project, which are recorded into the lessons learned
register, a document that is created the first time we run this process, or
earlier and updated subsequently. This can be a well-structured document
that links certain fields to each category, such as a description of the situation,
its impact on the project, recommendations, and proposed and implemented
actions. The categories, for example, may be the risks realized, challenges faced,
problems, and opportunities. To ensure the efficiency of capturing the content
as well as its effectiveness, appropriate technology such as audio, picture, and
video can be used.
Updates. At the end of a project or project phase, lessons learned are
transferred to the lessons learned repository in the knowledge database of
the organization; i.e., this component of the organizational process assets
is updated. Other organizational process assets in addition to the lessons
learned repository may also be updated. Other updates may also happen due
to this process.


Tip The key benefits of the Manage Project Knowledge process is that new knowledge is
created or existing organizational knowledge is improved, and in the process of this creation or
improvement the existing knowledge is used. Moreover, the created or improved knowledge is
used in the organization's operations and in future projects or future phases of the current project.


The project deliverables that have been accepted through the scope verification
process still need to go through final transition to the appropriate party, such
as the customer or the sponsor. In other words, the project needs proper
closure.
In the monitoring and controlling process group, the Monitor and Control
Project Work process and the Perform Integrated Change Control process
belong to project integration management.
The Direct and Manage Project Work process and the Manage Project
Knowledge process are high-level umbrella processes, under which other
executing processes are running, including the Manage Quality process.
360   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Once you have prepared the quality management plan, as discussed in
      Chapter 10, you have to ensure that all the quality requirements and
      standards relevant to the project are being implemented. You do that by
      managing quality, discussed next.


      Managing Quality
      Recall that quality planning is used to identify quality requirements and
      standards relevant to the project and its product and to determine how to
      implement those. Actual implementation is carried out in two processes:
      Manage Quality and Control Quality. The Manage Quality process implements
      the quality plan by executing some quality activities in light of the organization's
      quality policies to examine quality measurements.
      Performing organizations typically have a department called quality assurance
      (QA) that oversees the quality assurance activities and fosters continuous
      process improvement, which is an iterative method for improving the quality
      of all processes. Your project management team can work with the QA
      department.


      Tip Continuous process improvement enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of the
      processes by minimizing waste (unnecessary activities) and duplication of efforts. It includes
      identifying and reviewing the business processes inside the organization, such as the coding of
      modules within software programs and the process of project approval.


      In project management, while quality assurance only focuses on project
      process improvement, quality management includes both quality assurance
      and project product design and process improvement.
      Table 9-3 presents the Manage Quality process in terms of input, tools and
      techniques, and output.
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   361




Table 9-3. The Manage Quality Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques            Output
1. Project management plan:    1. Data gathering:              1. Quality reports
  * Quality management plan      * Checklists                  2. Test and evaluation
2. Project documents:          2. Data analysis:                  documents
  * Quality control              * Root-cause analysis         3. Change requests
    measurements                 * Process analysis            4. Project management
  * Quality metrics                                               plan updates:
                                 * Alternative analysis
  * Risk report                                                  * Quality management
                                 * Document analysis
                                                                   plan
  * Lessons learned register   3. Decision making:
                                                                 * Scope baseline
3. Organizational project        * Multicriteria decision
   assets                                                        * Schedule baseline
                                   analysis
                                                                 * Cost baseline
                               4. Data presentation
                                                               5. Project document
                                 * Affinity diagrams
                                                                  updates:
                                 * Flow charts
                                                                 * Risk register
                                 * Cause and effect diagrams
                                                                 * Issues log
                                 * Matrix diagrams
                                                                 * Lessons learned
                                 * Histograms                      register
                                 * Scattered diagrams
                               5. Audits
                               6. Design for X
                               7. Problem solving
                               8. Quality improvement method



Core of Performing Quality Management
The main input to the Manage Quality process comes from quality planning
and quality control. Performing the Manage Quality process can be explained
in the following steps in terms of the items from Table 9-3:
        1. Get "How to" Information. This process is performed
           according to the quality management plan. The following
           information from this plan will be very helpful: acceptable
           quality levels for project and its deliverables; how to
           check that these levels have been implemented; and what
           to do with the items that are found not to meet these
           quality levels; e.g., change request.
        2. Get Quality-related Risk Sources. Use the risk report
           to identify the sources of overall project risk that can
           impact the project quality objectives.
362   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


            3. Get Quality Control Measurements. These are in
               the quality control measurements document, an output
               of the Control Quality process discussed later in this
               chapter. Compare these quality measurements for
               project processes and deliverables against the quality
               requirements and standards that are supposed to be met.
               This will need analysis and techniques from Table 9-3.
            4. Get Quality Metrics. The quality metrics are an output
               of planning quality. Use them as reference or basis
               for developing the test for quality and for suggesting
               improvement; e.g., change request.
            5. Using the information from these steps and other reports,
               review, examine, analyze the result, and develop tests to
               verify quality.
            6. From the information produced from steps 1 through 5,
               generate quality reports and develop test and evaluation
               documents and change requests--the output of this
               process.
      To develop quality reports and tests and evaluations with which to examine
      and test quality, you use a host of tools to explore different quality aspects and
      issues, such as the following:
            1. Verify that a set of required steps has been performed
               and the set of requirements has been met.
            2. Rank the defects; determine the relationship between
               different project elements and defects; and identify the
               root causes of quality problems, how a cause resulted in
               a defect, and important areas that cause quality problems.
            3. Identify problematic processes that may create obstacles
               in meeting quality requirements.
            4. After finding faulty processes, determine how they can be
               improved and identify the root causes of quality problems.
            5. Explore different quality options and approaches in order
               to select the best one to apply.
            6. Make quality-related decisions about project and product.
      Some of these tools and techniques are discussed next.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      363




Tools and Techniques for Performing Quality
Management
The techniques and methods used in quality management are listed in Table 9-3
and discussed in the following sections.


Data Gathering and Data Analysis
You can use the data-gathering technique called checklists, discussed in the
next section on quality control, to verify that a set of required steps has been
performed and a set of requirements has been met.
In managing quality, data-analysis tools can be used to find faulty processes,
determine how they can be improved, identify the root causes of quality
problems, and so forth. The data-analysis techniques that can be used for
managing quality include root-cause analysis, document analysis, and alternative
analysis. You will use alternative analysis, explained in Chapter 6, to explore
different quality options and approaches in order to select the best one to
apply. Other data-analysis processes are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Document Analysis. In this process, you can use document analysis to
identify problematic processes that may create obstacles in meeting quality
requirements. Document analysis involves accessing the relevant documents,
studying them, and extracting the relevant information from the them. In
this case, the relevant documents would be the ones generated as outputs
of the control processes, such as performance reports, test reports, and
variance analysis. You will be analyzing such documents to identify problematic
processes.
Root-cause Analysis. This is a general method to solve a problem. It
involves collecting information about the problem and analyzing it to find the
root causes. The problem's solution would lie in removing all the root causes.
This approach can also be used in managing quality to identify the root causes
of defects and risks, and also to address other quality problems. Once the
root cause of a defect is found, you can examine the possibility of that root
cause generating other defects.
Process Analysis. This is a technique used to identify the ways a process can
be improved. It examines the problems, constraints, and unnecessary (non-
value-added) activities identified during the implementation of the process.
Process analysis also typically includes examining the following:
      1. Problems in the process
      2. Constraints faced or caused by the process
      3. Process waste: activities with little or no value that
         happen while performing the process
364   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Data Presentation
      Data-presentation techniques are used for various purposes, such as to
      quantify and rank the defects; expose the relationship between different project
      elements and defects; and identify the root causes of quality problems, how
      a cause resulted in a defect, and important areas that cause quality problems.
      In this process, affinity diagrams, covered in Chapter 4, can be used to identify
      the most important areas on which we should focus. Using affinity diagrams,
      causes are organized into groups, and these focus areas are identified.
      You can use flowcharts, discussed in the Plan Quality of Chapter 7, to identify the
      series of steps that leads to a defect or other quality problem. Matrix diagrams
      can be used to find the strength of the relationships between objectives, causes,
      and factors by examining the rows and columns of the matrix.
      Cause and effect diagrams, histograms, and scattered diagrams are discussed
      in the next section.


      Decision Making: Multicriteria Decision Analysis
      The multicriteria decision analysis decision-making technique, explained in
      Chapter 6 in the context of resource selection, can be used in managing
      quality to make quality-related decisions about projects and product. Some
      examples are as follows: choose from between different approaches to quality
      implementation, and while dealing with defects, choose from different options
      regarding schedule, cost, stakeholder satisfaction, and product lifecycle.


      Quality Audit
      An audit, in general, is a structured and independent review to check or verify
      compliance with some of the policies, processes, and procedures. In project
      management, a quality audit is an independent review to check whether
      project activities comply with the policies, processes, and procedures of the
      project and the performing organization. Audits can occur as scheduled or at
      random and can be conducted by a third party or by properly trained in-house
      auditors of the performing organization. The main objectives of quality audits
      are the following:
            *    Identify all good practices being implemented in the
                 project.
            *    Identify shortcomings and gaps in implementing, comparing
                 to what was planned or otherwise.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      365



      *    Offer assistance for improvement and share knowledge
           gathered from the implementation of good practices at
           similar projects in the organization or the industry.
      *    Record contributions from each audit in the lessons
           learned database of the project.
These audits accomplish the following:
      *    Because one of the objectives of a quality audit is to
           identify inefficient and ineffective policies, processes, and
           procedures being used for the project, audits reduce the
           cost of quality on subsequent projects.
      *    Audits increase customer satisfaction and acceptance of
           the product or service delivered by the project.

Other Tools
Design for X. Design for X (DfX), also called Design for Excellence, is a
set of guidelines of product design. DfX uses a formal methodology to
optimize a specific aspect of a design; i.e., X, a variable. Some examples of
X are performance, cost, reliability, yield, recycling, safety, quality, assembly,
and logistics. The use of DfX in quality management may improve the overall
quality, with the performance improvement including cost performance, hence
increasing stakeholders' satisfaction.
Problem Solving. This very general technique, described in Chapter 2, can
be used in solving issues arising in audit, Control Quality process, etc.
Quality Improvement. Some findings and recommendations would come
out of managing and controlling quality methods such as auditing and problem
solving. Based on those, common quality-improving techniques, such as Six
Sigma and Plan-do-check-act, mentioned early on in this chapter, can be used
to analyze and evaluate options for quality improvement.
The work performed while managing quality produces the output discussed
in the next section.

Output of Performing Quality Management
The main output of performing quality management includes quality reports,
test and evaluation documents, and change requests, discussed next.
Quality Reports. Quality reports can include the following:
      *    Summary findings in the quality control process; e.g., from
           quality control measurements
      *    Recommendations from inspection
366   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


            *    Change requests, such as corrective actions recommended
                 for defects and bugs; e.g., rework or repair
            *    Recommendations on quality improvement for project,
                 processes, and product
            *    List of quality management issues escalated by the team
      As for the format of the reports, they may be in or include numerical,
      qualitative, and graphical material.
      Change Requests. The goal of quality management is to ensure that the
      quality requirements are being met, and where they are not, to improve quality.
      For that or any other change recommended by this process, you will have to
      make a change request, which will be processed by the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process.
      Test and Evaluation. Following the project's industry needs or requirements
      and the organization's templates, these test and evaluation documents are
      composed for testing and evaluation purposes. They may include checklists
      and the requirements traceability matrix. These documents are used as an
      input item by the control quality process.

                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.2

         Name the processes that will use quality reports as input.



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.3

         Knowing the Manage Quality process, answer the following:
            A.   List the organizational process assets that can influence this
                 process.
            B.   Which component or components of the project management
                 plan will need to be modified as a result of quality activities?
            C.   Which component or components of the project management
                 plan will need to be modified as a result of project execution?
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth       367




Change requests generated by the Manage Quality process are processed through the Perform
Integrated Change Control process, approved requests are implemented using the Direct and
Manage Project Work process, and implementation goes to the Control Quality process in the form
of deliverables and work performance data.

Quality reports will be used by a host of processes; see Study Checkpoint 9.2.


In a nutshell, the Manage Quality process identifies quality problems by
comparing quality control measurements against the quality requirements and
standards that are planned to be met; examines these problems and makes
recommendations and change requests to eliminate or fix them; and develops
tests and evaluations to be used by the Control Quality process to check or
verify they have actually been fixed.
Use the Manage Quality process to verify that the process and it product
satisfy these requirements and standards. Incorporate the organization's
quality policy and procedures into these activities.
As you have seen, the Manage Quality process uses the risk report as an input,
indicating that quality and risk are related.


Implementing Risk Responses
The Implement Risk Response process is the process to make sure that all the
planned risk responses are executed as planned. Remember, the goal here is
to minimize the impact of threats and maximize the impact of opportunities
on the project. Table 9-4 presents the Implement Risk Responses process in
terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.

Table 9-4. The Implement Risk Responses Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                              Tools and Techniques        Output
1. Project management plan:        1. Project management       1. Change requests
  * Risk management plan              information system       2. Project document updates:
2. Project documents:              2. Interpersonal and team      * Risk register
                                      skills: Influencing
  * Risk register                                                 * Risk report
                                   3. Expert judgment
  * Risk report                                                   * Project team assignments
  * Lessons learned register                                      * Issues log
3. Enterprise environmental                                       * Lessons learned register
   factors
368   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Recall that planned risk response activities have already been scheduled,
      with resources assigned to them, through the Plan Risk Responses process,
      discussed in Chapter 7. In this process, you make sure they are executed. That
      said, the Implement Risk Responses process is explained in the following steps
      in terms of the items from Table 9-4:
            1. Get "How to" and Other Information about Risk.
               The "how to" information for this process can be found in
               the risk management plan, which also contains information
               on
                *   risk management roles and responsibilities assigned
                    to each role; these persons will play important roles
                    in implementing risk responses; and
                *   risk thresholds acceptable to relevant stakeholders;
                    what will the acceptable remaining risk impact level
                    be after risk response implementation?
            2. Get Information about Risks and Planned Risk
               Responses. From the risk report, you can obtain
               information on the overall project risk and planned
               responses to it. Detailed information on the individual
               risks, their owners, and planned responses is in the risk
               register.
            3. Ensure the Planned Responses Are Implemented.
               You can use your influence skill to help the relevant
               stakeholders--e.g., risk owner--realize that it is time
               to take action. To validate or modify risk responses
               before and after their implementation, you can use expert
               judgement from an appropriate source.
            4. Integrate Activities. You can use the tools available
               in the project management information system--e.g.,
               software--to manage resources, costs, and schedule so
               as to seamlessly integrate the risk response activities
               with other project activities, and in this way keep both
               kinds of activities synchronized.
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth     369



      5. Modify Documents. The documents that may change in
         this process are listed in the output column of Table 9-4.
         For example, the project team assignments will be updated
         with allotted resources, like funding and persons to
         execute response. As a result of risk implementation, the
         risk register and risk report will be updated with modified
         sets of "to implement" responses to individual risks and
         overall project risks, respectively.
      6. Generate Needed Change Requests. During or as
         a result of executing this process, some changes may be
         needed--e.g., more funds or a schedule change. As always,
         for proposed changes to any component of the project
         plan, such as schedule baseline or cost baseline, change
         requests must be generated and processed through the
         Perform Integrated Change Control process.
While performing planning and implementing the processes for risk
management, the risks need to be monitored, which will be discussed in the
next part of the book.
In some projects, you might not find the resources needed within your
organization to complete certain parts of the project. In this case, you would
have to get those resources through procurement. Since you have procurement
planned out, as discussed in Chapter 6, you are ready to actually conduct the
procurements.


Conducting Procurements
As you have already learned, procurement refers to obtaining (purchasing
or renting) products, services, or results from outside the project team to
complete the project. Procurement management is the execution of a set of
processes used to obtain (procure) a procurement item or items. Procurement
planning produces the procurement management plan and other documents
used to facilitate the implementation of this plan. The implementation is
largely done by the Conduct Procurement process, which involves seeking
out sellers, getting responses from them, selecting sellers, and reaching an
agreement with them. Table 9-5 presents the Conduct Procurement process
in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.
370   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Table 9-5. The Conduct Procurement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                          Tools and Techniques         Output
      1. Project management plan     1. Advertising               1. Selected sellers
        * Procurement                2. Bidder conferences        2. Agreements
          management plan            3. Data analysis: Proposal   3. Change requests
        * Scope management plan         evaluation                4. Project management plan
        * Communication              4. Interpersonal and team       update:
          management plan               skills: Procurement         * Procurement
        * Requirement                   negotiations                  management plan
          management plan            5. Expert judgment             * Communication
        * Risk management plan                                        management plan
        * Configuration                                             * Requirement
          management plan                                             management plan
        * Cost baseline                                             * Risk management plan
      2. Project documents                                          * Quality management plan
        * Project schedule                                          * Scope baseline
        * Requirement                                               * Schedule baseline
          documentation                                             * Cost baseline
        * Stakeholder register                                    5. Project document update:
        * Risk register                                             * Resource calendar
        * Lessons learned register                                  * Requirement
      3. Procurement                                                  documentation
         documentation                                              * Requirements
      4. Seller proposals                                             traceability matrix
      5. Enterprise environmental                                   * Stakeholder register
         factors                                                    * Risk register
      6. Organizational project                                     * Lessons learned register
         assets
                                                                  6. Organizational project
                                                                     assets update


      In the input column of Table 9-5, the procurement documents item and the seller
      proposals are discussed in the previous section. These and other input items
      should be familiar by reaching this point in the book.
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth     371




Core of Conducting Procurements
In this section, we will discuss, in terms of the items from Table 9-5, how to
perform the Conduct Procurement process. Let's start by noting that the goal
of this process is to secure an agreement with the seller of the procurement
item. It's very important to realize that procuring an item is equivalent
to procuring, or outsourcing, a piece of your project. In other words, the
procurement item has a piece of project attached to it in terms of its share
of the scope, requirements, cost baseline, project schedule, stakeholders, and
risks. Most of the plan and project documents appearing in the input column
of Table 9-5 carry information about these aspects of the procurement items;
this is why these documents are there. This information was mostly already
used in preparing the bidding document and the statement of work (SOW)
in the Plan Procurement Management process and travels to sellers that way
in this process. In this process, this information would be used for various
purposes, such as evaluating the bids and proposals and negotiating with the
sellers--e.g., cost and schedule should stay aligned with the project cost and
schedule baselines.
Also note that some of the information will come from the seller, who will
enter it into these documents; e.g., lessons learned during this process for
lessons learned register and risks coming from the seller's side for the risk
register.
The whole process can be summarized in the following steps:
      1. Seek Sellers. Use suitable means such as advertising and
         bidder conferences to seek out the sellers and to send the
         appropriate bidder documents including SOW.
      2. Select Sellers. Use the source selection criteria, a
         procurement document, and information from other input
         documents to evaluate the submitted bids and proposals.
         In this evaluation, check the proposed cost against that
         in independent cost estimates, another procurement
         document. Based on this evaluation, select one or more
         sellers.
      3. Obtain Agreement. Use negotiation and other commu-
         nication skills to reach an agreement with one or more
         of the selected sellers.
372   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work



      Tip If the proposed cost is incompatible with the independent estimate, the possible causes of
      this mismatch should be examined, which may include a vague or unclear SOW, misunderstanding
      of SOW by sellers, or simply that the seller's price is higher than others.

      Note Bids and quotations are typically used to ask for prices, whereas proposals are used to
      ask for solutions. Invitations for bids, requests for quotation, and requests for proposals travel from
      buyer to seller, whereas bids, quotations, and proposals travel from seller to buyer.


      In the following, we will discuss the tools and techniques referred to in this
      section.


      Tools and Techniques for Conducting Procurements
      The first goal for the tools and techniques discussed here is to find sellers and
      provide them with information about the requests for responses. The list of
      potential sellers can be developed from various sources, such as the World
      Wide Web, library directories, relevant local associations, trade catalogs, and
      the performing organization's internal information base.
      The main techniques used in soliciting seller responses are advertising
      and bidder conferences. These and other techniques used in conducting
      procurements are discussed in the following list.
      Advertising. The request for seller responses can be advertised in the
      public media or in relevant professional journals. Whether to use advertising
      depends on the organization's policy. However, some government jurisdictions
      require public advertising of pending government contracts.
      Bidder Conferences. This refers to meetings with prospective sellers prior to
      the preparation of a response to ensure that the sellers have a clear understanding
      of the procurement details, such as the technical and contractual requirements.
      These meetings can generate amendments to the documents depending on need.
      The purpose of these meetings is that all potential sellers receive the same kind
      of detail and amount of information (or help) so that each seller has an equal
      opportunity to produce the best response. These conferences are also called
      contractor conferences, vendor conferences, or pre-bid conferences.


      Note In some cases, after a proposal is submitted, the buyer can request that the seller
      supplement its proposal with an oral presentation to provide some additional information, which
      can then be used to evaluate the seller's proposal.


      Proposals submitted by sellers need to be evaluated.
                                                                             PMP(R) in Depth          373



Proposal Evaluation. Using this technique, you will check if a proposal is
complete according to the bidding document, including SOW. If it is, evaluate
it using the source selection criteria and comparing the cost to the independent
cost estimates. As said previously, the purpose of independent estimates is
to have a check on the proposed pricing by the seller. Significant differences
between the proposed cost and the independent estimate may mean you have
a vague or unclear SOW, misunderstanding of SOW by sellers, change in the
market, or the seller has failed to offer reasonable pricing.
Based on this evaluation, you select one or more sellers. Negotiations are
conducted to reach agreements with one or more sellers.
Procurement Negotiations. Procurement negotiations, also called the
contract negotiations, have the following two-pronged goal:
        *    Clarify the terms of the purchase, such as the structure
             and the rights and obligations of the parties in the
             contract.
        *    Reach an agreement.
Subjects covered during the negotiations may include the following:
        *    Applicable terms and laws
        *    Authorities, rights, and responsibilities
        *    Business management and technical approaches
        *    Contract financing
        *    Payments and price
        *    Proprietary rights
        *    Schedule
        *    Technical solutions
The conclusion of contract negotiations is a document, the contract, which
can be signed by both the buyer and the seller. The final contract signed by
both parties can be an offer by the seller or a counteroffer by the buyer.
Sometimes for simple procurement items the contract is nonnegotiable.

Tip A contract is a mutually binding legal relationship subject to remedy in court. These
negotiations are usually conducted by the procurement team. However, the project manager might
be required to be present during negotiations to provide any necessary clarification on the project
requirements.


Expert judgment is another tool that can be used while conducting
procurements.
374   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      Output of Conducting Procurements
      The main outputs of conducting procurements include the list of selected
      sellers and the agreements with those selected sellers. These and other
      output items are discussed in the following paragraphs.
      Selected Sellers. This is the list of sellers that you or the procurement team
      have selected as a result of the proposal and bid evaluations. A subset of these
      sellers would get the contract rewarded to them.
      Agreements. Also called procurement awards, these are the contracts
      awarded to selected sellers after negotiations. A contract is a legal document
      that obligates the seller to provide the specified procurement item or items
      and obligates the buyer to make the payment to the seller. The contract can
      be a simple purchase order or a complex document, depending on the nature
      of the procurement. Depending on the nature of the procurement, a contract
      can include the following:
            *   List of deliverables and statement of work
            *   Schedule
            *   Performance reporting
            *   Acceptance criteria
            *   Change-request handling
            *   Inflation adjustments
            *   Penalties and incentives
            *   Terms of pricing and payment
            *   Product support
            *   Roles and responsibilities
            *   Termination and dispute-handling mechanisms
            *   Insurance
            *   Limitation of liability
            *   Warranty
      Changes and Updates. The activities of this process may generate change
      requests, and these change requests and some other actions may cause the
      need to update some documents, such as those listed in the output column
      of Table 9-5.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth    375




                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.4

   True or False: The main goals of the Conduct Procurements process are to select the
   sellers, award procurement contracts to them, and obtain the procurement item.


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      *    The Direct and Manage Project Work process is a high-
           level process to produce project deliverables.
      *    Use the Manage Quality process to identify quality
           requirements and standards relevant to the project and
           its product and to determine how to implement those.
           Use the Implement Risk Responses process to make
           sure that all the planned risk responses are executed as
           planned.
      *    The procurement plan is implemented by using the
           Conduct Procurements process, which involves requesting
           seller responses, evaluating seller responses, selecting
           sellers based on the evaluation, and negotiating and signing
           contracts with the selected sellers.

Summary
The project management plan is executed using the processes in the
executing process group. The high-level umbrella process in this group is the
Direct and Manage Project Work process, whose main goal is to produce
the project deliverables to meet the project objectives. Under this process,
other executing processes are performed to complete the scheduled
activities and tasks. A significant task to perform during project execution
is managing quality, the process for which implements the quality plan by
executing some quality activities in light of the organization's quality policies
to examine quality measurements. Also, the Implement Risk Response
process is performed to make sure that all the planned risk responses are
executed as planned and with the goal of minimizing the impact of threats
and maximizing the impact of opportunities on the project.
Due to a lack of resources in the performing organization, you might need to
obtain some products, services, or results from outside the project team to
complete the project. This is called procurement. The Conduct Procurements
process is used to implement the procurement plan, which involves obtaining
seller responses, selecting sellers based on the responses, and reaching an
agreement with the selected sellers. Performing all these processes will
produce new information and knowledge. This information and knowledge
376   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


      is managed by the Manage Project Knowledge process, which is used to help
      meet the project objectives and contribute to organizational knowledge and
      learning by creating new knowledge and using existing knowledge.
      Road Ahead. To perform the project work as described in this chapter, you
      will be using the planned team and physical resources. These resources will
      need to be managed, which is the topic of the next chapter.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend

        *Executing the project means implementing the project management plan developed
         during project planning.
        *The execution of a project is managed by performing the process called Direct and
         Manage Project Work, a high-level umbrella process for the executing stage, which
         generates the project deliverables.
        *The Manage Quality process identifies quality problems by comparing quality control
         measurements against the quality requirements and standards; examines these
         problems; and makes recommendations and change requests to eliminate or fix them.
        *The Manage Quality process also develops tests and evaluations to be used by the
         Control Quality process to check or verify they have been actually fixed.
        *Conducting procurements is the process of obtaining responses from potential sellers,
         selecting sellers based on those responses, and awarding contracts to the selected
         sellers.
        *Implementation of risk responses is managed by the Implement Risk Responses
         process and not by the Monitor Risk Process.

      Look Out

        *The two major output items of the Direct and Manage Project Work process are
         project deliverables and work performance data, sometimes also wrongly called
         performance information.
        *Approved change requests must be implemented by performing the Direct and Manage
         Project Work process.
        *The proposal, an input of Conduct Procurements, is created during the same process
         by the seller.
        *Also remember, a residual risk is the remains of a risk on which a response has been
         performed, whereas a secondary risk is a risk that arises as a result of implementing a
         risk response.
        *Reminder: Invitations for bids, requests for quotations, and requests for proposals
         travel from buyer to seller, whereas bids, quotations, and proposals travel from seller to
         buyer.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth       377




Memorize

 *The project management plan is the major input to the Direct and Manage Project
  Work process.
 *Directing and managing project work involves managing various technical and
  organizational interfaces in the project to facilitate the smooth execution of the project
  work.
 *The Manage Quality process generates tests and evaluation documents as an output item,
  which become an input into the Control Quality process.
 *The risk register contains information about individual project risks, and the risk report
  contains information about the sources of overall project risks and a summary of
  individual project risks.



Review Questions
      1. What is not true about the Manage Project Knowledge
         process?
           A. It generates the lessons learned register.
           B. It generates the lessons learned.
           C. It is performed at the end of a project or phase.
           D. It uses project deliverables.
      2. The process or processes used to learn lessons from
         projects are:
           A. Manage Project Knowledge
           B. Direct and Manage Project Work
           C. Monitor and Control Project Work
           D. Close Project or Phase
      3. Which of the following is not the output of directing and
         managing project work?
           A. Accepted deliverables
           B. Issues log
           C. Work performance data
           D. Change requests
378   Chapter 9 | Managing Execution of Project Work


           4. Which of the following is not an input to the Manage
              Quality process?
               A. Quality metrics
               B. Quality control measurements
               C. Risk report
               D. Work performance data
           5. You are the project manager for the Mind The Gap project.
              You are going to meet with your project team, where you
              are going to develop quality tests that incorporate the
              organization's quality policies and procedures. Which of
              the following processes are you performing?
               A. Quality control
               B. Manage quality
               C. Quality planning
               D. Quality assurance
           6. You are the project manager of the Green Schools project.
              Your supervisor has asked you to make some self-checks
              and inspections before the stakeholders ask for a formal
              inspection. It is time to perform which process?
               A. Plan Quality
               B. Perform Quality Control
               C. Perform Quality Assurance
               D. Manage Quality
           7. In project risk management, which of the following state-
              ments is not true?
               A. Risk report contains information about the overall
                  project risk.
               B. Exploiting an opportunity ensures that the positive
                  risk does occur.
               C. An output of the Plan Risk Responses process is a
                  document called the risk response plan.
               D. The lowest level of RBS can often be used as a
                  checklist, which could be the list of risk categories.
                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   379



 8. The seller proposals, an input item for Conduct
    Procurement, is created during which process?
     A. Conduct Procurement
     B. Plan Procurements
     C. Control Procurement
     D. Close Procurement
 9. Quality audits are part of which of the following quality
    management processes?
     A. Manage Quality
     B. Control Quality
     C. Plan Quality
     D. Quality Inspection
10. You are the project manager for the ABC project.You are
    going to meet with your project team to discuss how to
    ensure that the project will be completed without any
    deviations from the project requirements. Which of the
    following processes are you performing?
     A. Quality Control
     B. Plan Quality
     C. Manage Quality
     D. Conduct Procurements
                                                                     CHAPTER


                                                                          10

Managing
Project
Resources
PMP Exam Objectives         What It Really Means
3.1Acquire and manage       Acquire and manage project resources by following the
   project resources        human resource and procurement management plans in order
                            to meet project requirements.
                            The Acquire Resources, Develop Project Team, and Manage
                            Project Team processes are covered in this chapter, and the
                            Conduct Procurements process was covered in Chapter 9.
                            You need to understand how to improve team performance
                            by using tools and techniques, such as ground rules, training,
                            and recognition and rewards, and how to manage the team
                            effectively.

Executing a project requires resources, and executing a project successfully
requires the optimal use of those resources. Therefore, coordinating and
managing resources, including both human resources, also called team
resources, and physical resources--i.e., material, equipment, facilities, and
infrastructure--is an integral part of overall project execution. Identifying,
acquiring, and managing these resources is called resource management. During


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_10
382   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      project planning, you define roles and assign responsibilities to those roles, as
      project work is generally performed in the form of roles and responsibilities.
      Project roles, the responsibilities of those roles, and the reporting relationships
      among the roles need to be determined in order to perform a project. This
      is accomplished during the development of the resource management plan.
      The roles need to be filled with qualified individuals. A team is a group of
      individuals who perform individual responsibilities to work interdependently
      on their independent assignments. From a scientific viewpoint, a team is a
      dynamic entity, and its dynamics are determined by the interaction among
      its members. Therefore, for the team to be successful, it has to be effective
      in both dimensions: its members must be competent in performing their
      individual assignments, and the interaction among them must be constructive
      overall. To ensure that, you need to continually develop and manage the project
      team. Obtaining the right individuals for the project team and developing and
      managing the team is an art, whereas the effective team's taking the project to
      success is a science that will unfold itself automatically if you do the art part
      right.
      So, the core question in this chapter is how to build and manage a high-
      performance project team and optimize the team and physical resources by
      using human resource management. In search of an answer, we will explore
      three avenues--developing a resource management plan, managing team
      resources, and managing physical resources.


      Resource Management: Big Picture
      In Chapter 5, you learned about creating and managing the project schedule. To
      implement that schedule, you need resources, which are managed by project
      resource management, whose big picture is illustrated in Figure 10-1. The
      processes in gray boxes in this figure are external to resource management.
      As shown in Figure 10-1, the Estimate Activity Resources process, a resource
      management process, generates activity resource requirements, which are an
      input to developing the project schedule, which in turn is used to estimate
      cost. The cost estimate is an input back to the Estimate Activity Resources
      process, and also an input to help determine the budget, which generates the
      cost baseline, which is an input to acquiring resources. Note here the close
      connection between resource management and cost management.
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   383




 ZZDW
                                       Z
                                       ^
                                                               WZ
                               ZZ
                                                       ZZ
                                                       
                                   
                                                                      Z
                                   ZZ
                                                       Z
                               ZZ
                                                                Z

                                    WZ                 Z                
                                    ZZ                                  

                                                                 WZ
                               WZ                                
                               

                                                                         ZZ
   Zd                               Dd
                     d                                                  ZZ
                     Z
                     



Figure 10-1. Big picture of resource management; processes shown in gray boxes are
external to resource management


In resource management, first, the resource management plan is generated from
the project charter, project scope baseline, and requirement documentation,
etc., and becomes input to all other processes. Once you have the resource
management plan, you can identify and estimate team and physical resources;
acquire resources; develop and manage the team resources, and control the
physical resources. You do that using the following processes:
       *    Plan Resource Management. This process is used to
            develop the resource management plan, which identifies
            the project roles, assigns responsibilities to these roles,
            and provides guides as to how to perform the rest of the
            resource management processes.
       *    Estimate Activity Resources. Estimates the types
            and amounts of team and physical resources that will
            be required to perform each schedule activity. Physical
            resources are non-human resources such as facilities,
            equipment, material, and supplies.
384   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


              *    Acquire Project Team. The process of obtaining the
                   team and physical resources estimated by the preceding
                   process.
              *    Develop Team. The process of developing an optimal
                   team by improving the individual competencies and
                   interaction among the individual team members, thereby
                   improving the team environment.
              *    Manage Project Team. The process of optimizing
                   the team, hence, project performance, by tracking
                   performance of and providing feedback to the individual
                   team members, managing changes related to the team,
                   and resolving issues.
              *    Control Resources. Process of keeping planned,
                   assigned--i.e., allotted--and used physical resources
                   synchronized by ensuring that planned resources are
                   allotted, used, and released immediately after use.

      Note As shown by Figure 10-1, resource management and cost management are closely
      connected. Also, the project team is a subset of project stakeholders; there is obviously an overlap
      between resource management and stakeholder management. You will notice that when we cover
      stakeholder management in the next section of this book.


      Table 10-1 lists the processes of resource management along with their
      process groups and major output.
      Table 10-1. Processes of Resource Management Mapped to the Process Groups

      Resource Management Process Group                Major Output           Performed
      Process
      Develop Resource            Planning             Resource               Once or at predefined
      Management Plan                                  management plan        points in the project
      Estimate Activity           Planning             Resource               Throughout the project
      Resources                                        requirements
      Acquire Resources           Executing            Project staff          Throughout the project
                                                       assignments
      Develop Project Team        Executing            Team performance       Throughout the project
                                                       assessments
      Manage Project Team         Executing            Change requests        Throughout the project
      Control Resources           Monitoring and       Work performance       Throughout the project
                                  Controlling          information, change
                                                       requests
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth     385



The Develop Resource Plan and Estimate Activity Resources processes
were already discussed in Chapter 6, and the Control Resources process
will be covered in the next part of the book. The rest of the processes listed
in Table 10-1 are covered in this chapter, starting with Acquire Resources.
After we figure out the project resource requirements, as discussed in Chapter 6,
it's time to acquire the resources, both physical and human; i.e., team.


Acquiring Project Resources
Project resources, both team and physical, are obtained and selected using the
Acquire Resources process, which is shown in Table 10-2 in terms of input,
tools and techniques, and output. The project work will be executed by the
project team, and therefore the role of the team in the success of the project
is crucial. Therefore, it is critical to acquire the right project team for your
project. Roles and responsibilities are defined during the resource planning
process, discussed earlier in this chapter. Before the work can start, the roles
need to be assigned to real individuals, who will become the members of the
project team or will be hired for the project.

Table 10-2. The Acquire Resources Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques         Output
1. Project management plan:   1. Decision making:          1. Physical resource assignments
  *Resource management          * Multicriteria decision   2. Project team assignments
   plan                           analysis                 3. Resource calendars
  * Procurement               2. Interpersonal and team    4. Project management plan
    management plan              skills:                      updates:
  * Cost baseline               * Negotiations               * Resource management plan
2. Project document:            * Pre-assignments            * Cost baseline
  * Project schedule            * Virtual teams            5. Updates to project documents:
  * Resource requirements                                    * Project schedule
  * Resource calendars                                       * RBS
  * Stakeholder register                                     * Resource requirements
3. Enterprise environmental                                  * Stakeholder register
   factors
                                                             * Risk register
4. Organizational project
                                                             * Lessons learned register
   assets
                                                           6. Enterprise environmental
                                                              factors
                                                           7. Organizational project assets
386   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      Selecting and Assigning Resources
      The goal and output of the Acquire Resources process is a list of resource
      assignments after going through obtaining and selecting those resources.
      You don't want to assign just any resources to your project--only the best
      available. So, selecting the right resources is a crucial part of this process. In
      the following, we explain in the form of steps how to perform this process:
            1. "How" Questions. Get general information about how
               to acquire resources from the resource management plan,
               and what resources will be procured and how to integrate
               them with the project and its stakeholders from the
               project management plan.
            2. Resource Needs. Fetch information about the project
               resources that need to be obtained from the resource
               requirements document, and also from the stakeholder
               register, where you may find stakeholder requirements
               or expectations about the use of specific resources; e.g.,
               they want to use Apple computers instead of Windows.
            3. Resource Use Time. Obtain information from the
               project schedule about when a given kind of resource is
               available; e.g., ten software engineers are needed for the
               months of March and April.
            4. Resource Availability. In light of the info from steps
               2 and 3, look into resource calendars to find out what
               resources are already available in what time slots.
            5. Select and Acquire Resources. Select and obtain
               the needed resources that are not currently available by
               using the techniques listed in Table 10-2. While selecting
               resources, cost information from the cost baseline will be
               useful.
            6. Resource Assignments. After having selected and
               obtained team and physical resources, assign them to the
               project and record these assignments into team resource
               assignments and physical resource assignments documents,
               respectively. Of course, these assignment records will
               contain the appropriate details, such as name, time, role,
               and responsibilities that come with the role. These two
               documents make up the output of this process.
            7. Create or Update Resource Calendars. Log the
               assignment information into resource calendars, another
               output of this process. Create them if they do not already
               exist.
                                                                             PMP(R) in Depth         387



        8. Create Change Requests. During the performance of
           this process the need for a corrective action or some
           other change might be felt. For example, you find out
           that a new assignment is needed, and as a result changes
           to the project schedule and cost baseline will need to
           be made. In such cases, you will create change requests,
           which would then be processed through the Integrated
           Change Control process.
        9. Updates. Make updates to documents, such as those
           listed in the output column of Table 10-2, that may be
           needed as a result of performing this process.
In this section, we have discussed how to yield the output of this process
starting from the input by using tools and techniques, which will be discussed
next.


Caution! Resource calendars are created as an output item of the Acquire Resources process
and evolve in a progressive elaboration manner throughout the project, as the process is iterated.
This output is also used as an input to this process.




Tools and Techniques for Acquiring and Selecting
Project Resources
In the following, we will discuss some techniques for selecting and acquiring
project resources, starting with pre-assignments.
Pre-assignment. At this stage of the project, there will likely be some team
and physical resources already assigned to the project. This can happen, for
example, due to the following situations:
        *    A team member was promised an assignment as part
             of a specific proposal. Acceptance of this proposal
             automatically affirms that staff-member assignment.
        *    There is only one person in the organization who has the
             expertise to perform a specific activity.
        *    Team members were already involved in the project,
             taking part in developing the project charter and other
             processes before the development of the resource
             management plan.
388   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      Decision-making Techniques. These techniques are used to select
      suitable resources that can be efficiently and effectively used to perform the
      project work. For example, in the multicriteria selection method, different
      resource options are compared and scored based on several given criteria,
      and the resource with the best score is selected. In a score scheme you can
      use different weights for different criteria depending upon their importance.
      The criteria and their relative importance partially depend on the project.
      The general examples include cost; timely availability; good fit with the team;
      and right knowledge, skill, experience, attitude, and ability to efficiently and
      effectively perform the assignment.
      Interpersonal and Team Skills: Negotiation. One very important
      interpersonal skill that you will be using to acquire resources is negotiation.
      The project manager and the project management team should effectively
      negotiate and exert influence in a positive way to obtain the best possible
      team to complete the project work. The failure to acquire an effective team
      can result in missed deadlines, cost overruns, poor quality, and eventually a
      failed project. You will most likely need to negotiate with functional managers
      for the staff assignments for your project. In these negotiations, you have a
      two-prong goal--to obtain the best available person for an activity and to
      obtain the person for the required timeframe.


      Tip While negotiating with a functional manager, sometimes it's important to understand the
      functional manager's perspective in light of the politics of the organization, and to be able to
      influence the manager in that context. For example, a functional manager will weigh the benefits
      (such as the visibility of your project compared to that of competing projects) in determining where
      to assign the best performers. In this case, it is to your advantage to explain the importance of your
      project and the activity for which you are asking for the best performer.


      You may also be negotiating with project management teams for other projects
      that might be competing for or sharing resources, physical or human, from the
      same resource pool. Negotiation skills will also be used to communicate with
      external organizations to hire or contract team members.
      Virtual Teams. Welcome to the Information Age triggered by the Internet.
      The process of working for an organization from outside its physical location
      was called telecommuting and is now e-commuting. Today, we have the Internet
      and Web, along with related and other technological advances, such as tele-,
      video-, and web conferencing, smartphones, websites, and web-supported
      emails and social media. This makes it possible to e-commute from virtually
      any place on the globe for any organization. Teams composed of e-commuters
      are called virtual teams because the team works together on the same project
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   389



with little or no face-to-face interaction or meetings. It is not difficult to find
people who have been or are working on virtual teams and have never seen
the other team members face-to-face. I have and still am working with several
such teams, and I'm sure you either have or you will in the near future. The
virtual team format expands the team definition to offer benefits such as the
following:
      *    People working for the same organization but living in
           different locations can join the same team.
      *    A needed expert can join a team even if the expert does
           not live in the same location as the rest of the team.
      *    The organization has the option to accommodate
           employees who can only work from their home offices
           for a certain period of time.
      *    Due to the availability of asynchronous communication
           means, such as email, online bulletin boards, and social
           media, it is possible to form a team of members who have
           different work hours or shifts.
      *    Virtual teams eliminate or reduce the need to travel
           by using means of communication that are abundantly
           available, such as email, video conferencing, and the World
           Wide Web.
      *    This enables organizations to perform projects that
           were previously impossible due to the anticipated travel
           expenses.
Note that because the virtual team members are not at the same location
and do not have regular face-to-face meetings, effective communication is
that much more important for the success of the project being performed.
Therefore, communication management is crucial to the success of virtual
teams.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.1

   Use your knowledge of the Acquire Resources process to answer the following
   questions:
   Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the process of acquiring resources.
   Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the process of acquiring resources.
   Q3. How are the documents listed for update in the output column of Table 10-2
       updated?
390   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      The team you are going to acquire could be at one location or a virtual team,
      and a team member might be from your organization or from outside your
      organization. In other words, you hire the individuals, but you need a team to
      complete the project successfully.Virtual or non-virtual, once initiated, a team
      needs to be continually developed.


      Developing the Project Team
      Your project team can consist of members from different departments and
      disciplines, regular employees and contractors, and experts from different
      disciplines. Some of these individuals might not have much appreciation for
      others' disciplines. You have the challenge of developing this diverse group
      into a cohesive and efficient team that will perform the project on time, within
      budget, and with quality. The single goal of team development is to maximize
      project performance. This is accomplished by introducing three elements:
              1. Improve the competencies of team members.
              2. Improve the interaction among team members.
              3. Improve the overall team environment.
      This will help you develop a cohesive and competent team to meet the project
      objectives effectively.


      Tip Each team member should be the owner of the piece of work assigned to the member,
      and hence be fully responsible for it. That said, teamwork and team spirit are critical factors for
      the project's success. It's the responsibility of the project manager to create an environment that
      supports teamwork and team spirit.


      Table 10-3 shows the Develop Team process, used to develop the project
      team, in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output. As usual, we start
      with the initial information provided by input. The resource management plan
      guides us on how to develop the project team by providing useful information
      on team development-related matters, such as the following:
              *    Feedback and training strategies
              *    Using result of performance assessments
              *    Disciplinary action
              *    Recognition and rewards systems
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth     391



Table 10-3. The Develop Team Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques         Output
1. Project management plan:    1. Co-location               1. Team performance
  * Resource management        2.Virtual teams                 assessment
    plan                       3. Communication             2. Change requests
2. Project documents:             technology                3. Project management plan
  * Project schedule           4. Meetings                     updates:
  * Project team assignments 5. Interpersonal and team        * Resource management
                                skills:                         plan
  * Team charter
                                 * Influencing              4. Updates to project
  * Resource calendars
                                                               documents:
  * Lessons learned register     * Conflict management
                                                              * Project schedule
3. Enterprise environmental      * Motivation
                                                              * Project team assignments
   factors                       * Negotiations
                                                              * Resource calendars
4. Organizational project        * Team building
   assets                                                     * Team charter
                               6. Individual assessments
                                                              * Lessons learned register
                               7. Training
                                                            5. Enterprise environmental
                               8. Recognition and rewards
                                                               factors
                                                            6. Organizational project
                                                               assets


Obviously, team development starts with team members and information about
them as well as the staff assignments made during the Acquire Project Team
process. The project team assignments, project schedule, and resource calendars
documents will reveal their names, assignments, roles, responsibilities, time
they are available for trainings, and maybe much more. Team values, operating
guidelines, and rules are given in the team charter document developed during the
Plan Resource Management process. With this information on hand, you can start
team development, which is an iterative process repeated throughout the project
lifecycle. In the repetition of this process, you can make use of the lessons learned
in team development so far, which are recorded in lessons learned register.
You can use the standard tools and techniques listed in Table 10-3 to develop
a winning team.


Tools and Techniques for the Develop Team Process
A very important management technique is to establish clear expectations at
the very beginning of a project. The expectations can be established by setting
ground rules. Early commitment to these guidelines will increase cooperation
and productivity by decreasing misunderstandings. Once the rules are clearly
established, all team members are responsible for enforcing them. These kinds
of ground rules are parts of the team charter document.
392   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      Other techniques are discussed in the following paragraphs.
      Co-location and Virtual Teams. This technique keeps all (or most) of the
      project team members in the same physical location to improve communication
      and to create a sense of community among the team members. In this age
      of virtual teams, discussed in a previous section, this is not an increasingly
      popular technique, but when most of the team members are in the same
      location, this technique is a default choice. It can include a war room, which is a
      meeting room used for regular face-to-face meetings. Also, when the project
      is being executed by a virtual team, the collation technique can be used to put
      together some team members at crucial times of the project. Some virtual
      teams can also manage to co-locate for a specific period during the project.
      In the case of virtual team development, the role of communication
      technologies becomes that much more important.
      Communication Technologies. There are abundant synchronized and
      asynchronized communication methods, both online and offline, available that
      can be used for team development and other project tasks. The following are
      some examples of methods available:
             *     Smartphone, email, web chat, web podcasts and seminars
             *     Audio and video conferences
             *     Shared web portals, discussion groups, and bulletin boards
             *     Social media site to set up groups
      We will explore communication further in an upcoming chapter on
      communication management.


      Note Synchronized communication is when all the communicating parties are present at
      the same time--e.g., phone, meetings, and conferences--while asynchronized communication
      is when all the communicating parties do not have to be present at the same time--e.g., email,
      website, and online courses. Internet and Web, in general, are designed to support asynchronized
      communication.


      Interpersonal and General Management Skills. General management
      skills, especially interpersonal skills, are necessary in order to develop an
      effective team. You and the project management team can minimize problems
      and maximize cooperation by understanding the sentiments of each team
      member, anticipating their actions, acknowledging their concerns, and
      following up on their issues. To accomplish this, the following interpersonal
      management skills are necessary:
                                                                           PMP(R) in Depth         393



       *     Effective Communication. This is needed to facilitate
             the smooth flow of necessary information among team
             members.
       *     Ability to Influence. This is generally needed to get
             things done. In team development, it will be helpful to
             start from collecting information and move to meetings,
             getting consent on issues, and resolving conflict.
       *     Leadership. This is needed for developing a vision and
             strategy and for motivating people to achieve that vision.
             During a time of possible uncertainty, such as changes in
             upper management, you should clarify the situation and
             help the team stay focused on the project.
       *     Motivation. This is needed for energizing team members
             to achieve high levels of performance and to overcome
             barriers to change. Motivation is invoked by being given a
             reason to act. For example, you can motive team members
             by letting them own their assignments, letting them
             participate in decision making, giving credit and rewards,
             and by explaining how they are making a difference by
             performing this important project. Especially during times
             when the team is in a low-morale mode, you should be
             able to lift the team's morale and thereby contribute to
             team development.
       *     Negotiation and Conflict Management. This is
             needed to work with team members to resolve conflicts
             and to facilitate negotiations when necessary to resolve
             conflicts or issue task assignments. Depending on the
             nature of the conflict, you can take it as a team develop-
             ment opportunity. The effective resolution of a conflict
             contributes to team building.
       *     Problem Solving. This ability is needed to define, analyze,
             and solve problems.
Most of these skills are discussed in more detail in Chapter 2. Team management
is further discussed later in this chapter.


Note Interpersonal skills are also called soft skills, as opposed to hard skills, which refer to
technical skills and capabilities.
394   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      Team-building Activities. In general, team building involves activities
      that encourage team members to know each other better and to create a
      collaborative, cooperative, and supporting team--hence work--environment.
      Team-building activities can range from indirect team-building activities, such
      as participating in constructing the WBS, to direct team-building activities,
      such as social gatherings where team members can get to know each other
      and start feeling comfortable with each other. While planning such activities,
      you should keep in mind that the team members might have different interests
      and different levels of tolerance for games and icebreakers. Although team
      building is an ongoing process, it's crucial in the beginning. It should start
      as soon as possible. For example, the project kickoff meeting is an indirect
      method to start team development. This can be used as a formal way to
      introduce team members and other stakeholders and spell out the project
      goals for everyone at the same time. An ideal kickoff meeting is a combination
      of serious business and fun. The goal is to align the team with the project goals
      and to help the team members feel comfortable with each other.
      In planning the kickoff meeting, you can assume that team members have the
      following questions in their heads that need to be answered before the end
      of the meeting:
            *    Why am I here?
            *    Who are you, and what are your expectations of me?
            *    What is this team going to do?
            *    How is the team going to do its work?
            *    How do I fit into all this?
      Consider the following steps to make your kickoff meeting successful:
            *    Agenda. Putting the meeting agenda in the hands of
                 the team members always helps the meeting run more
                 smoothly and effectively and keep it on track.
            *    Welcome. Take immediate charge of the meeting by
                 introducing yourself and welcoming the participants.
                 Quickly walk through the agenda and set the stage for
                 the rest of the meeting.
            *    Project Overview. Define the project, its goals, and its
                 deliverables. Introduce the project team members and
                 briefly describe their roles. The goal is to provide a big
                 picture and to help individual team members figure out
                 how they fit into it.
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   395



       *    Expectations. Many of the project team members
            might not already know you and your management style.
            You should take this opportunity to set expectations
            about how the team will function. For example, state
            that you expect all team members to attend the weekly
            status meetings. Remind the team to focus on the
            project goal, to do their part, and to look out for one
            another in a team spirit.
       *    Guest Speakers. Depending upon the size and visibility
            of the project, you might also invite relevant guest
            speakers, such as the project sponsor, the customer, or an
            executive stakeholder. Before the meeting, spend some
            time communicating with the guest speaker about the
            message to deliver.
       *    Closure. Ask for feedback and hold a question-and-
            answer session before closing the meeting.
Remember that the main purpose of the kickoff meeting is to bring every
team member onto the same page regarding the big picture of the project.
Don't get bogged down discussing every item in detail.
You should know that team development is not an instant process. Generally
speaking, when you form a team it goes through five stages of development
(according to the Tuckman model), as shown in Figure 10-2 and explained in
the following list.




Figure 10-2. The five progressive stages of team development in the Tuckman model
396   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


            *   Forming. This is the orientation stage, with high
                dependence on the leader (the project manager, in this
                case) for guidance and direction. Individual roles and
                responsibilities are unclear, and there is little agreement on
                the team goals other than those received from the leader.
                Processes are often ignored, and the team members test
                the tolerance of the system and the leader. It's time to
                establish the ground rules and clear expectations. The
                leader directs in this stage.
            *   Storming. This stage represents the struggle for control
                and power as team members work to establish themselves
                relative to other team members. The clarity of the team goals
                increases, but some uncertainties persist. Compromises
                might be required to make progress. Coaching and training
                can play effective roles during this stage.
            *   Norming.This is the routine stage during which consensus
                and agreement about team goals generally prevails among
                the team members. Roles and responsibilities are clear
                and accepted by the team members. Major decisions are
                made by group agreements, and smaller decisions can be
                delegated to the appropriate team members. During this
                stage, the leader facilitates.
            *   Performing. This is the productivity stage in which
                the team knows what it's doing and why. The team is
                functioning in a cohesive mode and working toward
                the common goal in a more autonomous fashion.
                Disagreements might arise, but they are resolved within
                the team in a constructive way. During this stage, the
                leader delegates and oversees.
            *   Adjourning. This is the closure stage. When the
                mission for which the team was formed is accomplished
                (or cancelled), the team is adjourned to free the team
                members to move on to other things.
      Being aware of these stages of team development will help you to better
      understand the behaviors of the team members and thereby develop your
      team more effectively.
      Training. The goal of training is to improve the competencies of the project
      team members, which in turn helps in meeting the project objectives. It might
      be aimed at the individual members or at the team as a whole, depending
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth      397



upon the needs. The training might be scheduled, or it might be less formal;
e.g., it might result from the on-the-job observations and conversations. The
following are examples of some other training methods:
      *    Coaching
      *    Mentoring
      *    On-the-job training of a team member by another team
           member
      *    Online training
      *    Instructor-led classroom training
Observation and Conversation. Although not listed separately in PMBOK
for this process, observations and conversations are both means to stay in
touch with the work and attitudes of the project team members. The indicators
to monitor these include the following:
      *    Progress toward completion of assigned activities and
           therefore project deliverables
      *    Distinguished accomplishments contributing to the
           project performance
      *    Interpersonal issues
Individual and Team Assessments. To continually develop the team, it's
important to know and track the strengths and weaknesses of the team and its
members. You want to assess the team members individually and collectively
on the following:
      1. What are their preferences, and what inspires them?
      2. How do they interact with other people?
      3. How do they process information?
Various tools are available to accomplish this, including focus groups, interviews,
ability tests, surveys, and online tests designed for this purpose.
Recognition and Rewards. Generally speaking, people feel motivated
if they feel that their contributions and efforts are recognized and valued.
Rewards are effective methods to express recognition. The recognition and
rewards strategy set up during the resource planning process can be used to
develop the project team. Remember the following rules in setting up a fair
reward system:
      *    Only desirable behavior should be rewarded.
      *    Any member should be able to win the reward.
398   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


            *   Win-lose rewards, such as team member of the month,
                can hurt team cohesiveness.
            *   It's important to consider the value of the particular
                reward from the rewardee's perspective.
            *   The cultural diversity of the team should be considered
                and respected.

      Output of Team Development Process
      The major output of the Develop Project Team process is the team
      performance assessment document. This and other output items are explained
      in the following paragraphs.
      Team Performance Assessment. The effects of the team development
      efforts are measured by the individual and team performance assessments
      and recorded into the team performance assessment document. It includes
      the following information:
            *   Improvement in individual skills that enables a team
                member to perform project activities more efficiently
            *   Improvement in team skills that helps the team to
                improve overall performance and work more effectively
                as a group
            *   Increased team spirit or cohesiveness: team members
                interact in constructive ways and help each other meet
                the project objectives
            *   Reduced staff turnover rate
      Change Request and Document Updates. As a result of the Develop
      Project Team process, the need for changes may arise. Change requests
      are generated and, as usual, are processed through the Integrated Change
      Control process. Approved changes are implemented, and the corresponding
      documents are updated. The obvious documents that might get updates are
      listed in the output column of Table 10-3. Knowing the process, the reasons
      for their updates should be trivial to figure out. For example, based on the
      team development experience of which methods work better than others,
      changes could be made to the relevant part of the resource management plan,
      and the lessons learned register should be updated accordingly. Similarly, team
      development could cause changes in assignments and schedule and so on.
      While you are developing the team, you also need to perform a related task--
      managing the project team.
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth       399




Managing the Project Team
You manage the project team by using the Manage Team process, which is
aimed at improving and optimizing the project performance by executing the
following tasks:
        *    Resolving issues and conflicts
        *    Coordinating changes
        *    Tracking the performance of each team member and of
             the team as whole
        *    Providing feedback to the team members individually and
             to the team as whole

Tip Managing the project team can involve activities from hiring to firing and from providing
feedback to optimizing the project performance, and therefore it requires a wide spectrum of
management skills, including communication, conflict management, negotiation, and leadership.
On one hand you should provide challenging assignments, and on the other hand you should
recognize and reward high performance; this is the interaction of managing and developing a team.


Table 10-4 presents the Manage Project Team process in terms of input, tools
and techniques, and output.

Table 10-4. The Manage Project Team Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                  Tools and Techniques        Output
1. Project management plan:            1. Interpersonal and team 1. Change requests
  * Resource management plan              skills:                2. Plan updates:
2. Project documents:                      * Influencing            * Resource management
  * Project team assignments              * Leadership                 plan
  * Team charter                          * Conflict management       * Schedule baseline
  * Issues log                            * Emotional                 * Cost baseline
                                            intelligence           3. Updates to project
  * Lessons learned register
                                          * Decision making           documents:
3. Team performance assessments
                                       2. Project management          * Project team
4. Work performance reports
                                          information systems           assignments
5. Enterprise environmental factors
                                                                      * Issues log
6. Organizational project assets
                                                                      * Lessons learned
                                                                        register
                                                                   4. Enterprise
                                                                      environmental factors
400   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      You perform this process by getting information about the team and some
      means to manage it from the input items listed in Table 10-4, and then you
      manage the team using the tools and techniques listed in the same table.


      Getting Information about the Team and Means for
      Managing It
      The main input items to managing the project team come from the output
      of the Plan Resource Management, Acquire Resources, and Develop Project
      Team processes. You extract the needed information from them as shown in
      the following sections.


      How to Manage the Team?
      You can get general guidance on how to manage the team, including releasing
      the team at the end of the project, from the resource management plan.


      Knowing the Team
      To manage the team, you want to know who composes the team, what the
      team is doing, and how (well) it is doing. This information can be extracted
      from the following documents.
      Project Team Assignments. Obviously you should know who your
      team members are and what they are supposed to be doing: roles and
      responsibilities. Project team assignments, an output of the Acquire Resources
      process, contains this information.
      Assessment and Performance Information. The following items will
      yield this information:
            *   Team Performance Assessment. This is the output
                of the Develop Project Team process discussed earlier
                in this chapter. Performance assessment is an important
                piece of information that can be used in managing a
                team member and in managing the team as a whole. This
                assessment helps you to understand a team member,
                identify issues, and address them. Some examples are the
                need to resolve conflicts, the need for training, and the
                need to modify communication.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth   401



     *   Performance Reports. Performance reports contain
         the progress of the project against the baseline data,
         such as the schedule baseline, the cost baseline, and the
         quality baseline. They basically reflect how the team is
         doing in achieving the project objectives. The information
         from the performance reports helps determine future
         team requirements--e.g., need more members, updates
         to resource management plan, and recognitions and
         rewards. It may also reveal the need for training or the
         need to change assignments.

Means to Facilitate Team Management
The following input documents, or information in them, serve as means to
facilitate team management:
     *   Team Charter. An output of the Plan Resource
         Management process, the team charter document con-
         tains information about team values, operating guidelines,
         and ground rules. These values and rules help facilitate
         team management by guiding how to make decisions and
         resolve issues and conflicts. This further facilitates team
         management if the team took part in developing the team
         charter and agreed to it.
     *   Issues Log and Lessons Learned Register. The issues
         log can be used to facilitate a team-related issue resolution
         by logging in the issue information, including a resolution
         target date. Issues generally involve obstacles that can stop
         the project team from achieving the project objectives.
         A written log should be maintained that contains the list
         of team members responsible for resolving the issues by
         target dates. The purpose of the issues log is to monitor
         the issues until they are closed.
         The lessons learned register can facilitate team management
         in the sense that you can use it to record ongoing lessons
         learned in managing the team to subsequently use them
         to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of team
         management.
402   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


            *    Enterprise Environmental Factors and Organiza-
                 tional Process Assets. The project management team
                 can use the following EEFs and OPAs in managing the
                 project team:
                 *   Enterprise environmental factors that should be
                     available to the project management team for use in
                     managing the team include bulletin boards, newsletters,
                     and internal websites for information sharing.
                 *   The OPAs that can influence team management
                     include the organization's policies, procedures, and
                     system for rewarding the team members. Certificates
                     of appreciation, recognition dinners, and bonus
                     structures are some other examples.
      To manage the team effectively, you should be aware of the tools and
      techniques that can be used to do so.


      Tools and Techniques for Managing the Project Team
      Interpersonal skills used to manage the team include leadership skills, one of
      the three skill types in a project manager's talent triangle, covered in Chapter 2;
      influencing, also covered in Chapter 2 in much detail; decision making, covered
      a few times in different situations so far; conflict management; and emotional
      intelligence.
      Influencing. Influencing means getting individuals or groups to do what you
      want them to do without necessarily having the formal authority to mandate
      an outcome from them. It becomes even more important when you realize that
      under many formal and informal organizational structures, project managers
      have no or very little practical authority. So, in that case, to get work done,
      your only option is to use influencing skills, such as collecting all information
      about the given issue or situation; understanding all different perspectives
      on it; listening actively and effectively; clearly explaining your points and
      perspective while demonstrating consideration and understanding for the
      other perspective; having the ability to persuade; and reaching an agreement
      without damaging the ongoing working relationship.
      Decision Making. In managing the team, you will be dealing with the team
      and the organization making decisions by choosing from the options available.
      However, first you need to create the choices by using your skills of negotiation
      and influence on the organization and the team, as well as stimulating a creative
      environment within your team. For that you should always do your homework:
      Collect all relevant information, including the relevant environmental factors
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth         403



about the issue at hand, and analyze this information. In your analysis, don't
forget to include the risk factors. After creating choices and analyzing, the
decision is made by following the rules in the team charter.
Emotional Intelligence. Emotional intelligence, in general, is the ability to
sense and manage one's own and other people's emotions, where manage
means to understand the emotions and their impact and control the impulse
to adapt in order to change the situation. You and your team can use emotional
intelligence to reduce the tension among team members to create an
environment of collaboration by anticipating and understanding each other's
reactions and emotions. You can also use relationship management, a part of
emotional intelligence that guides how to influence, inspire, and develop the
team while resolving conflict.
Conflict Management. The purpose of conflict management is to nourish
positive working relationships among the team members so they result in
increased productivity. Common sources of conflict include the following:
       *    Scarce resources resulting in unsatisfied needs
       *    Scheduling priorities
       *    Personal work styles
       *    Perceptions, values, feelings, and emotions
       *    Power struggles
You can reduce the number of conflicts by setting ground rules, clearly defining
roles and goals, and implementing solid project management practices. In this
the team charter is important.


Tip Differences of opinion should not be considered sources of conflict. If managed
properly, differences can be very healthy and can lead to better solutions and thereby increase
productivity.


Initially, the project team members who are parties to a conflict should be
given the opportunity to resolve it themselves. If the team members fail to
resolve the conflict and it becomes a negative factor for the project, you, the
project manager, should facilitate the conflict resolution, usually in private and
using a direct and collaborative approach. If the conflict continues, you might
have no option other than to use formal procedures, such as disciplinary
actions.
404   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      Different project managers normally use different styles or methods in
      different situations. The choice of the conflict-resolution style or technique
      may be influenced by the following factors:
            *   Does the conflict need to be resolved for the long term,
                or is a short-term resolution fine?
            *   The intensity of the conflict and the relative importance
                of resolution in context of the project
            *   Urgency of resolving the conflict
            *   Positions taken by the parties involved in the conflict
      The first step in conflict management is analyzing the nature and type of the
      conflict, which might involve asking questions. You can meet with (interview)
      the parties involved in the conflict. The next step is to determine the
      management strategy. Different management strategies are summarized here:
            *   Avoidance. In this strategy, at least one party to the
                conflict ignores (or withdraws) from the conflict and
                decides not to deal with the problem. This strategy can
                be used by the project manager as a cooling-off period, to
                collect more information, or when the issue is not critical.
                However, if the issue is critical, this is the worst resolution
                strategy and can give rise to lose-lose situations if both
                parties withdraw or yield-lose situations if one party
                withdraws. This strategy is also called withdrawal strategy.
            *   Direct. In this approach, also called force, one party uses
                any available means to get its way, often at the expense
                of the other party. This is a win-lose situation. It can be
                justified in some situations, such as when the basic rights
                of a party in conflict are at stake or when you want to
                set a precedent. However, if used unfairly from a power
                position (such as if it is a management style), it can be
                destructive for team development. This strategy can
                cause the conflict to escalate, and the losing party might
                attempt to retaliate. When used by a party in power, it is
                also called forcing.
            *   Compromising. In this strategy, also called reconcile,
                both parties gain something and give up something.
                This is a lose-win/lose-win strategy. You can use this
                strategy to achieve temporary solutions and to avoid a
                damaging power struggle when there is time pressure.
                The downside of this approach is that both parties can
                look at the solution as a lose-lose situation and can be
                                                                             PMP(R) in Depth          405



             distracted from the merits of the issues involved. In this
             way, this short-term solution can hurt the long-term
             objectives of the project.
        *    Accommodation. This strategy, also called smoothing,
             is opposite of the direct or force strategy. One party
             attempts to meet the other party's needs at the
             expense of their own. This might be a justifiable strategy
             when the concerns of the accommodating party are
             less significant than the concerns of the other party
             in the context of the project. Sometimes it's used as
             a goodwill gesture. However, it is a lose-win approach
             (the accommodating party loses and the accommodated
             party wins), and the accommodating party runs the risk
             of losing credibility and influence in the future. However,
             this strategy, when applied carefully--and if both parties
             become accommodating so they can meet in the areas
             of agreement--can turn into a win-win situation. This is
             why this technique is also called smoothing.
        *    Collaboration. This strategy, also called problem solving,
             is based on reaching consensus among the parties in the
             conflict. Both parties work together to explore several
             solutions and agree on the one that satisfies the needs
             and concerns of both parties. This is a win-win strategy
             and is generally considered the best of all the strategies
             because it helps build commitment and promotes goodwill
             between the parties involved. A form of collaboration is
             called confronting. You confront the problem causing the
             conflict head-on and then solve that problem through an
             open dialogue and by examining several alternatives.

Tip You should always look for how the different processes overlap and interact with each
other. For example, conflict management is a technique for managing the team. However, the
purpose of conflict management is to nourish the positive working relationships among the team
members that result in increased productivity, so resolving a conflict can also be looked upon as a
team development activity.


As mentioned earlier, leadership skills were covered in Chapter 2, and you
should already be familiar with project management information systems and
use one for managing the team, as it contains the schedule, calendar, and other
management application and features.
406   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.2

          Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a conflict-resolution
          strategy. Match each comment with the corresponding strategy in the second column.

          Comment                                            Conflict-Resolution Technique
          A . L et's have a face-to-face meeting and hear    1. Avoidance/withdrawal
              out both parties.
          B. Both of you have to meet halfway; you can't     2. Competition/forcing
             get everything all the time.
          C. I'm the one who is running the show here,       3. Compromising/smoothing
             and I have made the decision.
          D. OK, I see your point now. I was thinking        4. Accommodation
             more at a personal level; your view is more
             compatible with the project's objectives. I
             guess for that reason I can live with your
             approach.
          E. You guys are not even listening to my           5. Collaboration
             argument. I feel I'm wasting my time. So, I'm
             not going to discuss it with you any longer.
          F. sit down, talk it out, and design the best      6. Confronting/problem solving
             solution that is good for all parties.




      Caution! Not only can you earn quite a few points on the PMP exam, but you can also be a
      very effective project manager if you realize this: confront the problem or the issue head-on, but
      do your homework (investigate, research, or analyze) before taking action.


      While you are managing the team using these techniques, you might
      recommend some actions as an output of the Manage Project Team process.


      Output of Managing the Project Team
      The output from managing the project team includes change requests--
      e.g., recommended corrective and preventive actions--and updates to
      organizational process assets and the project management plan.
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth   407



Change Requests. You or the Manage Project Team process might generate
recommendations for corrective and preventive actions and other changes as
discussed here:
      *   Recommended Corrective Actions. A corrective
          action is a direction for executing the project work to
          bring the future performance in line with what is expected
          in the project management plan. The corrective actions
          recommended during project team management might
          include the following:
          *   Staffing changes, such as changing assignments of
              the team members, replacing team members (for
              example, the ones who leave), and outsourcing some
              work
          *   Training for the team or for individual team members
          *   Recognition and rewards based on the reward system
          *   Disciplinary actions
      *   Recommended Preventive Actions. A preventive
          action is a direction to perform an activity to stop or
          reduce the probability of an anticipated event occurrence
          generally associated with a project risk. Preventive action
          can also be taken to reduce the anticipated impact of
          an event in case it happens. The preventive actions
          recommended during project team management might
          include the following:
          *   Cross-training so that in the absence of a team
              member another team member can take over the
              assignment
          *   Role clarifications to ensure that all the responsibilities
              associated with the role are performed
          *   Planning for overtime in anticipation of extra work
              that might be needed to meet project deadlines
Other Change Requests and Updates. Team management activities
can generate some change requests for the project management plan. For
example, staffing changes can generate requests for extending the schedule,
increasing the budget, or reducing the scope. The change requests should
be processed through the Integrated Change Control process. Approved
and implemented changes will trigger changes to the resource management
408   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      plan, schedule baseline, and cost baseline. Of course, due to the changes in
      assignments and lessons learned in the course of managing the team, there will
      need to be updates to the issues log, project team assignments, and lessons
      learned register.
      Updates to Organizational Process Assets. Several kinds of organizational
      process assets can be updated as a result of project team management. Here
      are some examples:
              *    Input to Organizational Performance Appraisals.
                   The project team member's project work performance
                   and interaction with other project team members is
                   a significant way to offer input to the organizational
                   performance appraisal for that team member.
              *    Templates and Organization's Standard Processes.
                   Save them for future projects.
              *    Lessons Learned Database. The lessons learned
                   database should be updated with the lessons learned
                   during team management, which can come from different
                   areas, including the following:
                   *     Issues and solutions in the issues log
                   *     Special skills and competencies of the team members
                         discovered during the project work
                   *     Successful and unsuccessful ground rules, conflict-
                         management techniques, and recognition events


      Tip Managing the project team is a complex task when the team members are accountable to
      both the project manager and the functional manager. Effectively managing this dual relationship
      is critical to the success of the project and is therefore generally the responsibility of the project
      manager.


      Interpersonal skills and an understanding of organizational theories is very
      important in managing human resources. Motivation is the key factor.
                                                                   PMP(R) in Depth       409




Motivating Your Team
Because you have come so far in studying this book, I must say you are motivated
to take the PMP exam, learn about project management, or both. So, what is
motivation? Motivation is an internal drive to meet a set of objectives. Internal
drive is a state of unrest inside of you. This is how it goes. A need is a deficiency,
an absence of something, a hole. Out of need arises the desire to fulfill the
need. This desire or want represents dissatisfaction, which creates a state of
unrest. This unrest is the drive. When drive is directed at a call for action to
meet those objectives that will satisfy the need, it becomes motivation. In a
nutshell, the need acts as a catalyst, like an enzyme in a biochemical reaction,
that sets you on a journey toward meeting a set of objectives that will satisfy
the need.
If you want to get optimal results from your computers, you network them
appropriately and execute appropriate software programs on appropriate
drives in the network. If you want to achieve optimal results from your team,
you create the appropriate drives in the team members to execute actions to
meet project objectives; in other words, you motivate them.
This is how important motivation is: motivation to do some task plus the
ability to do that task is equal to performance. So, lack of motivation means
poor performance. In a project, motivation begins with you, the project
manager. You must be motivated for the project and to motivate the project
team members. It's always a good idea to have some formal knowledge of
something that you are going to go through. So, here in a nutshell are some
theories of motivation.
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Theory. According to this theory, people
have layers of needs, as illustrated in Figure 10-3, and until the lower-layer
needs are satisfied, they will not move to satisfy the upper-layer needs. For
example, if you are unemployed and broke and as a result your very survival
is in danger, you don't care about buying health insurance, life insurance, or
dating.
410   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources




      Figure 10-3. Illustration of Maslow's Theory of Hierarchy of Needs (based on Motivation
      and Personality, Abraham Maslow, 1970, Harper and Row)


      Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory. This theory classifies the
      factors needed to motivate people into two categories: hygiene factors and
      motivating factors. Hygiene factors are necessary for motivation but are
      not sufficient; they do not bring satisfaction, but they prevent dissatisfaction.
      Some examples are compensation; company policies; level of supervision or
      ownership of the assigned work; relationship with superiors, subordinates, and
      peers; and working conditions. Motivating factors are the factors that bring (or
      increase) job satisfaction. Some examples are challenging work assignments,
      opportunity for career advancement and accomplishments, opportunity for
      growth, sense of responsibility, and recognition.


      Caution! Hygiene factors are related to the work environment, whereas motivating factors
      (also called motivators) are related to the work itself.
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth   411



McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory. According to this
theory, the following three needs motivate people:
      *   Achievement. This is the need to perform well, achieve
          success, and get recognized for it. The key idea here is the
          drive to excel.
      *   Affiliation. This is the need or desire for good
          relationships at work. You want to feel connected at
          work.
      *   Power. This is the desire to move things, to influence
          people or events. The key term here is world dominance
          or making a difference.
McGregor's X-Y Theory. According to McGregor, there exist the following
two types of managers:
      *   Theory X Managers. These managers believe that
          most people (and hence workers) are self-centered and
          are only motivated by their physiological and safety needs
          and are indifferent to the needs of the organization they
          work for. They (workers) lack ambition and have very
          little creativity and problem-solving capacity. As a result,
          they dislike their work and will try to avoid it. They will
          also avoid taking responsibility and initiative. There is
          one word to describe Theory X managers: distrust. They
          distrust their employees. These managers, therefore, tend
          to be authoritarian.
      *   Theory Y Managers. As opposed to Theory X
          managers, Theory Y managers trust their employees. They
          believe that most of the people are high performers in a
          proper work environment. This is because most people
          are creative and committed to meeting the needs of the
          organization they work for. They also believe that most
          people like to take responsibility and initiate and are self-
          disciplined. Finally, they also believe that most people are
          motivated by all levels of needs in Maslow's hierarchy of
          needs. These managers tend to provide more freedom
          and opportunity for career growth.
Expectancy Theory. According to this theory, people are motivated only
if they expect a desired outcome or reward. The key idea here is: what is in
it for me? The desired outcome here has two components: objectives will be
met with this effort, and the performers will be rewarded.
412   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.3

         Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a management
         theory in the second column. Match each comment with the corresponding theory in
         the second column.

         Scenario                                            Motivation Theory
         A. T
             he management is real nice to the              1. Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
            employees, and there are lots of perks. But I'm    Theory
            more concerned about my career path once I
            join this company.
         B. Engineering manager Bob has a habit that      2. Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene
            employees don't like. Every time he passes by    Theory
            a cubicle of an employee, he always peeps at
            the computer screen over the shoulders of the
            employee to see what the employee is really
            doing on the computer.
         C. Rachel Janowicz quit her project management 3. McClelland's Achievement
            job with the Gugu Gaga company immediately     Motivation Theory
            after winning the California super lotto. She
            said, "Well, my money problem is solved. Now
            I will do what I always wanted to do."
         D. I'm not going to attend this seminar. Basically, 4. McGregor's X-Y Theory
            I'll be listening to their pitches all day long.
            What are the odds that I'll win the door prize?
         E. Kushal did not really like the assignment. But  5. Expectancy Theory
            he did it anyway because he did not want to let
            his manager down.




      Caution! The expectancy theory, applied carelessly, can backfire. For example, if the expected
      reward is unachievable or not worth the effort, people will get demotivated.


      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
             *    To lay the foundations of your project's success, you must
                  negotiate to acquire 1) individuals with the right skills and
                  capabilities to perform the project work effectively and
                  efficiently; and 2) the best options of physical resources.
                                                                  PMP(R) in Depth       413



       *   It is critical for the project's success that you develop and
           manage the group of individuals to be a high-performing
           team. Development generally goes through these stages:
           forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.
       *   Conflict resolution is a critical part of managing the team.
           Successful conflict resolutions are important for the
           success of the project.

Summary
To execute the project, you need to put together a project team that will
perform the project work, and you and the team will need physical resources
do so. To accomplish these tasks, you use the processes of project resource
management. First, you develop the resource management plan, as discussed in
Chapter 6, which contains the roles to perform the project, the responsibilities
assigned to the roles, and a guide on how to perform other processes in
resource management. Then, you estimate the team and physical resources
for each project activity, as explained in Chapter 6, using the Estimate Activity
Resources process. With this resources information in hand, you perform the
Acquire Resources process to obtain individuals and physical resources. The
goal is to negotiate to obtain the individuals with the right skills and capabilities
to perform the project work effectively and efficiently, and to obtain the best
options for physical resources.
Having obtained the group in individuals, you use the Develop Project Team
process and Manage Team process to turn this group into a high-performance
team by 1) identifying the areas of improvement and facilitating that
improvement--e.g., competencies, interaction with other team members, and
overall team environment; and 2) tracking performance, providing feedback,
resolving conflicts, and managing changes. Finally, use the Control Resources
process to optimize the results by keeping the planned, allotted, and used
physical resources in synch with each other. This process is covered in the
monitoring and controlling part of this book.
Road Ahead. In this and Chapter 9 combined, we have discussed the execution
of activities from all project aspects except two. These two very important
project aspects run through all other aspects and activities. These are project
stakeholder management and project communication management, and the
executing processes related to these will be discussed in the next chapter.
414   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend

       *The human or team resource planning, as explained in Chapter 6, is used to determine
        the roles that will perform the schedule activities and to develop the staff management
        plan to fill the roles with the team members.
       *The goal of the Acquire Project Resources process is to fill the roles defined in the
        staffing management plan with real individuals who will perform those roles to execute
        the project.
       *Regardless of how much control you have over team assignments, always try to
        obtain the best person for the job by means such as negotiation, for which you do
        your homework, which includes finding out the availability and competencies of the
        candidate team members.
       *The project team assignments made through the Acquire Project Resources process
        are the input to the Develop Team process, which uses techniques such as training,
        recognition and rewards, and other team-building activities to develop a high-
        performance team from team members who were just a group of people to start with.
       *You must manage the team in order to optimize its performance.

      Look Out

       *Planning resource management does not assign the resources; assignments happen in
        the Acquire Resources process.
       *Resource calendars are an output item as well as an input item for the Acquire
        Resources process.
       *The project manager should effectively negotiate and exert influence in a positive way
        to obtain the best possible team to complete the project work.
       *The failure to acquire an effective team can result in missed deadlines, cost overruns,
        poor quality, and eventually a failed project.

      Memorize

       *Team development goes through five progressive stages: forming, storming, norming,
        performing, and adjourning.
       *The strategies used to resolve conflicts include avoid/withdraw, force/direct, compromise/
        reconcile, accommodate/smooth, and collaborate/problem solve. Collaboration is the best
        strategy because it offers a win/win resolution.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   415




Review Questions
   1. Which of the following is generally the best conflict-res-
      olution technique to use to resolve conflict in your team
      in most situations?
       A. Avoidance
       B. Compromise
       C. Accommodation
       D. Collaboration
   2. Karl, one of your team members, is arguing with you over
      how to perform a specific task. At the end of a long dis-
      cussion, you say, "Karl, I know you feel different about it,
      but please do me a favor and do it this way for my peace
      of mind." Which conflict-resolution technique are you
      using?
      A. Avoidance
      B. Compromise
      C. Accommodation
      D. Forcing
   3. Which of the following is not a situation well suited for
      team development efforts?
       A. The kickoff meeting
       B. A conflict between two groups within the team
       C. Low team morale
       D. Changes in the budget
   4. You are in the beginning of executing your project, and
      you need to make assignments to individuals who will do
      the project work. Which process should you perform?
       A. Develop Human Resource Plan
       B. Develop Project Team
       C. Acquire Project Team
       D. Make Staff Assignments
416   Chapter 10 | Managing Project Resources


           5. Virtual teams are a tool and technique used in which of
              the following processes?
               A. Develop Human Resource Plan
               B. Develop Project Team
               C. Acquire Project Team
               D. Manage Project Team
           6. You heard in the hallway that the project manager of
              The Da Vinci Code project, named Pappu Gloria, has
              very poor soft skills. If this is true, Pappu Gloria needs to
              improve his:
               A. Software skills
               B. Interpersonal skills
               C. Ways of handling equipment
               D. Capability to use scheduling software
           7. Which of the following is not a standard tool or tech-
              nique you need in order to acquire a project team?
               A. Survey technique
               B. Negotiations
               C. Virtual teams
               D. Pre-assignments
           8. Pam Cruise, the engineering manager, receives daily prog-
              ress reports from all engineers she manages. She also vis-
              its the cubicles of the engineers several times a day to
              ensure that they are working and not just browsing the
              Web. Most of the engineers agree that she is a microman-
              ager. What kind of management theory is she applying?
               A. Theory alpha
               B. Theory X
               C. Theory Y
               D. McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory
                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   417



 9. Gary Meltzer, the engineering manager, receives weekly
    progress reports from all engineers he manages. He
    encourages them to take ownership of their assignments.
    Most of the engineers agree that he trusts his engineers.
    What kind of management theory is he applying?
     A. Theory alpha
     B. Theory X
     C. Theory Y
     D. McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory
10. Susan Travis, the project manager, receives weekly prog-
    ress reports from all engineers she manages. She rewards
    the achievements of her employees and always gives
    credit to her employees for their accomplishments. She
    is always interested in mentoring her team members and
    putting them on a career path. She also helps the good
    performers get the assignments and projects of their
    choice.
     A. Theory alpha
     B. Theory X
     C. Theory Y
     D. McClelland's Achievement Motivation Theory
                                                                     CHAPTER


                                                                         11

Managing
Communication
and Stakeholder
Engagement
PMP Exam Objectives       What It Really Means
3.6 Manage the flow of    Manage the flow of information by following the communications
    information           plan in order to keep stakeholders engaged and informed.
                          Study the Manage Communication process covered in the
                          chapter.
3.7 Maintain stakeholder Maintain stakeholder relationships by following the stakeholder
    relationships        management plan in order to receive continued support and
                         manage expectations.
                          Study the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process covered in
                          the chapter. Understand that stakeholder management is all about
                          managing the appropriate engagement of stakeholders in the
                          project; it's not about managing or controlling them.


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_11
420   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      As explained in Chapter 8, stakeholder management and communication man-
      agement are two inherently closely tied project knowledge areas. Without
      project stakeholders, there is literally no project. Your project is doomed to
      fail without successful project stakeholder management--i.e., managed stake-
      holder engagement in the project--which requires successful communication
      management. With the planning of stakeholder engagement and communi-
      cation already covered in Chapter 8, we will discuss managing stakeholder
      engagement and communication in this chapter. The central question in this
      chapter is: How do you effectively manage stakeholder engagement in the
      project as well as communication for the success of the project? In search of
      an answer, we will explore three avenues: Manage Communication, Manage
      Stakeholder Engagement, and the relationship between the two.


      Communication and Stakeholder Management:
      Big Picture
      Big pictures of communication management and stakeholder management
      were discussed in detail in Chapter 8, where the relationship between them
      was also explained. Here, we present the direct and indirect relationship
      between the Manage Communication and Manage Stakeholder Engagement
      processes in a larger context, as in illustrated in Figure 11-1.

                                             /
                    ^Z                      ^Z
                                                                       ^Z
                                                                       
                           ZZ                      ^Z
                                                   
                          ^Z                                hZ
                                             D              
         W                                                                  DZZ
                                            ^Z
        ZZ                                                                 ZZ
                          ZZ                
                          

                                                   WZ
                                                   ZZ                    WZ
                  ZZ                                                     ZZ
                  
                                           D
                                          ZZ


      Figure 11-1. Direct and indirect relationships between Manage Communication and Manage
      Stakeholder Engagement in big context
                                                                    PMP(R) in Depth     421



With the communication plan, discussed in Chapter 8, in our hands, we are
ready to make communication happen; e.g., implement the plan by managing
and monitoring communications.


Manage Communication
Throughout the project lifecycle, you need to continually distribute the rel-
evant information to the right stakeholders at the right time by using appro-
priate methods. A more complete statement would be that you need make
communications happen, where this includes creating, collecting, storing,
retrieving, and, at the end, disposing of project information. The process to
make it happen is called Manage Communication, which is run according to
the communication management plan and is presented in Table 11-1 in terms
of input, tools and techniques, and output.

Table 11-1. The Manage Communication Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques        Output
1.Project management plan:    1.Communication             1.Project communications
  *Communication                technology                2.Project management
   management plan            2.Communication methods       updates:
  *Stakeholder engagement 3.Communication skills:         *Communication
    plan                    *Feedback                      management plan
  *Resource management      *Presentation                 *Stakeholder engagement
    plan                                                   plan
                            *Nonverbal
2.Project documents:                                      3.Project document updates:
                            *Communication
  *Stakeholder register       competence                    *Stakeholder register
  *Quality report         4.Project reporting               *Project schedule
  *Risk report                5.Interpersonal and team      *Risk register
  *Issues log                   skills:                     *Issues log
  *Change log                   *Conflict management        *Lessons learned register
  *Lessons learned register     *Meeting management       4.Organizational project
3.Work performance              *Networking                 assets update
  reports                       *Active listening
4.Enterprise environmental      *Cultural and political
  factors                        awareness
5.Organizational project      6.Information management
  assets                        systems
                              7.Meetings
422   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      Overall, the Manage Communication process is run according to the communi-
      cation management plan. The core task of this process is to distribute the right
      information to the right stakeholders at the right time. All other activities in
      this process are dedicated to this core task. You get the information about
      the stakeholders, such as their identity and communication needs, from the
      stakeholder register; find out from the resource management plan what commu-
      nication is needed for the management of team and physical resources; and
      also learn communication strategies from the stakeholder engagement plan to
      keep stakeholders engaged in the project.
      With this knowledge at hand, distribute the information using communication
      technology, methods, and skills.


      What Information to Distribute and in What Form?
      Not all stakeholders need the same kind of information. That said, in this sec-
      tion, we will discuss, in general, what kinds information is distributed, where it
      is obtained from, and in what form it is distributed.
      Information sources are the input documents discussed in the following
      paragraphs.
      Quality and Risk Reports. Quality-related information, such as quality
      issues and improvements made in project, processes, and product, is collected
      from the quality report, an output of the Manage Quality process. Risk-related
      information, such as project level and individual risks and their summary, can
      be fetched from the risk report, an output of the Identify Risk process.
      Work Performance Reports. These reports are outputs of the Monitor
      and Control Project Work process and will be discussed in Chapter 12. Status
      reports and progress reports are two common examples of work perfor-
      mance reports.
      You take needed information and distribute it among relevant stakeholders, an
      act that is called in PMBOK project reporting.
      Performance Reporting. Performance reporting refers to collecting and
      distributing work performance information, which includes standard reports
      generated by processes as just discussed, such as work performance reports
      from the Monitor and Control Project Work process, as well as ad hoc reports
      and presentations prepared during this process. The information could be in
      various formats, from informal chat to formal report, various levels of detail,
      at different project levels, and with different frequency, from periodically to
      "on exceptional basis." These variations arise from the different information
      needs of different stakeholders. For example, on a periodic basis, an analysis
      of the baseline compared with actual work data yields performance data and
      forecasts the project results, which can then be communicated in appropriate
      detail to meet the needs of a group of stakeholders.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      423



As mentioned earlier, presentation is one form of performance reporting.
Presentation. Listed in Table 11-1, presentation is, according to PMBOK, a
communication skill. Certainly, you need good communication skills to prepare
and deliver a presentation. Based on stakeholders' needs, it could be about a
wide variety of topics, such as progress reports, information updates, and any
project documents. To make an effective presentation, you should consider
the audience and their needs and use audio/visual and other appropriate tools,
such as tables, graphs, and histograms. Essential elements such as background
information and conclusions should be included. It's important watch your
nonverbal communication, such as body language during presentations.
In addition to the two tools, performance reporting and presentation, just
discussed, you will need more tools to manage communication, such as com-
munication technology and methods, and communication skills.


Tools and Techniques for Managing Communication
To manage communication, you will also use the following two tools.


Communication Technology and Information Management
Systems (PMIS)
Communication technology is discussed in the planning communication sec-
tion in Chapter 8, and PMIS is covered in multiple chapters. Recall that an
information management system refers to a set of standard tools that a proj-
ect manager can use to capture, store, and distribute information to stake-
holders about the various aspects of the project, such as project costs, project
schedule, schedule progress, and performance. Depending upon the stake-
holders' needs and the kind of project information to be distributed, a variety
of information management tools can be used.
Hard-copy Document Management: reports, letters, and memos
Electronic and Web Communications Management: press releases,
email, fax, voice mail, telephone, video and web conferencing, websites, and
web publishing
Web Project Management Tools, Including Social Media: web inter-
faces to scheduling and project management software, meeting and virtual
office support software, portals, blog, collaborative work management tools
Examples of distribution formats supported by information management sys-
tems may include tables, spreadsheet analysis, and presentations. You can use
the capabilities and features of the applications, such as graphics, to make the
information easy to understand and hence enhance its impact.
424   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      Communication Skills
      You will need a wide variety of communication skills to manage communica-
      tion. Out of those listed in Table 11-1, we have already discussed presentations,
      and feedback was discussed in Chapters 8 and 10, and is offered in response
      to any communication, deliverable, or situation in the context of project com-
      munication. Feedback is any two-way communication. The nonverbal technique
      refers to communicating through nonverbal means, such as body language,
      eye contact, facial expression, and tone of voice. While communicating, you
      should always be mindful about the nonverbal component of communica-
      tion. Communication competence refers to the overall ability to communi-
      cate, including components such as clearly delivering the key message, having
      awareness of purpose, creating a relationship with receivers, and exhibiting
      leadership.


      Note Communication skills, an essential part of general management skills, are used to
      ensure the following:

      *   The right stakeholders get the right information at the right time.

      *   The communication requirements and expectations of stakeholders are
          properly managed.


      Interpersonal and Team Skills
      Out of the interpersonal and team skills listed in Table 11-1, cultural and
      political awareness are discussed in the planning communication section in
      Chapter 8, and conflict management was covered in Chapter 10.
      Active listening refers to paying attention to the speaker, acknowledging,
      asking for clarification in order in understand, and removing any hinderance in
      understanding communications.
      Networking, according to the dictionary definition, is interaction with other
      people to exchange information and develop contacts. You can network with
      stakeholders at project and departmental parties and other social gather-
      ings and settings. In this Information Age, you network using online tools and
      appropriate websites. Overall, it will help in achieving better project commu-
      nication with results, and in obtaining project support.
      Meeting Management Techniques. Meeting management refers to orga-
      nizing and conducting meetings. For effective and efficient meeting manage-
      ment to achieve the meeting objectives, you can take the following steps:
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth    425



      *    Send a timely invitation to all relevant and only relevant
           stakeholders, and encourage them to attend.
      *    Prepare meeting agenda and make it available in advance;
           if possible, send it with invitation and also distribute it at
           the beginning of the meeting.
      *    Use your communication skills, including conflict resolu-
           tion skills, to conduct meeting.
      *    Start meeting on time, stay on agenda topics, and end it
           on time.
      *    During the meeting, invite appropriate participation.
      *    Manage expectations during the meeting.
      *    Take minutes, including actions items and who attended.
      *    Follow up on action items after the meeting.
Given the same situation and communication technology and methods, one
project manager may fail while the other may succeed. Why? The answer lies
in the concept of effective communication.


Tools for Effective Communication Management
Managing communication effectively is more than choosing the right format,
technology, and method. In short, it takes integrating many factors together.
For example, using your communication skills to integrate appropriate tech-
nology, method, form, and content together to create a creative communi-
cation environment. This way, project communication goes beyond just the
distribution of relevant information. For example, you have to ensure that the
right information is appropriately generated in the right form at the right time,
received by right stakeholders, and understood. Moreover, you also need to
provide opportunities for stakeholders to make requests for further informa-
tion, clarification, and discussion.
In the following, we discuss some techniques and overall basic communication
concepts that, if applied properly, can help facilitate effective communication
management.


Techniques for Effective Communication
Most of these techniques have already been discussed, in detail, in Chapter 8.
Here, they are presented briefly in light of effective communication.
Sender-Receiver Models. To facilitate multichannel communication, feed-
back loops should be incorporated to provide interaction, encourage partici-
pation, and remove barriers to communication.
426   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      As discussed in Chapter 8, the communication line has two ends. Both the
      sender and the receiver need to have communication skills in this environ-
      ment. The sender has the following responsibilities:
            *    Ensure that the information is clear and complete.
            *    Confirm that the information is received and properly
                 understood.
      The receiver has the following responsibilities:
            *    Ensure that the information is received in its entirety.
            *    Ensure that the information is correctly understood.
      So, the success of information distribution depends on both the sender and
      the receiver. That said, at the end of the day, it's the project manager's respon-
      sibility to make sure information is communicated successfully. The communi-
      cation has two flavors in each of the following dimensions:
            *    Making Media Choice. Depending on the situation,
                 you decide whether to communicate in writing or orally,
                 write an informal memo or a formal report, and face-to-
                 face conversation or email. Whatever media you use, you
                 will use communication skills to deliver the information.
            *    Writing Style. Appropriate writing is an essential part of
                 good communication skills. It is important to know how to
                 use the active or passive voice, and how to use appropriate
                 sentence structure and word choice in a given situation.
            *    Meeting Management Techniques. You prepare a
                 meeting agenda and make it available in advance, and use
                 your communication skills, including conflict resolution skills,
                 to conduct the meeting to stay on agenda and end on time.
            *    Presentation Techniques. Prepare and deliver a pre-
                 sentation centered around the main message, using visual
                 aids for greater impact, while being aware of the impact
                 of body language as well.
            *    Facilitation Techniques. Use your communication
                 skills to actively clarify, acknowledge, confirm understand-
                 ing, remove barriers by overcoming obstacles, resolve
                 conflict, and build consensus on the common goal of pro-
                 cess success.
            *    Listening Techniques. Listen actively to comprehend
                 adequately and respond effectively.
      Also, an awareness of basic communication concepts will help with effective
      communication.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth    427




Mechanisms of Communication and Dimensions of
Communication Activities
Having awareness of the mechanisms of communication and the dimensions
of communication activities will help with effective communication because
awareness leads to making the right choices. The basic issue here is to
exchange information, which can be done in many forms, such as express-
ing emotions, sharing an idea, and giving instructions. However, you will need
mechanisms for this exchange, such as the following:
      *   Nonverbal or through gestures; e.g., body language,
          facial expressions, and tone of voice
      *   Spoken word; e.g., face-to-face, on phone, and through CD
      *   Written word; e.g., on paper and on electronic media,
          such as on a website
      *   Through media; e.g., still and moving pictures, actions,
          choices of spoken words and the way they are spoken;
          think of communication happening in a movie
      *   Choice of words; e.g., choosing words and phrases care-
          fully to fine-tune the message; blunt or between the lines
You should also be aware and make appropriate use of the two-dimensional
nature of some communication methods, features, or categories:
      *   Place: external or internal. Internal to the project--
          that is, within the project--or external--that is, com-
          municating to entities external to the project, such as
          customers, media, and the public.
      *   Format: formal or informal. Formal, such as reports
          and briefings, or informal, such as emails, memos, and ad
          hoc conversation.
      *   Hierarchy: vertical or horizontal. Horizontal means
          communication among peers, e.g., other project manag-
          ers, while vertical means communication between differ-
          ent levels of the organizational hierarchy--for example,
          upward to senior managers or downward to team mem-
          bers and other stakeholders working for the project.
      *   Official or unofficial. Examples: Official--newsletters and
          annual reports; unofficial--off-the-record conversation.
      *   Written or unwritten. Examples: Written email; unwrit-
          ten oral and verbal talk, and nonverbal body language.
428   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      You use these tools and techniques to generate the output of the Manage
      Communication process.


      Tip Effective communication management builds bridges between diverse stakeholders with
      different cultures, backgrounds, disciplines of knowledge, interests, and opinions.


      Output of Manage Communication
      Project Communications
      The main output of the Manage Communication process is project commu-
      nications, which are artifacts of project communication, such as performance
      reports, presentations, emails, memos, deliverables' status, incurred cost and
      earned value graphs, and schedule progress.

      Organizational Process Assets Update
      The Manage Communication process will create some items that can be added
      as a record to the organizational process assets. Here are some examples:
             *   Project reports, including status reports
             *   Stakeholder notifications about resolved issues and
                 approved changes
             *   Project presentations
             *   Project records, such as memos and meeting minutes, and
                 project files, such as plans and schedules
             *   Feedback from stakeholders
             *   Lessons learned

      Project Document Update
      As a result of this process, some project documents may be updated; see
      Study Checkpoint 11.1.

                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.1

         Q1. Knowing the Manage Communication process, how do you think documents listed
             for update in Table 11-1 would be updated?
         Q2. Why do you need the project stakeholder engagement plan for performing the
             Manage Communication process?
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth         429




Caution! Distinguish between communication, the singular, and communications, the plural.
Communication refers to the act of communicating, such as conducting a meeting or sending an
email, while communications refers to the artifacts of communication, such as meeting minutes,
memos, emails, and progress reports.


How will we know how we are doing in the communication aspect of the
project? Well, we need to monitor communication, which we will discuss in
Chapter 14.
The stakeholder engagement plan, discussed in Chapter 8, contains strategies to
implement and actions to perform to facilitate creative stakeholders' involve-
ment in the project, such as making project decisions and project execution.
The stakeholder management plan is implemented in the process of managing
stakeholder engagement.


Managing Stakeholder Engagement
Managing stakeholder engagement means communicating and working with
stakeholders to stay on the same page as far as project requirements by
addressing their needs, expectations, and issues as they arise. It is best done
by getting them involved in project decision making and project execution at
the appropriate level at the appropriate time. What do you really do when
you manage stakeholder expectations? This is a three-pronged task.
Involvement for Confirmation. Involve the stakeholders in project deci-
sion making and project execution at the appropriate level at the appropriate
time in order to ensure or confirm their continued project support.
Expectations Containment. Monitor and keep the expectations of the
stakeholders within the project scope and project management plan through
active communication, including negotiation.
Risk, Concerns, and Issues. Address stakeholder concerns, including those
that may not yet have become issues--for example, anticipate problems in the
near future. Addressing such concerns may uncover some potential risks that
will need to be addressed. An issue is an item or a matter that is under discus-
sion or dispute, and there are most likely opposing views and disagreements
about it among the stakeholders.
430   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      Understand, clarify, and resolve issues raised by the stakeholders. Some of the
      resolutions can give rise to change requests; other issues may be postponed
      to the next project or the next phase.


      Caution! The importance of resolving issues in a timely fashion cannot be overstated. An
      unresolved issue can grow into a major source of conflict and result in a delay in completion of
      project activities.


      You can see that your managing stakeholder engagement will keep them
      on the same page with you by ensuring that they understand the internal
      dynamics and realities of the project, such as risks and interdependencies.
      Keeping them in touch with the project reality and on the same page with
      you will increase the probability of project success. It's the responsibility
      of the project manager to manage stakeholder engagement by using the
      process presented in Table 11-2 in terms of input, tools and techniques,
      and output.


      Table 11-2. The Managing Stakeholder Engagement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques,
      and Output

      Input                            Tools and Techniques          Output
      1.Project management plan:       1.Feedback                    1.Change requests
         *Communication                2.Interpersonal and team      2.Project management
          management plan                skills:                       updates:
         *Stakeholder engagement          *Conflict management           *Communication
          plan                            *Negotiations                   management plan
         *Risk management plan            *Observation/                  *Stakeholder engagement
         *Change management                conversation                   plan
          plan                            *Cultural and political    3.Project document updates:
      2.Project documents:                 awareness                     *Stakeholder register
         *Stakeholder register         3.Ground rules                    *Change log
         *Change log                   4.Expert judgment                 *Issues log
         *Issues log                   5.Meetings                        *Lessons learned register
         *Lessons learned register
      3.Enterprise environmental
        factors
      4.Organizational project
        assets
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth          431



Most of the items in the input and tools and techniques listed in Table 11-2
have already been discussed in this book. Some information regarding these
items and relevant to this process will be discussed in this section.


Tip Managing stakeholders' expectations by engaging them is crucial for project success
because it keeps their expectations in line with the project goals, objectives, and requirements
in the project management plan. Otherwise, their definition of success will be different from your
definition of success, and the project will fail in their eyes even if it succeeded according to the
project management plan.


Earlier I discussed how managing stakeholder engagement is a three-pronged
task. That was the what of this process. But how do you perform this task? The
how of the task also has three dimensions to it.
Manage Stakeholder Engagement According to a Strategy. This
strategy and information on how to manage stakeholders' expectations by
engaging them is found in the stakeholder engagement plan.
Identify the Right Stakeholders to Communicate With. A list of
stakeholders and information about them is in the stakeholder register. Also,
you can use the risk management plan to find out about risk categories, risk
tolerance, and reporting format in the context of stakeholders, which you will
use to manage stakeholder engagement.
Communicate with the Stakeholders to Manage Their Project
Engagement. Use the communication management plan for guidance about
stakeholder communication regarding which methods, technology, and for-
mat to use. While communicating to manage their expectations, you will be
addressing their concerns and issues, for which you will need an issues log to
document and track the status of issues. Because it's a continuous process
throughout the project, you will be regularly recording the lessons learned in
the lessons learned register to subsequently use them to improve the process.
While addressing stakeholders' concerns and issues, you or them will be gen-
erating change requests, for which you will need a change management plan
that describes the process of submitting, evaluating, and implementing the
project changes, and of course the change log to document and manage the
change requests. The plans and other documents listed in the output column
of Table 11-2 are updated to reflect these changes.
As Table 11-2 shows, the change requests item is the main output of the
Manage Stakeholder Engagement process.
432   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement



      Note Rarely does an issue grow to become a project or a project activity. It is your
      responsibility to resolve issues in a timely fashion in order to maintain a constructive relationship
      with stakeholders. However, the resolution may cause change requests for the small project, which
      should go through the proper evaluation and approval process before they are implemented.


      Communication is the key to this process, and all the tools and techniques,
      listed in Table 11-2, used in managing stakeholder engagements are directly
      related to it. Feedback, negotiations, conflict management, observation and
      conversations, and ground rules (which are part of the team charter) are dis-
      cussed in Chapter 10 in the context of obtaining resources and developing a
      project team, and observation and conversations are mentioned in Chapter 4
      too. Cultural and political awareness are already covered in this chapter in the
      communication management section.

                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.2

          Knowing the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
          Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholders.
          Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholders.



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.3

          True or False: A stakeholder is proposing something that is not within the planned
          scope of the project. The appropriate response to this proposal is to oppose it.


      It is important to document your experience of managing stakeholder expec-
      tations, which includes causes of issues, how the issues were resolved, lessons
      learned, and so on. This will add to the organizational process assets and will
      be useful for upcoming projects and as a record through the lifecycle of the
      current project. As stakeholder engagement in the project needs to continue
      throughout the project's lifetime, it needs to be monitored.
      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
              *    Communication is managed according to the communica-
                   tions management plan and stakeholder engagement plan
                   to implement the mantra: Deliver the right information
                   to the right people at the right time by using the right
                   communication methods to produce the desired impact.
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth     433



      *   Stakeholder management is about managing and engaging
          stakeholders in the project and monitoring that engage-
          ment. The engagement is done by getting stakeholders
          involved in project decision making and project execution
          at the appropriate level at the appropriate time.
      *   Like in managing stakeholder engagement, one main pur-
          pose of managing communication is keeping and gaining
          the stakeholders' support.

Summary
Stakeholder management and communication management are two inher-
ently closely tied project knowledge areas. In the Manage Communications
process, reports such as work performance reports, quality report, and risk
report as well as information are distributed to the stakeholders at the right
time by using the right communication methods as planned. Project stake-
holder management is all about stakeholder engagement. It is crucial for the
success of the project to get the support of stakeholders for the project,
which is best done by getting them engaged in the project at the appropriate
levels at appropriate times.
Road Ahead. In this part of the book, you learned how the execution of dif-
ferent aspects is managed. But execution needs be monitored and controlled
to ensure that the project is being executed according to the project plan and
is making enough progress. We will cover this in the next part of this book.
434   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *Plan communication is the process of determining the information needs of the project
       stakeholders, and accordingly determining which tools and methods to use to meet those
       needs by producing, storing, and delivering.
      *Effective communication management builds bridges between diverse stakeholders with
       different cultures, backgrounds, disciplines of knowledge, interests, and opinions.
      *The main purpose of managing stakeholder engagement is to get continued project
       support from stakeholders. It done by managing their needs and expectations through
       their involvement in the project.

      Look Out

      *Communication plays a critical role in keeping the stakeholders engaged in the project.
      *Distinguish between communicating, the singular, and communications, the plural.
       Communication refers to the act of communicating, such as conducting a meeting, while
       communication refers to the artifacts of communication, such as meeting minutes.
      *Distributing information means distributing all the relevant information, whereas
       performance reporting focuses on the performance part of the information.
      *To manage and monitor communication, the stakeholder engagement plan is also used,
       along with the communications management plan, because it explains how to use
       appropriate stakeholder communication strategies to engage the stakeholders.
      *The main purpose of managing stakeholder engagement is to get continued project
       support from the stakeholders. It is done by managing their needs and expectations
       through their involvement in the project.
      *Managing stakeholder expectations is crucial to the success of the project as it keeps
       these expectations in line with the project management plan.
      *The communication management plan is an input to all the stakeholder management
       processes.
      *Unresolved issues can grow to become a source of conflict.

      Memorize

      *Distributing the right information to the right stakeholders at the right time by using the
       right communication method is the mantra in communication management.
      *Performance reports are important, but along with them, other reports and information
       are also distributed to stakeholders.
      *The process of managing communication significantly adds to the organizational process
       assets in the form of project reports, status reports, project presentations, stakeholder
       notifications, and other project communication artifacts and records.
      *Stakeholder management is not about managing or controlling the stakeholders; it is
       about managing or controlling their engagement in the project.
                                                         PMP(R) in Depth   435




Review Questions
   1. Which of the following is not an output of the Manage
      Communication process?
       A. Work performance information
       B. Project risk reports and status reports
       C. Performance reports and quality reports
       D. Project presentation
   2. The issues log is not an input used in the following
      process:
       A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
       B. Plan Communications Management
       C. Manage Communication
       D. Monitor Communication
   3. Which of the following is not an input to the Manage
      Communication process?
       A. Risk report
       B. Resource management plan
       C. Project communications
       D. Stakeholder engagement plan
   4. Which one of the following items will be certainly updated
      as result of the Manage Communication process?
       A. Enterprise environmental factors
       B. Organizational project assets
       C. Work performance report
       D. Resource management plan
   5. You have created the work performance report about
      the project that you are managing. Which process will
      you use to distribute the report among the stakeholders?
       A. Manage Stakeholders
       B. Distribute Reports
       C. Distribute Information
       D. Manage Communication
436   Chapter 11 | Managing Communication and Stakeholder Engagement


           6. The sponsor of your project wants to look at the raw
              data from executing the project--that is, the work per-
              formance data. Which process should you run to get this
              information?
               A. Manage Communication
               B. Execute Project
               C. Direct and Manage Project Work
               D. Monitor Communication
           7. Which of the following is an input to all the processes of
              stakeholder management?
               A. Project charter
               B. Communications management plan
               C. Resource management plan
               D. Stakeholder engagement plan
           8. What of the following is an output item of the Manage
              Stakeholder Engagement process?
               A. Communications
               B. Change requests
               C. Negotiations
               D. Work performance information
                                                              PA R T


                                                              IV

Monitoring and
Controlling the
Project
You need to continually monitor and control your project. In general,
monitoring means watching the course, and controlling means acting to
either stay the course or move away from the wrong course. When applied
to project management, you monitor the project via activities such as taking
performance measurements to see that it is on the track set by the project
management plan, and you control the project to keep it on track and to
bring it back on track if it falls off. The core of monitoring and controlling
the project includes collecting the work performance information--the raw
data--from the project's execution and analyzing it for performance, which
includes comparing it to the accepted performance baseline consisting of the
scope baseline, the schedule baseline, and the cost baseline. This comparison
generates performance measurements, which may then lead to some change
requests. The change requests must be processed through an integrated
change control system for approval, and only the approved changes should
be implemented. The performance measurements may also expose some
previously undetected risks. We will study all this in this part of the book.
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                         12

Monitoring and
Controlling the
Project Work
PMP Exam Objectives      What It Really Means
4.1 Measure project      Measure project performance using appropriate tools and
    performance          techniques in order to identify and quantify any variances and
                         corrective actions.
                         Here, it really means that you must understand the Monitor and
                         Control Project Work process, including the earned value analysis
                         technique, variance analysis, trend analysis, and creating change
                         requests to maintain course or bring the project back on track.
4.2 Manage changes       Manage changes to the project by following the change
                         management plan in order to ensure that project goals remain
                         aligned with business needs.
                         It means that you should know how change requests are handled
                         in the Perform Integrated Change Control process inside out,
                         and how the requests are created in the Monitor and Control
                         Project Work process, as well as other monitor and control
                         change processes, such as the Control Procurement process.
                                                                                  (continued)


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_12
440   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      PMP Exam Objectives        What It Really Means
      4.3 Verify that project    Verify that project deliverables conform to the quality standards
          deliverables conform   established in the quality management plan by using appropriate
          to the quality         tools and techniques to meet project requirements and business
          standards              needs.
                                 You must understand how to use the Control Quality process
                                 to ensure conformance to the quality standards included in the
                                 project management plan.
                                 You must understand all the quality control tools, such as control
                                 charts, cause and effect diagrams, root-cause analysis, statistical
                                 sampling, and inspections.
      4.4 Monitor and            Monitor and assess risk by determining whether exposure has
          assess risk            changed and evaluating the effectiveness of response strategies
                                 in order to manage the impact of risks and opportunities on the
                                 project.
                                 You need to know that you must actively monitor the identified
                                 risks and identify and respond to new risks as they appear. You
                                 must understand the risk monitoring and controlling process
                                 called Monitor and Control Risks. You should also be familiar
                                 with risk response techniques and strategies, such as acceptance,
                                 transference, and mitigation, discussed in Chapter 7.
      4.7 Monitor                Monitor procurement activities according to the procurement
          procurement            plan in order to verify compliance with project objectives.
          activities             Understand the Control Procurement process discussed in this
                                 chapter.


      You need to continually monitor and control your project--that is, monitor
      and control the project activities against the project management plan and
      project performance baseline. This is because executing a project means
      executing the project work according to the project management plan based
      on some baselines, such as a schedule baseline, a scope baseline, and a cost
      baseline. In general, monitoring means watching the course, and controlling means
      taking action to either stay the course or move away from the wrong course.
      You monitor the project by collecting project performance data, generating
      performance measurements from it, and distributing this information in the
      form of performance reports, which can be used to control the project. You
      can control the project by measuring the performance deviations by comparing
      the actual performance results with the planned performance and proposing
      changes based on these deviations. Controlling also includes influencing the
      factors that generate the deviations, processing the proposed change requests
      through the integrated change control system, which contains a process called
      the Perform Integrated Change Control process, evaluating their impact across
      the project, and ensuring the implementation of the approved change requests.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth         441



Every knowledge area has one or more processes from the monitoring and
controlling process group. In this chapter, we will cover the monitoring and
controlling processes in integration management, quality management, risk
management, and procurement management.
So, in this chapter, we will start by exploring the big picture of monitoring and
controlling the project and then venture through three avenues: monitoring
and controlling project work and performing integrated change control;
controlling quality and monitoring risks; and controlling procurements.


Monitoring and Controlling the Project: Big
Picture
As just mentioned, you monitor and control your project by monitoring
and controlling the project performance and resulting changes. It includes
measuring project performance and evaluating performance information to
see the trends, and also taking action to keep the project on track. Continuous
monitoring helps the project management team identify the areas that need to
be controlled closely; for example, by taking corrective or preventive actions.


Note Monitoring and controlling does not start only after the project starts execution. Rather,
the project needs to be monitored and controlled all the way from initiation through closing.


A project is monitored and controlled using the Monitor and Control Project
Work and Perform Integrated Change Control processes, which are high-level
processes performed by executing more-specific processes, such as Control
Cost, Control Schedule, and Control Scope, as shown in Figure 12-1. All
processes shown in Figure 12-1 are in the monitoring and controlling process
group except the Direct and Manage Project Work process, which belongs to
the executing group and is discussed in Chapter 9, and the Close Project or
Phase process, which will be covered in the next part of this book.
442   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work




           DZZ                               WZ                               
           ZZWZ                             /                                 D
             tZ                             ZZ                               WZtZ




      Figure 12-1. Big picture of the monitoring and controlling process group


      As illustrated in Figure 12-1, work performance data and deliverables
      generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process are used by the
      monitoring and controlling processes: deliverables by Control Quality and
      work performance data by all except the Monitor and Control Project Work
      and Perform Integrated Change Control processes. Two main output items of
      these monitor and control processes are the work performance information
      (by all except the Monitor and Control Project Work and Perform Integrated
      Change Control processes) and change requests, including plan changes
      and recommended corrective and preventive actions. Work performance
      information goes into the Monitor and Control Project Work process as
      input, and change requests from any processes or stakeholders are processed
      through the Perform Integrated Change Control process for approval. If
      approved, the execution or implementation of these changes is managed using
      Direct and Manage Project Work, a process in the executing process group.
      By using work performance information, the Monitor and Control Project
      Work process generates the work performance reports that are used by the
      Perform Integrated Change Control process.
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth   443




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.1

   Name three processes that convert work performance data into work performance
   measurements.


In the monitoring and controlling process group, the Monitor and Control
Project Work process and the Perform Integrated Change Control process
belong to project integration management, which as you saw in Figure 12-1
work as high-level umbrella processes under which other monitor and control
processes are running.
In this chapter, we will discuss the Monitor and Control Project Work, Perform
Integrated Change Control, Control Quality, Monitor Risks, and Control
Procurements processes. The rest of the monitor and control processes will
be covered in the following chapters. We will start with the Monitor and
Control Project Work process and the Perform Integrated Change Control
process, which belong to project integration management.


Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
Monitor and Control Project Work is the high-level process for monitoring
and controlling the project's progress to ensure that the project is on its
way to meeting its objectives as laid out in the project management plan.
Monitoring and controlling here means tracking, reviewing, and reporting
the project progress. You monitor by collecting data on or measuring some
project aspect and assessing how the measurements and trends would affect
the project performance. You control by determining changes--e.g., corrective
or preventive actions--or modifications to the plan, following this up with
action, and checking whether the actions taken have resolved the problem.
Some of the major tasks performed during this process include the following:
      *   Monitor the project performance by comparing it against
          the project management plan in terms of parameters
          such as cost, schedule, and scope.
      *   Evaluate performance to determine whether it needs to
          be controlled by taking corrective or preventive actions.
      *   Monitor the project by analyzing raw performance data
          to support status reporting, progress measurement, and
          predictions.
      *   Monitor risks by tracking and analyzing the already
          identified project risks and identifying new risks.
444   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


              *   Control risks by managing the execution of risk response
                  plans when the risks occur.
              *   Maintain an accurate and timely information base
                  regarding the project as it progresses.
              *   Monitor and control changes and monitor the
                  implementation of approved changes; e.g., from the
                  performance data.

      Tip The most important overall goal of the Monitor and Control Project Work process is to
      make sure that the project remains aligned with the organization's original business needs.


      The Monitor and Control Project Work process is presented in terms of
      input, tools and techniques, and output in Table 12-1.

      Table 12-1. The Monitor and Control Project Work Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
      Output

      Input                             Tools and Techniques        Output
      1. Project management plan        1. Expert judgment          1. Work performance
      2. Project documents:             2. Data analysis:              reports
        * Milestone list                  * Cost-benefit analysis   2. Change requests
        * Basis of estimates              * Earned value analysis   3. Project management plan
                                                                       update
        * Risk register                   * Root-cause analysis
                                                                    4. Project document updates:
        * Risk report                     * Trend analysis
                                                                      * Project schedule
        * Project schedule forecasts      * Variance analysis
                                                                        forecasts
        * Cost forecasts                  * Alternatives analysis
                                                                      * Cost forecasts
        * Quality reports               3. Decision making
                                                                      * Risk register
        * Assumptions log               4. Meetings
                                                                      * Issues log
        * Issues log
                                                                      * Lessons learned register
        * Lessons learned register
      3.Work performance
        information
      4.Agreements
      5.Enterprise environmental
        factors
      6.Organizational project assets
                                                                 PMP(R) in Depth       445




Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
The major inputs to this process are the project management plan, to look
at any aspect of the project, and the work performance data that result
from directing and managing the project work for analysis. We also have
project documents, including 1) milestone list with scheduled dates for specific
milestones to check if they are being met; 2) project schedule forecasts to
determine if the project is within defined schedule tolerance ranges; 3) bases
of estimates for information on how the various estimates were made and
how they can be used to determine responses to variances; 4) cost forecasts
of the project's past performance, used to determine if the project is within
the defined budget tolerance ranges and to identify any necessary changes;
5) issues log, which shows who is responsible for resolving specific issues by a
target date; 6) assumptions log for information on assumptions and constraints
identified as affecting the project; 7) change log, which contains the status of all
change requests; 8) risk register for information on threats and opportunities
that could possibly impact project execution; 9) risk report for information
on the overall project risks and also on specific individual risks, such as risk
sources; 10) quality reports for information on quality management issues;
corrective actions; recommendations for project, processes, and product
improvements; and summary of findings from the Control Quality process;
and 11) lessons learned register for information on effective responses for
variances, as well as corrective and preventive actions.
Enterprise environmental factors used as input to this process include the
project management information system, infrastructure for facilities and
equipment, the risk tolerance level of the stakeholders, and industry and
government standards. The organizational process assets that can be used
to perform this process include financial control procedures, management
procedures regarding issues and defects, risk control procedures, the process
measurement database, and the knowledge base repository for lessons from
past projects.


Tools and Techniques for Monitor and Control
Project Work
The tools and techniques for the Monitor and Control Project Work process
are meetings, decision making, expert judgment, and data analysis. You already
know about meeting management by now.
446   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Decision-making Techniques. Depending on the organization, project, and
      matter, any of the following different decision-making techniques may be used:
              *    Decision by Voting. This can take different forms, such as
                   by simple majority, by two-thirds majority, and by open or
                   unanimous voting. In a voting system called plurality, a group
                   or option carrying the largest vote wins even if it's not a
                   majority. This situation arises when there are more than
                   two alternatives. Plurality with two alternatives is simply a
                   majority method. One vote can represent an individual or
                   a group.
              *    Autocratic Decision Making. This is a technique
                   where one individual makes the decision instead of the
                   entire group.
              *    Multicriteria Decision Analysis. This is an analytical
                   technique to make a decision. In this technique, you have
                   a set of predefined criteria, and you use a number of
                   systematic analytical methods to evaluate the requested
                   changes. Then, you make the decision by comparing the
                   analysis result to already chosen criteria.
      Expert Judgment and Data Analysis. Expert judgment can be sought
      if needed on topics relevant to this process, such as contract management,
      risk management, technical knowledge of focus area of the project, decision-
      making techniques, or any of the data-analysis methods listed in Table 12-2.


      Table 12-2. Data-Analysis Methods Listed for the Monitor and Control Project Work Process

      Any Technique           Need                                                     Chapter
      Cost-benefit analysis   Helps to determine the best corrective action in         7
                              terms of cost in case of project deviations
      Earned-value analysis   To get an integrated perspective on scope, schedule,     13
                              and cost performance
      Root-cause analysis     To find out the main reasons for a problem; e.g., to   9
                              identify the reasons for a deviation and the areas the
                              project manager should focus on to effectively achieve
                              the project objectives
      Trend analysis          Forecast future performance based on past and            12, 15
                              present results
      Variance analysis       Determine and analyze the differences (or variances)     13
                              between planned and actual performance
      Alternatives analysis   Select corrective actions, preventive actions, or both   5, 6
                              to implement as a response to deviation.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth         447




Output of Monitor and Control Project Work
The output items of this process are described in the following paragraphs.
Work Performance Reports. The raw work performance data, a main
input into this process, is turned into information by data-analysis techniques
and is then presented in work performance reports. These reports are
distributed in physical or electronic form among the appropriate stakeholders
for various purposes, such as to raise awareness, help make decisions, or take
action. Status reports and progress reports are two common examples of
work performance reports. To help the stakeholder effectively comprehend
the information, these reports can use appropriate presentation tools, such
as tables; charts, such as reserve burndown charts; histograms, such as defect
histograms; and graphs, such as earned-value and trend-line graphs.
Change Requests. You will compare the work performance data or the
analysis thereof with the planned performance. Any deviations will produce
some change requests, such as those to adjust project scope, product scope,
quality requirements, or schedule or cost baselines. Change requests may
necessitate the collection and documentation of new requirements. We
have already discussed such changes in some detail in the Direct and Manage
Project Work process coverage in Chapter 9.

Caution! Original change requests, such as those in project scope, product scope, or cost
baseline, if approved, can trigger other changes, such as those to the project management plan,
project documents, or product deliverables.


Project Document Update. Based on the results of data analysis, any input
document may be updated. For example, new risks identified will be recorded
in the risk register; new issues will go into the issues log; and changes in cost
forecasts will modify the cost forecasts document.

                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.2

   Q1. The performance of a project is measured against which planning element?
   Q2. Can you name four baselines?


As you have leaned, change requests arise from monitoring and controlling the
project work, from directing and managing project work, and from any other
source, such as the stakeholders. These requests must be processed through
the integrated change control process, formally called Perform Integrated
Change Control.
448   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Performing Integrated Change Control
      The Perform Integrated Change Control process is all about processing
      change requests, which includes evaluating the change requests; deferring,
      rejecting, or approving them; and managing the implementation of approved
      changes and the changes resulting from this implementation.
      A project rarely runs exactly according to the project management plan, and
      therefore deviations will inevitably occur. Change requests can come from
      evaluating the project performance to bring the project in line with the
      project management plan, or they can come from other sources, such as the
      stakeholders. Regardless of where they originate, it is the project manager's
      responsibility to manage all the changes, which includes getting the changes
      rejected or approved, ensuring the approved changes get implemented, and
      changing the affected plans and documents accordingly.
      Note other things about changes and this process:
             *     The Perform Integrated Change Control process is used
                   to manage changes to the project from project initiation
                   through project closure.
             *     Process Changes. Depending on the project, performing
                   organization, and particular request, the authority to
                   determine whether it be deferred, rejected, or approved
                   might lie with the project manager, the sponsor, or some
                   kind of committee; e.g., change control board (CCB). The
                   CCB may consist of individuals from upper management
                   and other stakeholders.
             *     Even after CCB approval, an approved change request
                   may require the approval of other stakeholders, such as
                   customer or sponsor.
             *     As noted earlier, to incorporate the approved changes,
                   some other changes may be necessary, such as updating
                   the project baseline (cost, schedule, and scope) to
                   maintain its integrity.

      Tip Especially in a startup organization, you will notice quite often changes making their
      way through the back door--for example, a product manager talking to an engineer directly and
      introducing changes. Do not consider yourself an opponent of changes by default, but you do need
      to manage changes and make sure each change goes through the integrated change control
      process. So, when it comes to changes, the key word is control, and not necessarily oppose.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth        449



The Perform Integrated Change Control process is presented in terms of its
input, tools and techniques, and output in Table 12-3.

Table 12-3. The Perform Integrated Change Control Process: Input, Tools and Techniques,
and Output

Input                                     Tools and Techniques        Output
1. Project management plan:               1. Expert judgment          1. Approved change
  * Change management plan                2. Data analysis:              requests
  * Configuration management plan           * Cost-benefit analysis   2. Project management
                                                                         plan update
  * Scope, schedule, and cost baselines     * Alternatives analysis
                                                                      3. Project document
2. Project documents:                     3. Decision making
                                                                         updates:
  * Bases of estimates                    4. Meetings
                                                                        * Change log
  * Requirements traceability matrix
  * Risk register
3. Work performance reports
4. Change requests
5. Enterprise environmental factors
6. Organizational project assets



Tip The key benefit of this process is that the changes get documented; they are considered,
deferred, rejected, or approved; approved ones are implemented in the entire context of the
project; and changes resulting from the implementation are managed. This reduces the risk that
would prevail in absence of this process.



Input to Integrated Change Control
Each requested change and recommended action must be processed through
the Perform Integrated Change Control process. The approved changes have
their effects on the project management plan, and therefore the plan needs to
be updated accordingly. The following are the input items to the integrated
change control process.
Project Management Plan. This is needed for change-related information;
e.g. the change management plan contains information about managing the
change control process, along with the roles and responsibilities of the change
control board (CCB) and the role of the project manager in the change
request approval process. The other relevant project plan components
include configuration management and scope, schedule, and cost baselines.
450   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      We also need the project management plan because some of its components
      may need to be updated as a result of the applied changes.
      Project Documents. The project documents that we may need for
      information and updates include bases of estimates, requirements traceability
      matrix, and risk report, discussed earlier.
      Work Performance Reports. The performance report is input because
      the reported performance deviations from the plan are important when
      evaluating the resulting change requests. We described these reports in the
      previous section.
      Change Requests. These are obvious inputs. A requested change goes
      through an approval process, where it can be approved, rejected, or delayed.
      Enough has been said about these changes in this and previous sections. As said
      earlier, change requests may include the following types of recommendations:
            *   Recommended corrective actions
            *   Recommended preventive actions
            *   Recommended defect repairs
      These recommendations might arise from different sources, such as from
      performance evaluations, the output of various control processes, and
      stakeholders, as illustrated in Figure 12-2.
      Enterprise Environmental Factors. The enterprise environmental factors
      that can influence the integrated change control process include organizational
      governance; contracting and purchasing constraints; legal and regulatory
      requirements and constraints; and government and industry standards.
      Organizational Process Assets. The following organizational process
      assets can influence the change control process:
            *   Organizational Procedures. Your organization may
                have proper procedures related to change control--for
                example, how to modify documents, such as plans; how
                to process (evaluate, approve, or reject) changes; and
                how to implement the approved changes.
            *   Project Files. Project files from previous projects may
                be a useful input to the change control process in order
                to learn from the past.
            *   Change Knowledge Base. This is the knowledge base
                that can be used for configuration management, such
                as official company standards and policies and project
                documents; different versions of these.
      So, what tools and techniques are available to process these requests and
      recommendations?
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      451




Tools and Techniques for Integrated Change Control
Expert Judgment and Meetings. Expert judgment can be sought on
topics of technical expertise to evaluate change requests; risk management;
configuration management; and legal issues, legislation, regulations, and
procurement. The project manager or project management team can also
hold meetings with experts and the change control board to evaluate changes
and make approval/rejection decisions about change requests.
Change Control Tools. The change control tools actually refer to manual or
automated tools for both configuration control tools and change control tools.
Configuration refers to a specific arrangement of elements in a particular figure,
form, or combination. Some examples are the settings of options in a computer
program, the distribution of electrons in a particular atom, and the spatial
arrangement of atoms in a molecular bond. Configuration control is mainly
about deliverables and processes; e.g., facilitating identifying, documenting,
reporting, verifying, and auditing. Change control is mainly about change;
e.g.. facilitating identifying, documenting, postponing, rejecting, approving, and
tracking changes to the deliverables, baselines, project documents, etc.
Data Analysis and Decision-Making Techniques. These techniques are
used to assess the change requests and decide whether to postpone, reject, or
approve them. The data-analysis techniques may include alternatives analysis
to help make a decision about which corrective actions, preventive actions,
or both to implement as a response to deviations, if the change request is
accepted; cost-benefit analysis to determine if the change implementation is
worth its cost; and so forth.
We can easily apply decision-making techniques, such as voting, autocratic
decision making, and multicriteria decision analysis, which were discussed in
the section on the tools and techniques for the Monitor and Control Project
Work process.


Output from Integrated Change Control
The changes that are processed through the Perform Integrated Change
Control process will either be deferred, rejected, or approved. As a result of
the approved changes, the project management plan and project documents
might need to be updated. Accordingly, the following are the output items of
this process.
Approved Change Requests. You must make sure not only that the approved
change requests are implemented through the Direct and Manage Project Work
process, but also that the status or info about the deferred and rejected change
requests is communicated to the stakeholders who requested the change.
The dispositions of all change requests are recorded in the change log as a
project document update.
452   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Project Plan and Project Document Updates. As a result of approved
      changes, components of the project management plan may need to be updated,
      such as baselines and any subsidiary plans. Also, project documents may need
      to be updated, such as the change log, which is used to record changes that
      happen during the project lifecycle. Figure 12-2 illustrates the big picture of
      the change control process.

                                                                     tZ
                                                                     Z
        KDZZ                                                            DZZZZ
        ZZWZ                                 ZZ                                       WZtZ

                                                             Z
                                                             
                                                                                
                       
                                             WZ/
                                              ZZ

                                                        
                                                        



                                                ^Z


      Figure 12-2. Big picture of change control


      Caution! During document updates, changes to any baseline are made in reference to the last
      baseline version of the baseline going forward, keeping all the versions intact in order to preserve
      the integrity of the baselines for historical data of past performance.




                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.3

          Q1. Many processes in the monitoring and controlling process group generate change
              requests. Name the process in this process group that is used to approve or reject
              the change requests.
          Q2. Name the processes and other sources that can generate the change requests.


      As shown in Figure 12-1, project deliverables, an output of by the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process, need to be verified by the Control Quality
      process. Also, quality control measurements used as an input in the quality
      management process, discussed in Chapter 9, come from controlling quality,
      the process discussed next.
                                                                           PMP(R) in Depth         453




Controlling Quality
Quality is controlled by performing the Control Quality process, which is
a high-level process that oversees and controls the quality management
activities with the goal of making sure that the project outcome is complete
and correct. To that end, the following is accomplished:
        1. Verify that all the planned requirements and specifications
           have been implemented and complied with or conformed to.
        2. To be specific, measure the completeness and compliance
           of the project in its outcome.
        3. In these measurements, include all steps, variables, and
           attributes.

Note The phrase "project outcome is complete and correct" says it all because it is complete
and correct, it has met all the planned requirements and hence meets stakeholders' expectations,
and the project outcome does what it is supposed to do.


Table 12-4 presents the Control Quality process in terms of input, tools and
techniques, and output.

Table 12-4. The Control Quality Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                            Tools and Techniques             Output
1. Project management plan:      1. Data gathering:               1. Quality control
  Quality management plan           * Checklists and check           measurements
2.Project documents:                  sheets                      2.Verified deliverables
  *Test and evaluation              * Statistical sampling        3. Work performance
   documents                        * Questionnaires and             information
  * Quality metrics                   surveys                     4. Change requests
  *Lessons learned register      2. Data analysis:                5. Project management plan
                                    * Root-cause analysis            updates:
3. Approved change requests
                                    * Performance reviews            *Quality management
4. Work performance data
                                                                      plan
5. Deliverables                  3. Data presentation
                                                                  6. Project document updates:
6.Enterprise environmental          * Control charts
                                                                     *Test and evaluation
  factors                           * Cause and effect diagrams
                                                                      documents
7.Organizational project            * Histograms
                                                                     * Risk register
  assets                            * Scattered diagrams
                                                                     * Issues log
                                 4. Product test and evaluation
                                                                     *Lessons learned
                                 5. Inspection                        register
                                 6. Meeting
454   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Core of Performing Quality Control
      The key word in the Control Quality process is verify. Performing the Control
      Quality process can be explained in the following steps in terms of the items
      from Table 12-4:
            1. Get "How to" Information. This process is performed
               according to the quality management plan.
            2. Get What to Verify. You run verification on deliverables
               and work performance data from the Direct and Manage
               Project Work process. The work performance data,
               already discussed in this chapter, includes quality
               schedule and cost quality information, measurements for
               technical performance, quality metrics, and other quality
               information such as that from observations.
            3. Verify. You perform various tasks to run verifications,
               such as the following:
                *   Inspect the deliverables to determine if they conform
                    to the standards as planned, and examine if they meet
                    the acceptance criteria defined in the project scope
                    statement. While doing this, use information from
                    the work performance data.
                *   Also, use deliverables and work performance data to
                    verify that approved change requests from the Perform
                    Integrated Change Control process are correctly and
                    completely implemented.
                *   Run tests from test and evaluation documents from the
                    Manage Quality process to check the quality of the
                    implementation and if various project and product
                    variables comply with quality standards as specified
                    in the quality metrics.
                *   Also, test and evaluation documents perform evaluations
                    about overall quality objective achievements.
            4. Generate Output. From the information and results
               obtained from these verifications, you can generate
               the output of this process, such as quality control
               measurements, verified deliverables, work performance
               information, and change requests.
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth         455




Caution! Note that according to PMBOK you are using the project scope statement in the
preceding steps, but Table 12-4 does not have the project scope statement as input. The same
is true with the outputs of the control processes, such as performance reports, test reports, and
variance analysis used in the Manage Quality process where you perform document analysis.




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.4

    Q1. Which quality process generates quality control measurements?
    Q2. Which quality process uses quality control measurements?
    Q3. Which quality process generates quality metrics?
    Q4. Which quality process uses quality metrics?


To facilitate verification, you can use a plethora of tools and techniques,
discussed next.


Tools and Techniques for Quality Control
The tools and techniques used for quality control are explained in the
following sections.


Data Gathering
The following techniques can be used to collect data both for and during
verification; e.g., inspection.
Questionnaires and Surveys. This technique, discussed in Chapter 2, can
be used to collect data about customer satisfaction with the project outcome.
Statistical Sampling. Statistical sampling involves randomly selecting a
part of the population for study. In quality control, you can select a subset of
features for inspection, measurements, and quality verification. This can save
a substantial amount of resources. To get reasonably accurate results, make
sure that the sample is random and is of reasonable size; i.e., not too small.
Quality Checklist. A checklist is a structured tool used to verify that a
predetermined set of required steps has been performed. The checklists can
come in imperative form, such as "to do" lists, or in interrogative form, such
as "have you done this" lists. Checklists are prepared--or identified, if they
already exist--in quality planning and used in quality control and are part of
the input in test and evaluation documents.
456   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Check Sheets. In many data-collection scenarios where you want to put
      the data in an organized form, a very useful tool called check sheets or tally
      sheets can be used. This tool is particularly suitable when data to be collected
      is about the variables; e.g., different types of errors in a software module. For
      example, Table 12-5 presents different kinds of errors found in a sample of
      software modules during inspection.

      Table 12-5. Errors Found in Software Modules

      Errors / Module Number        1         2      3       4      5        Total
      Functionality Errors          5         2      7       0      1        15
      Communication Errors          0         1      6       4      1        12
      Missing Command Errors        5         0      0       4      1        5
      Syntactic Errors              1         7      3       8      2        21
      Error-handling Errors         1         1      4       0      0        6
      Calculation Errors            0         1      6       4      8        19
      Control-flow Errors           7         6      3       0      1        17



      Data Analysis
      You perform root-cause analysis, discussed in the Manage Quality section, to
      identify the root causes of defects. Also, you can analyze and measure the
      quality metrics defined in the Plan Quality Management process using the
      work performance data and then compare these measurements with their
      planned values. This is called the performance reviews.


      Data Presentation
      In this process, data-presentation techniques are used to identify causes of
      defects, find the potential effects of quality defects and errors, rank defects
      and their causes, and find if the processes are stable.
      Scatter Diagrams. A scatter diagram is used to show the pattern of the
      relationship between two variables--an independent variable and another
      variable that depends on the independent variable. The dependent variable
      is plotted corresponding to the independent variable. For example, a variable
      representing a cause, such as temperature, can be the independent variable,
      and a variable representing the effect, such as operational errors, can be a
      dependent variable. The closer the data points are to a diagonal line, the
      stronger the relationship (called the correlation) is between the two variables.
      So, scattered diagrams can be used to find the causes of defects.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      457



Histograms. In general, a histogram is a representation of the distribution of
numerical data. It could be a bar chart that shows a distribution of variables.
Each bar can represent an attribute, such as defects due to a specific cause,
and its height can represent the frequency of the attribute, such as number of
defects. This tool helps rank the defects and causes behind those defects, and
also ranks the processes in term of numbers or frequency of defect.
You might ask: How many defects is acceptable? To find an answer to this
question, you need to understand another tool, called the control chart.
Control Charts. Control charts, in general, are used to determine if a
process is stable; i.e., if its performance can be predicted. In other words, they
are used to monitor whether the variance of a specified variable is within
the acceptable limits dictated by quality control. A variance is a measurable
deviation in the value of a project variable, such as cost from a known baseline
or expected value. This is a way to monitor the deviations and determine
whether the corresponding variable is in or out of control. The values are
taken at different times to measure the behavior of a variable over time.
The mean value in the control chart represents the expected value, and a
predetermined spread from the mean value (usually 3 ) is used to define
the limits within which an acceptable value can fall.
Control charts can be used to monitor the values of any type of output
variable. To illustrate their main features, consider the example of a control
chart shown in Figure 12-3. In this example, assume that a manufacturer
produces 100 units of a product each day, and it is expected that 95 out of
100 units should have no defects--that is, the expected number of defective
units is equal to five. The control limits are set to 3. In other words, 95 units
out of 100 must be correct, give or take three. That puts the lower limit at
92 and the upper limit at 98. Crossing the lower limits is not acceptable to
the customer, and crossing the upper limits might require an unjustifiable cost.
458   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work




      Figure 12-3. An example of a control chart

      Controlling quality includes dealing with defects and the problems that cause
      them. So, studying causes of a problem is critical to quality control.


      Caution! The upper and lower limits are based on requirements set in the specifications,
      while control limits are statistically determined from actual data on how the process is
      performing.


      As mentioned earlier, control charts, in general, are used to determine if a
      process is stable, and their particular uses can include monitoring
             *    volume;
             *    cost and schedule variances; and
             *    frequency of scope changes;
      as well as tracking repetitive activities to produce manufacturing lots.
      Cause and Effect Diagram. A cause and effect diagram is used to explore
      all the potential causes (inputs) that result in a single effect (output), such as a
      problem or a defect. This type of diagram is the brainchild of Kaoru Ishikawa,
      who pioneered quality management processes in the Kawasaki shipyards, and
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      459



therefore these diagrams are also called Ishikawa diagrams. Due to the shape
of these diagrams, they are also known as fishbone diagrams, and because of
what they do--i.e., find multiple causes--they are also called why-why diagrams.
For example, to construct and use cause and effect diagrams effectively, you
can perform the following simple steps:
      1. Identify the Problem. Write down the problem in a
         box drawn on the right side of a large sheet of paper. This
         represents the head of the fish. Starting from the box,
         draw a horizontal line across the paper. This represents
         the spine of the fish.
      2. Identify the Possible Areas of Causes. Identify the
         areas or factors from where the potential causes of the
         problem might come. Environment, people, materials,
         measurements, and methods are some examples of
         areas (factors) of causes. For each factor relevant to the
         problem under study, draw a line off the spine and label
         it with the name of the factor. These lines represent the
         fish bones.
      3. Identify the Possible Causes. For each factor, identify
         possible causes. Represent each possible cause with a line
         coming off the bone that represents the corresponding
         factor.
      4. Analyze the Diagram. Analyzing the diagram includes
         narrowing down the most likely causes and investigating
         them further.
Figure 12-4 shows an example of a cause and effect diagram. The problem in
this example is the delay in the release of a website. The factors considered are
environment, methods, people, and time. Of course, the diagram is incomplete
in the sense that more factors and related causes can be explored, and causes
for each factor can be explored further. But you get the point.
460   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work




      Figure 12-4. An example of a cause and effect diagram: explore the causes for a delay in a
      website release


      Tip While constructing the cause and effect diagram, you can use the brainstorming method
      to identify the potential factors of causes and the potential causes for each factor.


      A cause and effect diagram offers a structured way to think through all
      possible causes of a problem. You can use these diagrams to carry out a
      thorough analysis of a problematic situation. This kind of analysis is useful in
      complex situations when, to discover the real causes, you need to explore all
      the potential causes and not just the obvious ones.
      In the Manage Quality process, cause and effect diagrams can be used to
      identify the main or root causes of defects, while in the Control Quality
      process they can be used to find the potential effects of quality defects and
      errors.
      In addition to the seven quality tools we have discussed, there are some other
      tools that you can use for quality control.

      Other Quality Control Tools
      Two other quality control tools are discussed here:
             *    Inspection. This is a technique used to examine
                  whether an activity, component, product, service, or
                  result conforms to specific requirements. This can also be
                  used to verify defects and implications of their removal.
                  Inspections can be conducted at various levels of project
                  execution. For example, you can inspect the results of
                  a single activity, or you can inspect the final product of
                  the project, or both. Nevertheless, inspection generally
                                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      461



             includes measurements. There are various forms of
             inspections, such as reviews, peer reviews, audits, and
             walkthroughs.
        *    Testing and Product Evaluation. This technique is
             used to find bugs, defects, and errors in the product, and
             also to verify its conformity to quality requirements and
             standards. Testing does not have to wait until toward the
             end of the project. Rather, it should be performed side-
             by-side with development. As a product or its component
             is developed, it can be tested. This approach will be less
             costly. The kinds of tests depend upon the application
             area of the product.

                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.5

    Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second column.

Data Presentation Tool        A Use
A. Flowcharts                 1. To identify the most important area of causes of defects
B. Tally sheets               2. To find the relationship between two variables and find
                                 potential causes of defects
C. Scatter diagrams           3. To anticipate what quality problems might be and where they
                                 might occur
D. Histograms                 4. To monitor whether the variance of a specified variable is
                                 within the acceptable limits
E. Affinity diagrams          5. To find the frequency of defects
F. Control charts             6. To explore all the potential causes of a problem, not just the
                                 obvious ones
G. Cause and effect           7. To display the relative importance of different variables;
   diagrams                      e.g., its causes


All this work done by using these tools generates the output items for this
process, discussed next.


Output of Quality Control
The quality control measurements, verified deliverables, work performance
information, and change requests are the main output items of the Control
Quality process. These and other output items are discussed in the following
paragraphs.
462   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Quality Control Measurements. These are the results of the Control
      Quality activities and are fed back to the Manage Quality process in the form
      of a document as specified in the quality management plan. They are also used
      to make recommendations for corrective and preventive actions or other
      change requests.
      Verified Deliverables. These are the deliverables whose correctness
      and conformity with quality requirements and standards have been verified
      through the Control Quality process. They are fed into the Validate Scope
      process discussed in Chapter 4. The rejected deliverables come back for
      verification after repair.
      Work Performance Information. This document from this process
      includes information about the following items:
            *   List of verified deliverables
            *   Causes of rejections
            *   Status of project requirement fulfillment
            *   Status of quality metrics
            *   Recommendations for corrective actions and process
                adjustments
      Change Requests. If in the quality control process changes need to occur
      that effect a component of the project management plan or a project
      document, you need to generate change requests that must go through the
      standard process.
      Of course, you can have meetings regarding topics relevant to quality control,
      and you will have to make needed modifications to documents such as those
      listed for modification in the output column of Table 12-4.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth    463




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.6

    Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
    column. An item in the first column may match with more than one item in the second
    column and vice versa.

Item                                      Appears In
A. Quality metrics                         1. Input to Plan Quality Management
B. Quality control measurements            2. Input to Plan Quality
C. Quality report                          3. Input to Control Quality
D. Test and evaluation documents           4. Output of Plan Quality Management
E. Approved change requests                5. Output of Manage Quality
F. Work performance data                   6. Output of Control Quality
G. Deliverables                            7. Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
H.Verified deliverables                    8. Output of Perform Integrated Change Control
I. Work performance information            9. Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
J. Change requests                        10. Monitor and Control Project Work


In a nutshell, the Control Quality process verifies the deliverables and
makes quality control measurements by using inspection, data analysis, data
presentation, and other techniques to check if quality requirements are met
and quality standards are conformed to.
Quality management is closely related to risk management. Let's say you are
doing a fine job controlling quality. However, if an unidentified risk suddenly
strikes or an already identified risk event has occurred but the planned
response is not being implemented in a timely fashion, quality is one of the
possible victims. So, controlling risks is as important as controlling quality.


Monitoring Risks
Risks are monitored by using the Monitor Risks process, which includes the
following:
        *    Tracking the status of identified risks
        *    Monitoring residual risks (risks that remain after risk
             responses have been implemented)
        *    Identifying new risks and making sure that they are
             analyzed and responded to if needed
        *    Evaluating the effectiveness of risk processes
464   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      However, the risk situation can change with time. Therefore, monitoring and
      controlling risks also includes monitoring risk dynamics, which involves the
      following:
              *   Ensuring that the project execution is conforming to the
                  risk management policies and procedures
              *   Determining whether the project assumptions are still
                  valid. If an assumption becomes invalid, it may eliminate a
                  risk or may give rise to a new risk.
              *   Determining whether the current analysis has changed
                  the risk assessment. A change in the risk assessment may
                  require changes in other aspects of the project, such as
                  cost, schedule, and contingency reserves.
      Table 12-6 presents the Monitor Risks process in terms of input, tools and
      techniques, and output.

      Table 12-6. The Monitor Risks Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                          Tools and Techniques Output
      1. Project management plan:    1. Data analysis:       1. Work performance information
        * Risk management plan         * Technical           2. Change requests
      2. Project documents:              performance         3. Project management plan update:
                                         analysis               any component
        * Risk register
                                       * Reserve analysis    4. Project document updates:
        * Risk report
                                     2. Audit                  * Risk register
        * Issues log
                                     3. Meetings               * Risk report
        * Lesson learned register
      3. Work performance data                                 * Assumptions log
      4. Work performance report                               * Issues log
                                                               * Lesson learned register
                                                             5. Organizational project assets
                                                                updates



      That said, the Monitor Risks process may be explained in the following steps
      or tasks in terms of the items from Table 12-6:

              1. Get "How to" and Other Information about Risks.
                 Information about how, how often, and when risks should
                 be reviewed can be found in the risk management plan,
                 which also contains information on risk management
                 roles and the responsibilities assigned to each role to
                 monitor risks.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   465



2. Get Information about Risks and Planned Risk
   Responses. From the risk report, you can obtain up-to-
   date information on the overall project risk and planned
   responses to it. All the information on the individual risks
   needed for this process can be obtained from the risk
   register.
3. Get Project Risk Results. You can get the risk-
   related results from the project execution from the work
   performance data, an output of the Direct and Manage
   Project Work process, and from the work performance
   report, an output of the Monitor and Control Project
   Work process. The work performance data basically
   provides the project status, including the risk status; e.g.,
   risks to which the responses have been implemented,
   those currently active, those already closed out, and those
   newly occurred. The work performance report contains
   information about work performance measurements. The
   data and information from both of these documents are
   analyzed to assess the effectiveness of risk management,
   as shown next.
4. Generate Work Performance Information, an
   Output Item. As already mentioned, the work performance
   report contains information about work performance
   measurements, which can be analyzed to generate work
   performance information, which includes how much the
   risk results vary from the plan, as well as earned values
   and forecasts in terms of risks. In a nutshell, the work
   performance information tells how effective the risk
   response and implementation processes are. You can also
   use the relevant data from the work performance data in
   preparation of work performance information.
466   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


           5. Technical Performance Measurements. Technical
              performance analysis compares actual versus planned
              quantities related to the technical progress of the
              project. The deviation determines the degree of potential
              impact of risks. For example, for a project software
              product project, the technical performance measurement
              quantities could include running time of a module to
              complete a job, number of bugs, and how often the
              program crashes. In general, the parameters and quantities
              chosen to measure technical performance could be any
              parameters that represent something important related
              to the project objectives and requirements; software
              performance, human resource performance, and system
              test performance are some examples.
           6. Reserve Analysis. Recall that the contingency reserve is
              the amount of funds or time (in the schedule) in addition
              to the planned budget that is reserved to keep the
              impact of risks to an acceptable level when the project is
              executing. The risks occurring during project execution
              can have positive or negative effects on the contingency
              reserve. You perform reserve analysis at a given time to
              compare the remaining reserve amount to the remaining
              risk to determine whether the remaining reserve amount
              is adequate to handle the risk.
           7. Audit. You will be responsible for conducting risk audits
              with the frequency suggested in the risk management
              plan. These audits are usually done to assess the
              effectiveness of the risk management processes. They
              may be conducted as a part of project review meetings or
              risk review meetings, or just as separate audit meetings.
              As is true for any audit or meeting, the objective should
              be clearly defined before it starts.
           8. Risk Reviews Meetings. You can put risk reviews as an
              agenda item at project status meetings or hold separate
              risk review meetings. These regular reviews can include
              activities such as assessing current risk, closing outdated
              risks, identifying new risks or secondary risks that
              occurred as a result of applying the responses, recoding
              lessons learned, and discussing other risk-related issues.
              Having these risk reviews on a regular basis helps make
              risk management smoother and more effective.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth    467



      9. Modify Documents. The documents that may change in
         this process are listed in the output column of Table 12-6.
         For example, as a result of risk monitoring, the risk register
         and risk report will be updated with new information
         and the status of individual risks and overall project risk,
         respectively. Also, the risk report can include the results
         of the risk audit on the current effectiveness of the risk
         management processes.
           As a result of the risk monitoring and controlling pro-
           cesses, some organizational process assets might need
           to be updated, such as savings templates for the proj-
           ect management plan, risk register, risk report, risk
           breakdown structure (RBS), and the lessons learned
           knowledge database.
     10. Generate Needed Change Requests. While
         monitoring risks, some changes may be needed; e.g.,
         preventive or corrective action, more funds, or a
         schedule change. As always, for proposed changes to any
         component of the project plan, such as schedule baseline
         or cost baseline, change requests must be generated
         and processed through the Perform Integrated Change
         Control process.

                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.7

   Q1. Why might you end up updating the assumptions log and lessons learned register
       during the Monitor Risks process?
   Q2. The work performance information, an output item of the risk control process, is
       an input to which process?
   Q3. Which other processes generate work performance information?


There can be risks related to procurements, which also need to be monitored.
Also, in general, like any other part of the project, you need to monitor and
control procurements, which you do by using the Control Procurements
process.
468   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Control Procurements
      Controlling procurements is the process of ensuring that the performance of
      buyers and sellers meets agreed-upon procurement requirements, and that
      procurement is properly closed. It includes the following:
            1. Manage procurement-specific relationships.
            2. Monitor the performance of the procurement part of the
               project.
            3. Manage procurement-related changes.
            4. Close procurement contracts.
      Administering procurements has a two-pronged goal: the seller performance
      meets the procurement requirements, and the buyer meets its agreed-upon
      contractual obligations. Depending on the size and complexity of the project
      and the structure of the performing organization, procurement administration
      may be handled by a group outside of the project organization. But you will
      still need to integrate the procurement function with the project and act as
      a communicator and coordinator to ensure that this function is performed
      smoothly and without adversely affecting the other aspects of the project.
      This is accomplished by monitoring and controlling the interface of the
      procurement processes with non-procurement processes, such as those from
      quality, risk, and integration management. Most of the input and output items
      in Table 12-7 reflect that interface.
Table 12-7. The Control Procurement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                            Tools and Techniques            Output
1. Project management plan:                      1. Claims administration        1. Closed procurement
  * Procurement management plan                  2. Data analysis:               2. Work performance information
  * Change management plan                          * Procurement                3. Procurement documentation update
  * Requirement management plan                       performance reviews        4. Change requests
  * Risk management plan                            * Earned-value analysis      5. Project management plan update:
  * Schedule baseline                               * Trend analysis               * Procurement management plan
2. Project documents                             3. Audits and inspections         * Risk management plan
  * Milestone list                               4. Expert judgment                * Schedule baseline
  * Requirements traceability matrix                                               * Cost baseline
  * Requirement documentation                                                    6. Project documents update:
  * Quality reports                                                                * Resource requirement documentation
  * Stakeholder register                                                           * Requirements traceability matrix
  * Assumptions log                                                                * Stakeholder register
  * Risk register                                                                  * Risk register
  * Lessons learned register                                                       * Lessons learned register
3. Agreements                                                                    7. Organizational project assets update
4. Procurement documentation
5. Approved change requests
6. Work performance data
7. Enterprise environmental factors
8. Organizational project assets
                                                                                                                           PMP(R) in Depth
                                                                                                                             469
470   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      Core of Controlling Procurements
      As discussed earlier, procuring an item is equivalent to procuring or
      outsourcing a piece of your project with its share of the scope, requirements,
      cost baseline, project schedule, stakeholders, and risks. However, this procured
      piece is still connected to the whole project and can affect and impact it. In
      this context, the core of controlling procurement is to manage the interface
      of the procurement processes with the other processes of the project, as
      alluded to earlier. In this section, we will illustrate how you do that.
      The input and output items in Table 12-7 represent the interface you need to
      manage. From this and other chapters, you are familiar with all these items
      and their roles. In the following, we will explain in a compact manner how to
      manage this interface.


      Manage Information about the Procurement
      For this process, information about the procurement buyers and sellers comes
      to and is managed through two kinds of documents: 1) documents from
      procurement processes--e.g., agreements, procurement documentation, and
      the procurement management plan; and 2) documents from non-procurement
      processes, such as the following:
            *   The milestone list holds the dates on which sellers must
                deliver specific results.
            *   Procurement-related assumptions go into the assumptions log.
            *   The risk from the seller side goes into and is managed by
                using the risk register; this risk may arise from cost, missing
                a milestone, delivery method, etc.
            *   These risks can be managed as guided by the risk
                management plan.
            *   Procurement-related requirements, both technical ones
                that the seller is required to meet and contractual ones,
                become part of the requirement documentation.
            *   These requirements are managed as guided by the
                requirement management plan.

      Analyses of Sellers' Data
      The work performance data contains raw performance data from the seller
      side, such as activities in progress and those finished, costs incurred, and
      so forth. As described in Chapter 13, by using earned-value analysis you will
      compute the performance indexes and variances for both schedule and cost.
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      471



Comparing these with the agreed-upon target (e.g., SOW) will measure the
deviation. Also, as explained in this chapter, you can perform trend analysis to
predict the estimate for cost at completion so as to monitor cost; e.g., is it on
track, improving, or getting worse?
You can also keep track of procurement by conducting performance reviews,
as discussed in this chapter in the Control Quality section. As in any control
process, from the seller data you will measure certain quantities about
schedule, resource, and cost performance and compare them with their
expected values, which are found in the contract or agreement or agreed-
upon procurement documents.


Perform Audits and Inspections
Already discussed in the Control Quality section, you can apply these tools
here in a similar way. For example, in an inspection you can perform a
structural review of the contractor's work; e.g., review actual work or review
final product--i.e., deliverable. Depending on the field, this review could take
many forms; e.g., in software engineering, it could be a code walkthrough.
In this process, the audit would be a structural review of the overall
procurement process. The buyer and sellers' project managers should share
the results from the audit and make necessary changes.


Create Work Performance Information
Similar to any monitoring and controlling process, data analysis and audit and
inspections will generate work performance information. In this process, for
example, work performance information will include information on how the
seller's performance is in terms of schedule, cost, and technical performance
as compared against the SOW.


Generate Change Requests
Deviations found during the data analysis and audit and inspections will
generate change requests; e.g., to the procurement management plan, schedule
baseline, and cost baseline. As always, change requests are processed through
the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
Because there are two parties, buyer and seller, involved in procurement, there
may arise disagreement on whether the deviation or change happened or if
the solution (e.g., compensation) to the change is acceptable. The preferred
method for resolution would be through negotiations, as may be described in
the contract. If negotiations fail, then these changes are called disputed claims
and are processed through alternative dispute resolution (ADR), which may be
472   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


      referred to in the contract. Handling these kinds of changes is called claim
      administration.
      Like in any process, the change requests and some actions may cause the
      need to update some documents, such as those listed in the output column
      of Table 12-7.
      Close Procurements. When you or your team have accepted all the
      deliverables from the sellers through the Control Procurements process and
      there are no payments due or unresolved claims, then the procurement team,
      through an authorized administrator, can formally close the procurement,
      as described in the procurement management plan and the contract. This
      includes closing all the agreements or contracts.
      In a nutshell, you use the Control Procurement process to monitor and
      control the implementation to the SOW and any agreements between sellers
      and buyer, ending with the sellers delivering the procurement items.
      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
            1. All change requests must go through the integrated
               change control process, and only the approved changes
               should be implemented.
            2. Tests and evaluations, an output of the Manage Quality
               process, describes tests and evaluations that can be used
               by the Control Quality process to verify that quality has
               been applied.
            3. The risk monitoring process is used not only to monitor
               the identified risks, secondary risks, and residual risks, but
               also to identify new risks and direct them onto the path
               of analysis to response management.

      Summary
      You need to monitor and control your project throughout its lifecycle, which
      includes monitoring and controlling project work, including procurements,
      performance, changes, quality, and risks. You monitor and control your
      project by collecting project performance data, generating performance
      measurements from it, calculating the deviations of these from the planned
      ones, and taking appropriate action to stay the course or bring the project
      back on track. All aspects of the project are monitored and controlled using
      two high-level processes that belong to integration management: Monitor and
      Control Project Work and Perform Integrated Change Control, under which
      other monitor and control processes run, such as Control Quality, Monitor
      Risks, and Control Procurements.
                                                                         PMP(R) in Depth    473



Project deliverables, an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work
process, are verified by the Control Quality process. By comparing the work
performance generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process with
the project plan, the monitor and control processes generate change requests
with the goal of keeping the project on track. These and other change
requests from any process or stakeholder are processed through the Perform
Integrated Change Control process for approval. If approved, the execution or
implementation of these changes is managed using Direct and Manage Project
Work, a process in the executing process group.
Road Ahead. As we mentioned, monitor and control processes are available
in all aspects of a project. In the chapters that follow, we will explore these
processes in the resource, cost, schedule, and scope aspects of a project.


Exam's Eye View
Comprehend

  * Controlling procurement includes closing procurement at the end.
  *You monitor and control the project in an integrative way by using two processes:
   Monitor and Control Project Work and Perform Integrated Change Control.
  *All the individual monitor and control processes, such as Monitor Risk, Control
   Quality, and Control Schedule, can generate change requests, which must be processed
   through the Perform Integrated Change Control process, in which each of these change
   requests will be deferred, rejected, or approved.
  *The Control Quality process verifies the deliverables and takes quality control
   measurements, using inspection, data analysis, data presentation, and other techniques
   to check if quality requirements are met and quality standards are conformed to.

Look Out

  *The procured deliverables are provided by the sellers during the Control Procurements
   process before the procurement is closed.
  *Change requests can come from any monitor and control process or directly from
   stakeholders, but they all must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change
   Control process.
  *The performance reports, generated by the Monitor and Control Project Work
   process, are an input to the Perform Integrated Change Control process.
  *Approved change requests--and only the approved change requests--must be
   implemented, i.e., processed, through the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
  *Tests and evaluations, an output of the Manage Quality process, describes tests and
   evaluations that can be used by the Control Quality process to verify that quality has
   been applied.
  *Implementation of risk responses is managed by the Implement Risk Responses
   process and not by the Monitor Risk process.
474   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work



      Memorize

        *Change requests are an output of the Monitor and Control Project Work process
         and the Direct and Manage Project Work process, but they can also come from other
         monitor and control processes, or directly from stakeholders.
        *The Perform Integrated Change Control process is used to approve, reject, or
         postpone a change request.
        *Project deliverables are generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process,
         verified through the Quality Control process, accepted by the customer through the
         Validate Scope process, and transitioned to the appropriate party through the Close
         Project or Phase process.
        *The Control Quality process generates quality control measurements as an output item,
         which becomes an input into the Manage Quality process.
        *Work performance data generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process
         is used as an input to the Monitor Risks process to generate work performance
         information.



      Review Questions
             1. Every change request must be processed through which
                process?
                 A. Perform Integrated Change Control
                 B. Project charter and stakeholder register and Direct
                    and Manage Project Work
                 C. Monitor and Control Project Work
                 D. Process Change Requests
             2. The integrated change control process is used to manage
                changes to the project at which stage?
                 A. From initiating through closing
                 B. Planning only
                 C. Executing only
                 D. Monitoring and controlling only
             3. A project manager is getting the risk-related recommended
                corrective actions approved. Which of the following
                processes is the project manager involved in?
                 A. Perform Integrated Change Control
                 B. No process
                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   475



   C. Risk identification
   D. Monitor and Control Project Work
4. You have just received approval from the change control
   board to implement a few change requests. What process
   are you going to execute for that to happen?
   A. No process is needed
   B. Direct and Manage Project Work
   C. Perform Integrated Change Control
   D. Monitor and Control Project Work
5. Walking down the hallway, you hear a program manager
   saying to a project manager, "You need the performance
   reports to run this process." To which process might the
   program manager be referring?
   A. Monitor and Control Project Work
   B. Perform Integrated Change Control
   C. Close Project or Phase
   D. Evaluate Performance
6. You are using an Ishikawa diagram to find the real causes
   of a problem by exploring all the possible causes. Which
   quality process are you performing?
   A. Manage Quality
   B. Plan Quality
    C. Control Quality and Plan Quality
    D. Control Quality
7. You want to examine the results of a process to determine
   whether the process is in or out of control. Which of the
   following is the most suitable tool to use?
    A. Control chart
    B. Cause and effect diagram
    C. Inspection
    D. Scatter diagram
476   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


           8. You are managing a software project with limited
              development resources. The QA department has
              discovered a large number of defects in the product, and
              the project sponsor is very concerned about this. You
              want to get the maximum number of defects repaired
              with minimal effort and cost. Which quality-control tool
              are you going to use before you direct the efforts of the
              project team to fixing specific problems?
               A. Control chart
               B. Cause and effect diagram
               C. Inspection
               D. Scatter diagram
           9. You are the project manager for a software development
              project that has limited resources. The customer is
              concerned about the quality of the code developed
              and wants you to conduct a code review. The product
              contains a large body of code with millions of lines.
              Which approach will you take?
               A. Tell the customer it's not possible.
               B. Use statistical sampling.
               C. Use automated testing tools.
               D. Arrange to review each line of the code.
          10. Which of the following is not an input to controlling
              quality?
               A. Project deliverables
               B. Work performance measurements
               C. Quality control measurements
               D. Test and evaluation documents
          11. Which of the following tools or techniques is not listed in
              PMBOK to be used in the Control Quality process?
               A. Statistical sampling
               B. Performance reviews
               C. Fishbone diagrams
               D. Change control tools
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   477



12. A project manager is getting risk-related recommended
    corrective actions recommended by his team. In which of
    the following processes is the project manager involved?
     A. Perform Integrated Change Control
     B. Plan Risk Responses
     C. Identify Risks
     D. Monitor Risk
13. A project manager is getting the risk-related recommended
    corrective actions approved. In which of the following
    processes is the project manager involved?
     A. Perform Integrated Change Control
     B. Plan Risk Responses
     C. Identify Risks
     D. Monitor Risks
14. In project risk management, which of the following
    statements is not true?
     A.Risk report contains information about the overall
       project risk.
     B. Exploiting an opportunity ensures that the positive
        risk does occur.
     C. An output of the Plan Risk Responses process is a
        document called the risk response plan.
     D. The lowest level of RBS can often be used as a
        checklist, which could be the list of risk categories.
15. Which of the following is not an input to the Monitor
    Risks process?
     A. Work performance reports
     B. Work performance information
     C. Work performance data
     D. Risk management plan
478   Chapter 12 | Monitoring and Controlling the Project Work


          16. Which of the following is the correct order in which to
              perform the listed processes?
               A. Validate Scope, Quality Control, Close Project or
                  Phase
               B. Quality Control, Validate Scope, Close Project or
                  Phase
               C. Validate Scope, Close Project or Phase, Control
                  Procurements
               D. Quality Control, Close Project or Phase, Control
                  Procurements
          17. Which of the following is not an activity of the Control
              Procurements process?
               A. Issuing formal acceptance of the procured products
               B. Handing over the accepted products to the appropriate
                  parties, such as the customer or the sponsor
               C. Closing all the contracts associated with the
                  procurement
               D. Archiving lessons learned documents
          18. Which of the following shows the correct order in which
              to perform the listed processes for the first time?
               A. Direct and Manage Project Work, Control
                  Procurements, Perform Integrated Change Control
               B. Control Procurements, Perform Integrated Change
                  Control, Direct and Manage Project Work
               C. Perform Integrated Change Control, Control
                  Procurements, Direct and Manage Project Work
               D. Perform Integrated Change Control, Direct and
                  Manage Project Work, Control Procurements
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                        13

Monitoring
and Controlling
the Scope,
Schedule,
and Resources


(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP (R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_13
480   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      PMP Exam Objectives          What It Really Means
      4.1 Measure project          Measure project performance using appropriate tools and
          performance              techniques in order to identify and quantify any variances and
                                   corrective actions.
                                   Here, it means that you must know the Control and Validate
                                   Scope, and Control Schedule and Cost processes inside out,
                                   and their role in measuring project performance, and you
                                   must compare this performance with the baseline, requesting
                                   changes to stay the course and/or bring the project back on
                                   track.
                                   Also, understand how controlling resources is related to
                                   scope and controlling cost and schedule.
      4.5 Review the issues log    Review the issues log, update it if necessary, and determine
                                   corrective actions by using appropriate tools and techniques
                                   in order to minimize the impact on the project.
                                   In this chapter, it belongs to the Control Resources process.
      4.6 Capture, analyze, and    Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned using lessons
          manage lessons learned   learned management techniques in order to enable
                                   continuous improvement.
                                   Practically, it can and should be done in every monitoring
                                   and controlling process, but in this chapter, it refers to the
                                   Control and Validate Scope, Control Schedule and Cost, and
                                   Control Resources processes.


      High-quality projects deliver the promised product, service, or result within
      the planned budget, schedule, and scope. This is a very important and
      basic criterion of success: Complete the project with complete scope, on
      schedule, and within budget. So, it should not come as a surprise when project
      performance is largely measured by making integrated measures of scope,
      schedule, and cost and comparing them to the scope, schedule, and cost
      baselines. So, the three fundamental project parameters are scope, schedule,
      and cost. You will see in this chapter that these three project parameters are
      intrinsically connected by a triangular relationship. Because the success of
      the project depends largely on how you manage this triangle, we call it the
      golden triangle. Because these parameters are intrinsically connected, so too
      are their monitoring and controlling. A parameter that is closely related to
      these parameters is resources.
      So, the core issue in this chapter is how to monitor and control the golden
      triangle and resources. In search of an answer, we will explore three avenues:
      the relationship between scope, schedule, and cost; monitoring and controlling
      scope, schedule, and cost; and monitoring and controlling resources.
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   481




Controlling Scope, Schedule, and Resources:
Big Picture
In this chapter, we will discuss the monitoring and controlling of scope,
schedule, and resources. Depending on the context, such as now, we use the
term resources that includes cost. The corresponding processes are listed in
Table 13-1, where high-level information about these processes is presented.
Note that there are two monitoring and controlling processes corresponding
to scope management.

Table 13-1. Processes Covered in this Chapter Mapped to the Knowledge Areas

Monitoring and     Project Knowledge    Major Output                     Performed
Controlling        Area
Processes
Control Scope      Scope Management     Work performance                 Throughout the
                   Process              information                      project
Validate Scope     Scope Management     Accepted deliverables, work      As needed
                   Process              performance information,
                                        change requests
Control Schedule   Project Schedule     Work performance                 Throughout the
                   Management           measurements                     project
Control Costs      Project Cost         Work performance                 Throughout the
                   Management           information, budget forecasts    project
Control Resources Develop Human         Work performance                 Throughout the
                  Resource Plan         information, change requests     project


We will start by discussing controlling the project scope.


Controlling Scope
Controlling the project scope is all about keeping a tab on the status of project
scope and product scope as well as managing changes to the scope baseline.
While controlling the scope, you focus on the following tasks:
       *    Watch out for scope creep; determine whether it has
            happened and correct the situation. Scope creep refers to
            scope changes applied without processing them though
            the change control process.
       *    Process scope change requests through the integrated
            change control process for approval.
       *    Manage the implementation of scope changes after
            approval, as well as their impact across the project.
482   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources


      Tip In real life, scope creeps occur for various reasons. For example, perhaps a development
      engineer thought something was a cool feature to implement, or the customer spoke directly with
      the engineer to make a request for a minor additional feature, or various other similar situations.
      If scope creep has taken your project off track by affecting schedule, resources, cost, etc., you
      need to take corrective action to get the project back on track. You should also investigate how the
      scope creep happened and take steps to prevent it in the future--for example, by educating team
      members about the proper scope change process.


      Table 13-2. The Control Scope Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                                  Tools and Techniques Output
      1.Project management plan:             Data analysis:             1.Work performance
        * Scope baseline                       * Variance analysis        information
        * Performance baseline                 * Trend analysis         2. Change requests
        * Scope management plan                                         3.Project management plan
                                                                          updates:
        *Requirement management
         plan                                                              *Scope management plan
        * Change management plan                                           *Baselines: scope,
                                                                            schedule, cost,
        *Configuration management
                                                                            and performance
         plan
                                                                            measurement
      2. Work performance data
                                                                        4.Project document updates:
      3. Project documents:
                                                                           *Requirement
        * Requirement documentation                                         documentation
        *Requirements traceability                                         *Requirements
         matrix                                                             traceability matrix
        * Lessons learned register                                         * Lessons learned register
      4. Organizational project assets


      Given the input, tools and techniques, and output shown in Table 13-2 for this
      process, the following is a brief account of how the output is generated from
      the input by using tools and techniques:
              1. The scope baseline uses the WBS and the WBS dictionary
                 to check out what the approved scope is. We have a scope
                 management plan to tell us how to control the scope.
              2. Compare the actual work performance data with the per-
                 formance measurement baseline using variance analysis.
              3. Compare the scope aspect of the work performance data
                 with the scope baseline using variance analysis.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   483



4. Use the trend analysis tool on project performance over
   time to determine if it's improving or getting worse.
5. Steps 2, 3, and 4 will generate two main output items:
    a. Work performance information that includes how
       the actual project scope performance is progressing
       compared to the scope baseline.
    b. This comparison may generate change requests to
       bring the project on track; e.g., requests to change
       scope, schedule, or cost baselines.
6. We will manage these changes using the change manage-
   ment plan and configuration management plan discussed in
   previous chapters.
7. Use requirement documentation to detect any require-
   ment-related deviations from the scope baseline, and use
   a requirements traceability matrix to link the impact of any
   change to project objectives.
8. As you know from the previous chapter, all change
   requests are processed through the integrated change
   control process for approval, and only approved changes
   are implemented by using the Direct and Manage Project
   Work process.
9. In the Control Scope process, the input item work per-
   formance data includes information about received,
   approved, implemented, and validated change requests.
   This and change requests generated in this process will
   require some documents to be updated, such as the
   following:
    a. Scope baseline for scope change, and scope manage-
       ment plan to record how to manage those changes.
    b. Schedule baseline, cost baseline, and performance mea-
       surement baseline because changes in the scope base-
       line or any of these baselines may trigger changes in
       the rest of the baselines in this set of baselines.
    c. In addition to these plan documents' updates, some
       project documents may also need to be updated,
       including lessons learned register with effective scope
       control techniques, requirement documentation with
       additional, changed, and removed requirements, and
       the requirements traceability matrix to make it consis-
       tent with requirement documentation.
484   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

                                  STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.1
          Q1. List some of the organizational process assets that will influence the Control
              Scope process.
          Q2. Why do you need the lessons learned register in the input of the Control Scope
              process?


      Scope monitoring and controlling ends with validating scope for acceptance
      of project deliverables.


      Validating the Scope of Project Deliverables
      Validating scope is the process of formally accepting the completed project
      deliverables, which have already been verified for their correctness using the
      Control Quality process. Before you hand over the project deliverables to
      the appropriate party mentioned in the project management plan, such as
      the customer or the sponsor, you need to validate with the party that the
      deliverables actually meet the planned scope.


      Caution! You should perform the Validate Scope process with the appropriate party even if
      the project is terminated; that is, ended before completion. In that case, you would verify and
      document the level and extent of the project and product scope that was completed. At the very
      least, it will help the Close Project process; e.g., for the record, project review, and lessons learned.


      Validating the scope of the project deliverables includes inspection, also
      called audits, product review, or a walkthrough, depending on the project and
      organization. The purpose is to ensure that all deliverables are completed as
      planned and therefore as expected.
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   485



Table 13-3. The Validate Scope Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                                  Tools and Techniques    Output
1. Verified deliverables               1. Decision making      1. Accepted deliverables
2. Work performance data               2. Inspection           2.Work performance
3. Project management plan:                                      information
  * Scope baseline                                             3. Change requests
  * Scope management plan                                      4.Project document
                                                                 updates:
  * Requirement management plan
                                                                  *Requirement
4. Project documents
                                                                   documentation
  * Requirement documentation
                                                                  *Requirements
  * Requirements traceability matrix                               traceability matrix
  * Lessons learned register                                      *Lessons learned
  * Quality reports                                                register


The process used in validating the scope is formally called Validate Scope, and
its input, tools and techniques, and output are given in Table 13-3. It may also
be described in terms of the following steps:
        1. Use the scope management plan to find out the planned
           procedure for accepting the deliverables.
        2. Study the quality reports about the verified deliverables to
           find issues and recommendations. Also, information in the
           lessons learned register can be used to improve the valida-
           tion procedure in terms of efficiency and effectiveness.
        3. Compare the requirements in the requirement documenta-
           tion with the actual work performance data, which contains
           information on how much the actual work complies with
           the planned requirements.
        4. Use the requirement management plan and requirements
           traceability matrix for information on how to validate the
           requirements.
        5. Also, compare the actual result to the scope baseline.
        6. Deviations and non-compliance found in steps 2, 3, and
           5 may generate change requests, such as requests for
           defect repairs, an output.
486   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

              7. Of course, in steps 2, 3, and 4, you were using an inspec-
                 tion technique that also creates the output item called
                 work performance information, which records the valida-
                 tion status information, such as which deliverables have
                 been accepted and which have not, and why.
              8. Validated deliverables form the output item accepted
                 deliverables and are handed over to the appropriate party,
                 such as the customer or the sponsor, after being signed
                 off on by them.
              9. Update the affected documents, such as requirement docu-
                 mentation and requirements traceability matrix; see Study
                 Checkpoint 13.2.


      Caution! Do not confuse scope validation with quality control or scope verification performed
      using quality control, which is primarily focused on checking the correctness of the deliverables
      and other quality requirements, whereas scope validation is about ensuring that the entire scope
      with the requirements have been implemented.



                                STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.2
          Q1. The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are used to validate
              scope. Why are they in Table 13-3?
          Q2. The Verify Scope process belongs to which process group?
          Q3. From Table 13-3, you know that the project documents requirement documentation,
              requirements traceability matrix, and lessons learned register are updated during
              the Validate Scope process. Using your knowledge about these documents, what
              do you think they are updated with in this process?
          Q4. Which process will be performed first: Control Quality or Validate Scope?


      As mentioned earlier, the project schedule depends on the project scope.
      So, controlling project scope and schedule are related. Once the schedule is
      developed and approved, as discussed in Chapter 5, it needs to be controlled
      throughout the lifecycle of the project.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth    487




Controlling the Schedule
Schedule control has a three-pronged goal: 1) Monitor the status of the
project to see if it's progressing according to the planned schedule, and, if it's
not, 2) take action, such as changing resources or changing schedule, and 3)
manage this change. As a project manager, you should be out in front of the
project, performing the following tasks on a regular basis:
        *   Determine the current status of the project schedule.
        *   Influence the factors that generate schedule changes.
        *   Determine whether the project schedule has changed--
            for example, if some activities are running late.
        *   Manage the changes as they occur.
You detect or measure a schedule change by comparing the project execution
results--i.e., work performance data--against the schedule baseline; both are
major input items to the Schedule Control process, as shown in Table 13-4.

Table 13-4. The Control Schedule Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                       Tools and Techniques         Output
1.Project management plan: 1. Earned-value analysis      1.Work performance
  *Schedule management      2. Critical path method        Information
   plan                     3. Variance analysis         2. Schedule forecast
  * Schedule baseline       4. Iteration burndown chart 3. Change requests
  * Scope baseline          5. What-if scenario analysis 4. Plan updates:
  *Performance              6.Project management            * Schedule management plan
   measurement baseline       information system            * Schedule baseline
2. Project documents:       7. Trend analysis               * Cost baseline
  * Project schedule        8. Resource optimization        *Performance measurement
  * Schedule data           9. Schedule compression:         baseline
  * Project calendar           * Leads and lags          5. Project document updates:
  * Resource calendars         * Performance reviews        * Project schedule
  *Lessons learned                                          * Schedule data
   register                                                 * Resource calendars
3. Work performance data                                    * Bases of estimates
4.Organizational project                                    * Assumptions log
  assets
                                                            * Risk register
                                                            * Lessons learned register
488   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Performing the Control Schedule Process
      In the following, we will explain the Control Schedule process in the form of
      its main steps.


      Getting the Needed Information
      To control the project schedule, you need to know what to expect from the
      project, which is given in the schedule baseline, and you need to know how the
      project is actually performing, which can be found in the work performance
      data. These are the core input items need. Of course, as we are controlling
      the schedule, all the needed schedule-related items along with the schedule
      itself appear in the input column of Table 13-4. You will control the schedule
      as planned in the schedule management plan, which also contains information
      about the usage of reserves and the allowed frequency of schedule updates.
      For other information about deliverables, assumptions, and constraints
      necessary for schedule control, we need the scope baseline.


      G
       enerating the Work Performance Information: Measuring
      Variance
      In this process, we generate the schedule-related work performance information
      by comparing the schedule-related actual results in the work performance
      data against the schedule baseline. This comparison produces the variance of
      start and finish dates, and hence also the durations, of activities. The work
      performance information document has this information down to the work
      package level.
      This information is produced by using one or more of the following techniques:
      Earned-value Analysis. This technique is used to calculate the schedule
      variance (SV) and schedule performance index (SPI) and is discussed in detail
      in terms of cost in an upcoming chapter on cost management. In this process,
      you use these quantities to assess the variation from the schedule baseline.
      Variance Analysis. Performing a barebones schedule variance analysis, this
      technique is crucial to schedule monitoring because it reveals the deviation
      of the actual start and finish dates from the planned start and finish dates
      of schedule activities. It also reveals the variations of actual versus planned
      durations and floats. It might suggest corrective actions to be taken to keep
      the project on track.
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      489



Performance Reviews. Performance reviews are simple reviews of project
progress that compare the performance data with schedule baseline. These
comparisons use start and end dates and percentages of completed and
remaining work to analyze the variances.
Project Management Information System. The included schedule
software can be used to generate the schedule and schedule-related items,
such as project network diagrams, bar charts, and histograms. Since it already
has the schedule-related information, it is able to provide the schedule variance
(SV) information and also forecast the effect of this variance on the schedule
model going forward.


Generating Schedule Forecast
Schedule forecasts are predictions of the future state of the project if it were
to continue on the current path as defined by the current schedule-related
work performance information. Forecasts are based on trends extracted from
current and past information. The variance analysis technique and PMIS also
include the ability to forecast the effect of a variance on the project's future.
You can also use trend-analysis techniques that compare the work performance
data with the schedule baseline over time. One such technique is called an
iteration burndown chart.
The iteration burndown chart technique works by keeping track of the
remaining project work over working days. A very simple example presented
in Figure 13-1 illustrates this technique, where decreasing remaining work is
plotted against the accumulating working days, called iteration days. The solid
line represents the planned schedule in the baseline, which shows the project
will be complete in 40 days. The bullet points in the figure represent the
performance data from the project execution. The trend line drawn through
these data points in the form of a broken line predicts that the project is on
track to be completed in 47 days, a deviation or variance of 7 days.
490   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources




      Figure 13-1. Iteration burndown graph

      After we find out that the project has gone off track by measuring the deviation
      in terms of variance, the question is how to get the project back on track; i.e.,
      in alignment with the schedule baseline.


       ringing Project Back on Track: Generating Change Requests
      B
      and Updates
      Having measured the schedule variations from the schedule baseline, there are
      only two ways to get the project back on track: 1) align the project with the
      schedule baseline without updating the baseline; and 2) update the baseline.
      Align the Project with Schedule Baseline Without Updating the
      Baseline. This can be done by using techniques already discussed while
      covering the schedule development process. The examples include resource
      optimization, schedule compression, lags and leads, and what-if scenario
      analysis.
                                                                                PMP(R) in Depth          491



Update the Schedule Baseline. A schedule baseline update is an obvious
way to align the project schedule with the schedule baseline. You can use
trend lines and future forecasts as guides to update the baseline. Before the
schedule baseline updates can be applied, change requests will need to be
created, which must go through the standard approval process. Schedule
change requests will also trigger other change requests, such as those to the
cost baseline. Work performance information produced in this process may
also create non-schedule-related change requests as well.
As a result of these changes, documents listed in the output column of
Table 13-4 may need to be updated.

Caution! Since schedule variance on the critical or near-critical path directly impacts the
project finish date, it mainly determines the project status. Therefore, the activities on these paths
should be closely watched; even a short delay on the critical path can produce a bigger effect on
the project end date than do bigger delays on non-critical paths.

Tip Remember that corrective actions are not about going back and fixing past mistakes.
Rather, they're about ensuring that future results match with the plan. You can do this by influencing
the future results, such as expediting the execution or changing the plan.



                           STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.3
    Q1. Use your knowledge about the lessons learned register to figure out why we need
        it as input to the Control Schedule process.
    Q2. Knowing the Control Schedule process, make a list of organizational process
        assets that will influence this process.


The need for project resources depends on the project schedule. So, controlling
the project schedule and controlling resources are related. Once the resource
management plan is developed and approved, as discussed in Chapter 6, the
resources need to be controlled throughout the lifecycle of the project.


Controlling Project Resources
The project's physical resources are monitored and controlled using the
Control Resources process, which, by monitoring the planned versus actually
allocated resources, makes sure that the planned resources are made available
to the project at the planned time. It tracks not only the shortage of resources,
but also their surplus, and makes sure used resources are released in a timely
manner. Table 13-5 presents the Control Resources process in terms of its
input, tools and techniques, and output.
492   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Table 13-5. The Control Resources Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                         Tools and Techniques      Output
      1.Project management plan:    1.Interpersonal and       1.Work performance
        *Resource management          team skills:              information
         plan                         * Influencing           2. Change requests
      2. Project documents:           *Negotiations           3. Plan updates:
        *Project team assignments 2. Problem solving            * Resource management
        * Project schedule          3. Data analysis:             plan
        *Physical resource            Cost-benefit analysis     * Schedule baseline
         assignments                  Performance reviews       * Cost baseline
        * Resource breakdown          Trend analysis          4. Updates to project documents:
          structure                                             *Physical resource
                                      Alternatives analysis
        *Resource requirements                                   assignments
                                    4.Project management
        * Issues log                  information systems       * Resource breakdown
        * Risk register                                           structure
        *Lessons learned register                               * Assumptions log
      3. Agreements                                             * Risk register
      4. Work performance data                                  * Issues log
      5.Organizational project                                  * Lessons learned register
        assets                                                5.Enterprise environmental
                                                                factors



      In short, the central task of controlling physical resources is to keep the
      triangle of planned, allocated, and used resources synchronized, as illustrated
      in Figure 13-2. It means that all resources planned are allotted, and all allotted
      resources are being used. To make that happen, you will be monitoring the
      planned, allocated, and in-use resources; analyzing this resource data and
      creating change requests to take action; and making sure that those change
      requests are processed. In the process of doing all this, you will obviously be
      communicating with relevant resource stakeholders.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   493




                                       Z


                                         W
                                        ZZ
                  W                                           h

Figure 13-2. Control Resources: synchronize planned, allocated, and used resources


In the following, we will discuss this process in the form of steps.
       1. Get "How to" Information. First, find out from the
          resource management plan general information on how to
          use, control, and release the physical resources.
       2. General Resource Information. From the resource
          requirements and RBS, find the reference for detailed
          resource information. This information will be useful in
          case a resource needs to be replaced or an additional
          quantity of it needs to be acquired.
       3. Get Process Facilitators. While performing this pro-
          cess, be aware of risks attached to the resources; these
          risks are recorded in the risk register. Also, continually use
          the lessons learned register to record the lessons learned
          during this process for subsequent use. Moreover, agree-
          ments made are recorded into documents when issues
          arise with the resources in use or when new resources
          are acquired during project execution. Here, we are talk-
          ing about the resources external to the organization.
       4. Get Information about Scheduled and Assigned
          Physical Resources. The project schedule reveals the
          needed resources: which resource and when and where
          it's needed. These are planned resources. Physical resource
          assignments contain information about the resources
          assigned to the project: resource type, quantity, assign-
          ment location, and whether the resource is internal
          or external to the organization. These are allocated
          resources.
494   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

           5. Get the Used Resource Information. Work performance
              data provide information about the actually used resources,
              such as the resource type and quantity used.
           6. Synchronize Planned, Allotted, and In-use Resources.
              In steps 4 and 5, you got information about planned,
              allotted, and used resources. Having this information,
              you can do the following:
               a. Conduct Performance Reviews. Compare and
                  analyze the actual resource usage from the work per-
                  formance data with planned and allotted resource use
                  to prepare work performance information, an output
                  of this process. This would expose any asynchroni-
                  zation or gaps between planned, allotted, and used
                  resources. You then proceed to synchronize the
                  planned, allotted, and used resources triangle.
               b. Predict the Resource Usage. Perform a trend
                  analysis on the work performance data collected over
                  time to predict the resource usage in the future.
                  Knowing the predicted resource usage, you would
                  want to synchronize it with the planned and allotted
                  resources, as shown next.
               c. Explore Different Solutions. You deal with short-
                  ages and surpluses of resources by adjusting cost/
                  budget, scope, schedule, or a mixture of these three
                  factors. You can perform a cost-benefit analysis, cov-
                  ered in Chapter 7 on cost management, to explore
                  the option of acquiring additional resources in case
                  of shortage. Also, you can consider the other options
                  to synchronize predicted resource usage with the
                  planned and allotted resources, such as adjusting
                  schedule or scope.
               d. Pick the Best Solution. You the pick the best
                  options by performing alternatives analysis and then
                  generate the change requests accordingly, another
                  output of the Control Resources process.
               e. Use your negotiation and influencing skills to get the
                  best solution approved.
               f.   Based on approved and implemented changes, or for
                    other reasons in this process, update the documents
                    that need to be updated; e.g., those listed in the out-
                    put column of Table 13-5.
                                                                    PMP(R) in Depth    495



While controlling resources, you can also use the problem-solving technique,
which is listed in PMBOK as a technique for the Control Resources process;
however, it is a very general approach that can be used in all disciplines of
knowledge. This approach is applied to solve a problem by taking the following
steps:
      1. Identify and define the problem clearly.
      2. Break the problem into smaller, easily solvable pieces.
      3. Investigate the problem and collect data.
      4. Analyze the data to discover several possible solutions.
      5. Choose the best or most suitable solution.
      6. Test the chosen solution to make sure that it fixes the
         problem.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.4
   Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the Control Resources
   process, answer the following questions:
   Q1. Make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.
   Q2. How might the assumptions log and risk register be updated as a result of the
       Control Resources process?


Project cost and budget depend on project resources. So, controlling project
resources and controlling cost are related. Once the project cost is determined
and the budget is approved, as discussed in Chapter 6, you need to control the
cost as the project progresses.


Controlling Cost
Controlling cost means monitoring and controlling the cost performance
and the resulting updates and changes to the project's cost, budget, and cost
baseline. Monitoring and controlling cost has two dimensions: expenditure
of project funds and the work performed as a result of those expenditures.
One major aspect of cost monitoring and controlling is to determine the
relationship between the expenditures and the accomplishments. The cost
performance lies in this relationship. The other main aspect is to control
changes to the approved cost performance baseline.
496   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources


      Caution! Like any other change, a change in cost and budget must also be processed through
      the integrated change control process and should only be implemented after its approval.


      To be more specific, monitoring and controlling the project cost includes the
      following:
             *    Influence the factors that can create changes to the
                  approved cost baseline.
             *    Monitor the following:
                  *    Work performed against the funds expended
                  *    Variance of cost performance from the approved
                       baseline
             *    Prevent unapproved changes from creeping into imple-
                  mentation, expenditures, and cost reports.
             *    Act to keep cost overruns within the planned acceptable
                  limits.
             *    Ensure the following:
                  *    Change requests are dealt with in a timely fashion
                       and managed as they occur.
                  *    Expenditures do not exceed the approved budget;
                       that is, by period and by total amount. Any
                       change to the budget must be approved before
                       implementation.
             *    Communicate with the appropriate stakeholders about
                  the cost associated with the approved changes.
      Cost is monitored and controlled by using the Control Costs process, which
      is presented in Table 13-6 in terms of input, tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   497



Table 13-6. The Control Costs Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

Input                          Tools and Techniques       Output
1. Project management plan:    1. Earned-value analysis   1. Work performance
  * Cost management plan       2. Variance analysis          information
  * Cost baseline              3. Trend analysis          2. Cost forecasts
  *Performance                 4. Reserve analysis        3. Change requests
   measurement baseline        5.To-complete              4. Plan updates:
2.Project funding                performance index          * Cost management plan
  requirements                 6.Project management         * Cost baseline
3. Work performance data         information system         *Performance measurement
4. Project documents:                                        baseline
  * Lessons learned register                              5. Updates to project
5.Organizational project                                    Documents:
  assets                                                    * Cost estimates
                                                            * Bases of estimates
                                                            * Assumptions log
                                                            * Risk register
                                                            *Lessons learned register


The following steps are the core of the Control Cost process:
        1. From the cost management plan, get information on how
           to control cost. Apply this information to the following
           steps.
        2. Compare the cost results from project execution in the
           work performance data against the cost baseline by using
           variance analysis. If deviations pass the threshold, create
           needed change requests.
        3. Perform the earned-value analysis by comparing the project
           execution results in the work performance data against the
           performance measurement baseline. This comparison may
           generate change requests.
        4. Based on these comparisons, perform the trend analysis.
           This will generate the cost forecast.
        5. The results from the preceding steps will create work per-
           formance information.
        6. Like in many other processes, use the lessons learned
           register to record--and subsequently use--the lessons
           learned to improve the process.
498   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Organizational process assets that can influence cost controlling include cost
      control-related policies, procedures, and guidelines; monitoring and reporting
      methods; tools used in controlling cost; and the lessons learned database from
      past projects.


      Caution! In general, project progress or performance is measured by comparing the project
      execution results, found in the work performance data, against the performance measurement
      baseline, which is an approved integrated plan for scope, schedule, and cost for the project.
      Important relevant components in this integrated plan are scope baseline, schedule baseline, and
      cost baseline.


      Two common input items to controlling scope, schedule, and cost are work
      performance data and performance measurement baseline. In all three
      processes, we perform performance measurement analysis, using some tools
      and techniques, to generate work performance information, a common output
      item of these three processes.
      The elaborate nature of the performance measurement analysis can be seen
      in the cost-control process. This performance measurement analysis for cost
      control, using the tools and techniques listed in Table 13-6, is presented in the
      next section.


       erformance Measurement Analysis for Cost
      P
      Control
      As mentioned earlier, cost control includes influencing the factors that can
      create changes to the cost baseline. But to detect the arising changes, you
      need to detect and understand any variances or deviations from the cost
      baseline by monitoring cost performance.
      In general, a variance is a measurable deviation in the value of a project
      variable or parameter, such as cost or schedule, from a known baseline or
      expected value. Variance analysis is a technique used to assess the magnitude
      of variation in the value of a variable (such as cost from the baseline or
      expected value), determine the cause of the variance, and decide whether
      a corrective action is required. A common technique used to assess the
      cost variance is called the earned-value technique (EVT), also called earned-
      value management (EVM). It is a commonly used method of performance
      measurement that has various forms. Most commonly, it integrates the
      scope, schedule, and cost performance by comparing the baselines with the
                                                                             PMP(R) in Depth         499



actual progress made. For example, you calculate the cumulative value of
the budgeted cost of work performed in terms of the originally allocated
budgeted amount and compare it to the following:
        1. Budgeted cost of work scheduled--that is, planned
        2. Actual cost of work performed
Don't worry if these terms sound confusing right now; I will go through an
example soon. However, as you will see, the greatest difficulty in understanding
EVT (or EVM) stems from the coupling of cost and schedule. You must realize
that the project cost and the project schedule are inherently related to each
other. Schedule refers to performing certain work over a certain time period,
whereas cost refers to the money spent to perform the work on a project (or
a project activity) over a certain period of time. The relationship between cost
and schedule can be realized by understanding that it costs money to perform
a schedule activity. Also, the "time is money" principle is at work here. For
example, a project activity can be looked upon in terms of an amount of work
that will be needed to complete it or in terms of its monetary value, which
includes the cost of the work that needs to be performed to complete the
activity.


Caution! As you delve into EVM, remember that there are only three variables or parameters
that need to be monitored and developed closely: planned value (PV), earned value (EV), and actual
cost (AC). The rest of the parameters and the earned-value analysis are largely based on these
three fundamental parameters.


The EVM involves calculating some variables where you will see the interplay
of schedule (work) and cost. I will work through a running example to help
you understand the terminology used here.
Example: Assume you are a project manager for the construction of a
16-mile road. Further assume that the work is uniformly distributed over 12
weeks. The total approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end of
first four weeks of work, $125,000 has been spent, and four miles have been
completed.
I will use this example to perform the cost performance analysis and the
schedule performance analysis in terms of cost.
500   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Cost Performance
      Cost performance refers to how efficiently you are spending money on
      the project work, measured against the expectations set in the project
      management plan--that is, the cost baselines. The total cost approved in the
      baseline is called the budget at completion (BAC).


      Note The variables discussed here, such as BAC, EV, and AC, can be calculated either for the
      whole project or for a part of the project, such as a project activity.


      Budget at Completion (BAC). This is the total budget authorized for
      performing the project work (or a project activity), also called the planned
      budget. In other words, it is the cost originally estimated in the project
      management plan. You use this variable in defining almost all the following
      variables. In our example, the value of BAC is $600,000.
      Earned Value (EV) or Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP).
      This is the value of the actually performed work expressed in terms of the
      approved budget for a project or a project activity for a given time period. In
      this variable, you see the relationship of schedule (work) and cost in action.
      BAC represents the total value of the project. But when you perform only
      some work on the project, you have earned some of that total value, and the
      earned value is proportional to the fraction of the total work performed, as
      shown by the formula here:
      EV = BAC x (work completed / total work required)
      So, in our example, EV can be calculated as:
      EV = $600,000 (4 miles/16 miles) = $150,000
      This is the earned value of the work performed so far, which may or may not
      be equal to the actual money that you spent to perform this work.
      Actual Cost (AC) or Actual Cost of Work Performed (ACWP). This
      is the total cost actually incurred performing the work for a project until a
      specific point on the timescale. In our running example, $125,000 has already
      been used up to this point. So, the actual cost at this point in time is $125,000.
      This cost is to be compared with the earned value to calculate the cost variance
      and cost performance.
      Cost Variance (CV). This is a measure of cost performance in terms of
      deviation of reality from the plan; it is obtained by subtracting the actual cost
      (AC) from the earned value (EV), as shown in the formula here:
      CV = EV - AC
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth     501



So, in our example, CV can be calculated as shown here:
CV = $150,000 - $125,000 = $25,000
The expected value of CV is zero because we expect the earned value
to be equal to the actual cost. The positive result indicates better cost
performance than expected, whereas a negative result would indicate worse
cost performance than expected. Deviation is one way of comparison, and
ratio is another.
Cost Performance Index (CPI). Earned value represents the portion of
the work completed, and actual cost represents the money spent. So, the
CPI indicates whether you are getting a fair value for your money. This is a
measure of the cost efficiency of a project calculated by dividing earned value
(EV) by actual cost (AC), as shown in the formula here:

                                          EV
                                  CPI =
                                          AC

So, the CPI for our example can be calculated as:
CPI = $150,000 / $125,000 = 1.2
This means you are getting $1.20 worth of performance for every dollar
spent. A value of CPI greater than one indicates good performance, whereas
a value less than one indicates bad performance. The expected value of CPI
is one.
Back in our example, both the CV and the CPI indicate that you are getting more
value for each dollar spent. Hold back a little before opening the champagne,
though. If you read the text of our example again, note that four out of 12
weeks have already passed, and only four out of 16 miles of road have been
built. That means that only one-fourth of the work has been accomplished in
one-third of the total scheduled time. This means we are lagging behind in our
schedule. Although cost performance is good, schedule performance needs to
be investigated, too. Remember: Time is money!


Schedule Performance in Terms of Cost
Schedule performance refers to how efficiently you are executing your project
schedule as measured against the expectations set in the project management
plan. It can be measured by comparing the earned value to the planned value,
just like cost performance is measured by comparing the earned value to the
actual cost. Planned value refers to the value that we planned to create in the
time spent so far.
502   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Planned Value (PV) or Budgeted Cost for the Work Scheduled
      (BCWS). This is the authorized cost for the scheduled work on the project
      or a project activity up to a given point on the timescale. The planned value is
      also called the budgeted cost for the work scheduled (BCWS). PV is basically how
      much you were authorized to spend in the fraction of schedule time spent so
      far, as shown in the formula here:
      PV = BAC x (time passed / total schedule time)
      Therefore, the planned value for the project in our example at the end of the
      first four weeks is calculated as shown here:
      PV = $600,000 x (4 weeks / 12 weeks) = $200,000
      So, PV represents the planned schedule in terms of cost. You can calculate the
      schedule performance by comparing the planned schedule to the performed
      schedule in terms of cost.


      Caution! Note that the total planned value (PV) of the project is the same as the budget at
      completion (BAC)


      Schedule Variance (SV). This is the deviation of the performed schedule
      from the planned schedule in terms of cost. No confusion is allowed here,
      because you already know that the schedule can be translated to cost. SV is
      calculated as the difference between EV and PV, as shown in the formula here:
      SV = EV - PV
      So, the SV in our example can be calculated as:
      SV = $150,000 - $200, 000 = -$50,000
      The negative value means we are behind schedule. Deviation represented
      by schedule variance is one way of comparison, and ratio represented by
      schedule performance index is another.
      Schedule Performance Index (SPI). Earned value represents the portion
      of work completed in terms of cost, and planned value represents how much
      work was planned to be done by this point in time in terms of cost. So, the SPI
      indicates how the performed work compared to the planned work. This is a
      measure of the schedule efficiency of a project calculated by dividing earned
      value (EV) by planned value (PV), as shown in the formula here:

                                                      EV
                                              SPI =
                                                      PV
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth       503



So, the SPI for our example can be calculated as shown here:
SPI = $150,000 / $200,000 = 0.75
This indicates that the project is progressing at 75 percent of the planned
pace--not good.
You should note that all these performance variables except the BAC are
calculated at a given point in time. As shown in Figure 13-3, you can maintain a
graphic that presents the values of these variables against points in time as the
project progresses. Note that the value of the BAC does not change with time
because it is the cost at completion time. Further note that, given the BAC, the
PV can be calculated at any point in time, even before the project execution
starts. EV and EC are accumulated as the project execution progresses.




Figure 13-3. The behavior of some performance variables as the project progresses in time.
The variable BAC is independent of time.

By using the variables discussed so far, you can monitor the project performance
as time progresses. Not only that, but you can also make predictions about
future performance based on past performance.
504   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Forecasting Techniques
      Forecasting refers to predicting some information about the project in the
      future based on the performance in the past. The forecast is regularly updated
      as the project progresses and more data of the past performance becomes
      available.
      Estimate to Complete (ETC) at Budgeted Rate. This is a prediction
      about the expected cost to complete the remaining work for the project
      or for a project activity. The future work is assumed to be completed at the
      budgeted rate. Therefore, the value of the ETC is obtained by subtracting
      the earned value (EV) from the budget at completion (BAC), as shown in the
      formula here:
      ETC = BAC - EV
      So, in our example, the value of ETC can be calculated as:
      ETC = $600,000 - $150,000 = $450,000
      This is true if the current variances are seen as atypical and the future
      performance is expected to be as planned. If the current trend, however,
      continues, then we need to take CPI into account, as shown next.
      Estimate to Complete (ETC) at the Present CPI. This is the prediction
      about the expected cost to complete the remaining work at the present
      CPI. Therefore, in that case, the ETC is given by:

                                                  BAC - EV
                                          ETC =
                                                    CPI

      The next question that can be asked about the future is how much it will cost
      to complete the whole project.

                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.5
         In our running example, calculate the ETC at the present CPI.


      Estimate at Completion (EAC) at the Budgeted Rate. This is the
      estimate made at the current point in time for how much it will cost to
      complete the whole project or a project activity from beginning to end. It
      is assumed that the future work will be performed at the budgeted rate.
      Therefore, the value of the EAC is obtained by adding the value of ETC at the
      budgeted rate to AC, as shown in the formula here:
      EAC = AC+ ETC (budgeted rate)
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth   505



Accordingly, the value of EAC for our example can be calculated as:
EAC = $125,000 + $450,000 = $575,000
Another useful prediction to be made is how much performance you need in
the future to complete the remaining work within budget.

                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.6
   Prove the validity of the following equation:
   EAC = AC + BAC - EV


The EAC calculated thus far is correct under the assumption that in the future
the cost will be incurred as it was budgeted, or performance will be made as
planned. If, however, the current variance trend is assumed to continue, then
EAC is calculated as discussed next.
Estimate at Completion (EAC) at the Present CPI. This is the estimate
made at the current point in time for how much it will cost to complete
the whole project or a project activity from beginning to end. It is assumed
that the future work will be performed at the current CPI. Therefore, EAC is
calculated as follows:
                          EAC = AC + ETC (at current CPI)

                                                   BAC - EV
                                 EAC = AC +
                                                     CPI


                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.7
   In our running example, calculate EAC at the present CPI.


As said earlier, performance is an integrated measure of progress in the areas
of scope, schedule, and cost. Just measuring one of these parameters may be
misleading. For example, in our running example, we are performing better in
cost but poorly in schedule. This is why sometimes EAC is measured by taking
into account both CPI and SPI, as shown here:
                                               BAC - EV
                                 EAC = AC +
                                               CPI  SPI
506   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.8
         In our running example, calculate EAC at the present CPI.


      To Complete Performance Index (TCPI). This is the variable to predict
      the future performance needed to finish the work according to a specified
      goal; for example, either within the planned budget (BAC) or at the completion
      cost currently predicted (EAC). If the goal is to complete it within BAC, TCPI
      is calculated as the ratio of the remaining work to the remaining budget, as
      shown in the formula here:
                               Remaining work BAC - BCWP BAC - EV
                      TCPI =                  =          =
                               Remaining funds BAC - ACWP BAC - AC

      Therefore, the value of TCPI in our example can be calculated as:
      TCPI = ($600,000 - $150,000) / ($600,000 - $125,000) = 450,000 / 475,000
      = 0.95 = 95%.
      If it is realized that BAC is not attainable, then it is replaced with EAC.Accordingly,
      TCPI will be given by:
                                        Remaining work BAC - EV
                               TCPI =                  =
                                        Remaining funds EAC - AC

      Table 13-7 summarizes most of these performance variables.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth      507



Table 13-7. Performance Variables Used in the Earned Value Analysis Technique

Variable            Abbreviation    Description                       Formula
Budget at           BAC             Total planned cost                None
completion
Earned value or     EV or BCWP      Fraction of the completed work EV = BAC x (Work
budgeted cost of                    in terms of the planned budget completed / Total
work performed                      at a given point in time       work required)
Actual cost         AC or ACWP The money spent on the work            The sum of all the
                               until a given point in time            costs until a given
                                                                      point in time
Cost variance       CV              The difference between what       CV = EV - AC
                                    you planned to spend and what
                                    is actually spent until a given
                                    point in time
Cost performance    CPI             The work performed per actual CPI = EV / AC
index                               cost
Planned value or    PV or BCWS      The fraction of work planned to PV = BAC x (Time
budgeted cost of                    be completed at a given point   passed / Total
work scheduled                      in time                         schedule time)
Schedule variance   SV              The difference between the        SV = EV - PV
                                    work actually completed
                                    and the work planned to be
                                    completed at a given point in
                                    time
Schedule            SPI             The actual work performed         SPI = EV / PV
performance index                   per planned work performed in
                                    terms of cost
Estimate to         ETC             Estimate of what will be spent    ETC = BAC - EV
complete                            on the remaining project (or a
                                    project activity) based on the
                                    performance so far and the
                                    planned cost
Estimate at         EAC             Estimate of what will be spent    EAC = ETC + AC
completion                          on the whole project (or a
                                    project activity) based on the
                                    performance so far and the
                                    planned cost
To complete         TCPI            Calculates the efficiency:        (BAC - EV) /
performance index                   remaining work per remaining      (BAC - AC)
                                    funds
508   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources


      Caution! Depending on what information is known, these variables can be expressed in
      different equations, as shown by Study Checkpoint 13.6. But sticking to the definitions of these
      variables, it can be realized that all these different forms of equations for a variable are all equivalent.


      The analysis presented here is a good demonstration of how schedule and cost
      are coupled together, and both obviously depend upon scope. The success of
      a project depends on completing the project according to the schedule with
      full planned scope and within the planned cost. These three parameters--
      scope, schedule, and cost--are intrinsically related to one another.


      S cope, Schedule, and Cost: The Triple
       Constraint
      The nutshell of running a project is delivering the scope according to some
      schedule, and it's going to cost someone. Completing a project successfully
      includes delivering the planned scope according to the planned schedule
      and within the planned budget. The fundamental parameters for budget and
      schedule are cost and time, respectively. Budget is the cost with a timeline, and
      schedule is determined from the time estimates for completing the schedule
      activities defining the scope. So scope, schedule, and cost make the heart of
      any project. These three project parameters also make up a triple constraint
      that is a framework for evaluating competing demands. A triple constraint
      can be depicted as a triangle, with each side representing one of these three
      parameters. Figure 13-4 shows the triple constraint for scope, schedule, and
      cost. This means if one of these parameters changes, at least one of the other
      two must change as well.




      Figure 13-4. Triple constraint: scope, schedule, and cost. You cannot change the length of
      one side of the triangle without changing the length of at least one of the other two sides.
                                                                             PMP(R) in Depth          509




Caution! The present version of PMBOK does not formally discuss the triple constraint of
scope, cost, and schedule. However, the formal name aside, it remains a fact that scope, schedule,
and cost are tightly coupled as reflected by the integrated performance measurement baseline and
the earned-value analysis. Therefore, the discussion in this section is still valuable.


In Figure 13-4, you cannot change the length of one side of the triangle without
changing the length of at least one of the other two sides. For example, assume
you are being interviewed by a functional manager for a project manager
position. Don't be surprised if you are asked a question based on the following
situation:
        1. The project is way behind schedule.
        2. No extra resources, such as money or project team
           members to perform activities, are available.
        3. You have to implement all the planned features.
The question is, what will you do to meet the deadline that is approaching
within a week? From a project management viewpoint, this situation is a good
example of the triple constraint. The project is behind schedule, which means
there is a schedule change (or a change in time available to finish the remaining
project). Recall about project scheduling from Chapter 6 that your options
in this situation are pretty limited, such as applying leads and lags, floats, and
smoothing techniques. In most of these situations, at least one of the other
two parameters must change. If you want to meet the deadline, either you
should be allotted more funds to hire more resources, or the scope of the
project should be changed, which means some of the features would be left
out. Depending upon the knowledge level of the functional manager about
project management, this answer might not get you the job, but as a project
manager, you must stand your ground. Project management is not magic; it
involves dealing with cold, hard reality in a realistic way, thereby establishing
clear and achievable objectives.


Note While considering the cost-schedule-scope constraint, you should also remember techniques
like resource leveling and smoothing, applying leads and lags, and schedule compression techniques,
such as crashing and fast tracking, discussed in Chapter 5. Also remember that those techniques do
not guarantee that no additional cost (or resources) will be required.
510   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      You can see the relationship of the triple constraint with quality by recalling
      that a high-quality project delivers the required product on time and within
      the planned scope and budget. Therefore, while balancing between these
      three constraints, the quality (and as a result, customer satisfaction) might be
      affected. The triple constraint is also a good example of how one change can
      give rise to other changes across the project. This highlights the importance
      of managing and controlling changes.
      Changes to scope, schedule, and cost are controlled using the Control Scope,
      Control Schedule, and Control Cost processes, respectively. These three
      processes are at the center of the project action. As Figure 13-5 illustrates, they
      take work performance data from the Project Execution process, the Direct
      and Manage Project Work process, and the Generate Work Performance
      Information process that are used by the Monitor and Control Project Work
      process to generate the work performance reports.

                                              
                                              D
                                             WZtZ

                    tZZ                                  tZZ
                                                      tZ   
                                                      Z
                                                      
                      ZZ
                                            ZZ^Z                      ZZZ
                     ^


                                              tZ
                                             Z
                                             ZZ



                                             DZZ
                                              ZZ
                                             WZZ


                                             tZ
                                             Z
                                             Z

      Figure 13-5. The processes to control scope, schedule, and cost in a big picture
                                                                    PMP(R) in Depth    511




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.9
   Name three processes that convert the work performance data into work performance
   information.


The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      1. To avoid scope creep and to ensure that the scope is
         implemented, you need to control the scope. Also, the
         scope of the project outcome needs to be validated
         before the acceptance of the verified product.
      2. The schedule needs to be controlled to keep the project
         on track; i.e., in alignment with the schedule baseline. The
         major output items of the schedule control process are
         work performance information, schedule forecasts, and
         change requests resulting from comparing the sched-
         ule-related work performance data with the schedule
         baseline.
      3. Cost control involves converting the cost-related work
         performance data into work performance information by
         comparing the data with the integrated baseline: scope
         baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline.

Summary
The nutshell of running a project is delivering the scope according to some
schedule, and it's going to cost someone. These three parameters--scope,
schedule, and cost--are intrinsically related to one another; a change in one is
likely to cause changes in one or both of the others. Changes in any of them
may cause changes in resources. The scope is controlled by the Control Scope
process, and the scope of verified deliverables is validated by using the Validate
Scope process. You need to control the schedule to keep it aligned with
the schedule baseline, which includes monitoring the status of the project
progress and controlling changes to the schedule baseline.
Reflecting this triangular relationship, the project cost performance is
measured by comparing the project execution results against the performance
measurement baseline, which is an approved integrated plan for scope,
schedule, and cost for the project. In other words, the performance baseline
includes scope baseline, cost baseline, and schedule baseline. This is done in the
Control Cost process. Finally, use the Control Resources process to optimize
the results by keeping the planned, allotted, and used physical resources in
synch with each other.
512   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

      Road Ahead. To run controlling or any processes successfully, it's crucial to
      keep stakeholders engaged in the project, which takes effective communication.
      Stakeholder engagement and communication need to be monitored. The next
      chapter is all about that.


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend

        *Monitoring and controlling includes monitoring and controlling project performance
         and managing the resulting changes.
        *The three project parameters--cost, schedule, and scope--form a triple constraint, which
         means if one of these three parameters changes, at least one of the other two must change.
        *Performance measurement baselines and work performance data are the common
         input to controlling the scope, schedule, and cost, and work performance information
         and change requests are the common output.
        *Project cost performance is measured by comparing the project results from work
         performance data against the performance measurement baseline: scope baseline,
         schedule baseline, and cost baseline.

      Look Out

        *All change requests generated by controlling scope or any other process must be
         processed through the integrated change control process for approval, and only
         approved changes should be implemented by using the Direct and Manage Project
         Work process.
        *The Validate Scope process is used on the project deliverables already verified by the
         quality control process; the goal is to get deliverables accepted by the appropriate
         party, such as a customer or a sponsor.
        *The approved version of the project schedule is called the project schedule baseline,
         against which project progress is tracked and measured by comparing the actual
         progress with the baseline.
        *The Control Resources process is all about keeping the planned, allotted, and used
         physical resources in synch with each other.
        *The Control Resources process is about physical resources only.
        *Planned value (PV), earned value (EV), and actual cost (AC) are the three key
         parameters that need to be monitored closely. The rest of the earned-value analysis is
         based on these three fundamental parameters.
        *Cost variance (CV) is calculated by subtracting the actual cost (AC) from the earned
         value (EV), and not from the planned value (PV).
        *Schedule variance (SV) and schedule performance index (SPI) are calculated in terms of
         cost: EV and PV.
        *It is possible for CV and SV to run in opposite directions--for example, CV has a
         positive value when SV has a negative value.
        *The total planned value (PV) of the project is the same as the budget at completion (BAC).
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth     513




Memorize

 *Control accounts are the points in the WBS at which scope, schedule, and cost are
  integrated for the purpose of monitoring and controlling the performance.
 *The Control Schedule process, by comparing the schedule-related work performance
  data with the schedule baseline, produces the work performance information
  containing the schedule variance--i.e., deviation from schedule baseline--and schedule
  forecasts are based on this and past performance.
 * In every stage or funding period:
   Cost baseline = anticipated expenditure + anticipated liabilities
   Funding requirements = cost baseline + management reserves
 *For cost performance analysis:
   EV = BAC x (Work completed / Total work required)
   CV = EV - AC
   CPI = EV / AC
 * For schedule performance analysis:
   PV = BAC x (Time passed / Total schedule time)
   SV = EV - PV
   SPI = EV / PV
   EAC at the budgeted rate = AC + BAC - EV
                                BAC - EV
   EAC atcurrentCPI = AC +
                                  CPI
                                                BAC - EV
   EAC atcurrentCPI and current SPI = AC +
                                                CPI  SPI
            BAC - EV
   TCPI =
            BAC - AC




Review Questions
      1. Which of the following is the correct order of running
         processes (choose all that apply)?
           A. Develop Project Charter, Collect Requirements, and
              Create WBS
           B. Collect Requirements, Control Quality, and Validate
              Scope
           C. Identify Stakeholders, Define Scope, and Collect
              Requirements
           D. Collect Requirements,Validate Scope, Control Quality
514   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

           2. You have selected a node in the hierarchy of the WBS
              that you will use to compare schedule, cost, and scope
              with the earned value in order to measure the project
              performance. This node or component in the WBS is
              called:
               A. Code of accounts
               B. Control account
               C. Management account
               D. Performance node
           3. You are the project manager for a software product, and
              your project is in the execution stage. You have learned
              that Maya, a developer, has started adding some new fea-
              tures to the deliverable she is working on. What is the
              best action for you to take?
               A. Tell Maya to delete the code corresponding to these
                  features because this is scope creep, and scope creep
                  is not allowed.
               B. Learn from Maya what those features are and how
                  much time they will take and then make necessary
                  updates to the WBS, the WBS dictionary, and the
                  schedule. Also tell Maya that in the future she should
                  get approval from you before adding any new features.
               C. Determine where the request for the new features
                  came from and process the change request through
                  the integrated change request process.
           4. Which of the following is a true statement about the
              critical path?
               A. Each activity on the critical path has zero float time.
               B. It controls the project finish date.
               C. It controls the project start date.
               D. It is the shortest sequence in the network diagram.
                                                         PMP(R) in Depth   515



5. You have developed the schedule for your project, and
   you've called the kickoff meeting. A team member who is
   responsible for an activity comes to you and tells you that
   the activity cannot be performed within the allocated
   time because some pieces were left out during activity
   definition.The revised estimate will add two more days to
   the activity duration, but the activity is not on the critical
   path. Which of the following actions will you take?
    A. Go to the team member's functional manager and
       find out whether the team member's estimate is
       correct.
    B. Accept the new estimate but do not change the
       schedule.
    C. Accept the new estimate and update the schedule
       accordingly.
    D. Put the new estimate through the integrated change
       control process.
6. Your project sponsor has asked you to ensure that allotted
   resources are used, unused resources are immediately
   released, and no unplanned resources should be allotted.
   To ensure that, which process would you run?
    A. Plan Resource Management
    B. Control Resources
    C. Manage Resources
    D. Acquire Resources
7. Assume that you are the project manager for the con-
   struction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
   work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
   approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
   of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
   and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
   earned value of the project at the end of the first three
   weeks?
    A. $160,000
    B. $200,000
    C. $150,000
    D. $600,000
516   Chapter 13 | Monitoring and Controlling the Scope, Schedule,
                   and Resources

           8. Assume that you are the project manager for the con-
              struction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
              work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
              approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
              of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
              and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
              planned value of the project at this point in time?
               A. $160,000
               B. $200,000
               C. $150,000
               D. $600,000
           9. Assume that you are the project manager for the con-
              struction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
              work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
              approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
              of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
              and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
              cost variance?
               A. $40,000
               B. $50,000
               C. -$40,000
               D. $120,000
          10. Assume that you are the project manager for the con-
              struction of a 15-mile road. Further assume that the
              work is uniformly distributed over 12 weeks. The total
              approved budget for this project is $600,000. At the end
              of first three weeks of work, $160,000 has been spent,
              and five miles of road have been completed. What is the
              schedule variance?
               A. $40,000
               B. $50,000
               C. Three weeks
               D. Twelve weeks
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   517



11. There is a CPI value of 1.25 and an SPI value of 1.33 for a
    project. This means which of the following?
     A. The project is making slower progress and costing
        more than planned.
     B. The project is making faster progress and costing less
        than planned.
     C. The project is making slower progress and costing
        less than planned.
     D. The project is making faster progress and costing
        more than planned.
12. Project cost performance is measured by comparing the
    project results from work performance data against the
    integrated performance measurement baseline. Which of
    the following are the three elements of this integrated
    performance measurement baseline?
     A. Scope baseline, time baseline, and cost baseline
     B. Scope baseline, schedule baseline, and quality baseline
     C. Scope baseline, time baseline, and quality baseline
     D. Schedule baseline, scope baseline, and cost baseline
13. You are managing a project in biotechnology code named
    Mitochondria Eve.You need work performance measure-
    ments or information to write the performance reports.
    Which process(es) will you run?
     A. Monitor and Control Project Work
     B. Control Scope, Control Schedule, and Control Cost
     C. Develop Project Work Performance Report
     D. Direct and Manage Project Work
                                                                    CHAPTER


                                                                         14

Monitoring
Stakeholder
Engagement and
Communication
PMP Exam Objectives        What It Really Means
4.1 Measure project        Measure project performance using appropriate tools and
    performance            techniques in order to identify and quantify any variances and
                           corrective actions.
                           Here, it means that you know the Monitor Stakeholder
                           Engagement and Monitor Communication processes inside out,
                           and their role in measuring project performance, comparing
                           this performance with planned desired goals and requesting
                           changes to keep and/or bring the project on track.

                                                                                (continued)




(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_14
520   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication


      PMP Exam Objectives         What It Really Means
      4.5 Review the issues log   Review the issues log, update it if necessary, and determine
                                  corrective action by using appropriate tools and techniques to
                                  minimize the impact on the project.
                                  In this chapter, it refers to the Stakeholder Engagement and
                                  Monitor Communication processes.
      4.6 Capture, analyze, and  Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned, using lessons-
          manage lessons learned learned management techniques in order to enable continuous
                                 improvement.
                                  Practically, it can and should be done in every monitoring
                                  and controlling process, but in this chapter, it refers to the
                                  Stakeholder Engagement and Monitor Communication
                                  processes, as well as the Control Resources process.



      Without project stakeholders, there is literally no project. Your project
      is doomed to fail without successful project stakeholder management.
      Before asking what stakeholder management is, let's recall who the project
      stakeholders are. As discussed in Chapter 2, stakeholders will have different
      levels of enthusiasm, anxiety, fear, and so on. Accordingly, they will have
      differing needs and expectations. One of the key project management areas
      on which project success depends is stakeholder satisfaction, achieved by
      meeting their needs and expectations as aligned with project objectives. A
      key to keeping stakeholders' expectations aligned with project objectives
      and meeting those expectations is to keep stakeholders engaged in the
      project. Project managers have little, if any, control over the stakeholders. So,
      stakeholder management is all about stakeholders' engagement.
      As you learned in Chapter 8, stakeholder management and communica-
      tion management are two inherently closely tied project knowledge areas.
      Without project stakeholders, there is literally no project. Your project is
      doomed to fail without successful project stakeholder management, which
      takes successful communication management. You also learned that stake-
      holder management is all about stakeholder engagement in the project.
      Like in any other project knowledge area, communication and stakeholder
      engagement need to be monitored and controlled. Reflecting the close rela-
      tionship between stakeholder management and communication management,
      monitoring and controlling communication and stakeholder engagement are
      also closely related.
      So, the question addressed in this chapter is: How do you monitor stakeholder
      engagement and communication? In search of an answer, we will explore three
      avenues: monitoring stakeholder engagement, monitoring communication, and
      the role of these two processes in the big picture of stakeholder engagement
      and communication.
                                                                   PMP(R) in Depth   521




Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and
Communication: Big Picture
As mentioned earlier, stakeholder management is all about stakeholder
engagement in the project. The close relationship between stakeholder
management and communication management is reflected by the fact that
the communications management plan is one of the main items used in
preparing the stakeholder engagement plan, which is one of the main items
used in preparing the communications management plan. Similarly, the close
relationship between the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement and Monitor
Communication processes is reflected by the fact that the communications
management plan, stakeholder engagement plan, and resource management
plan are the main input items of both of these processes. A high-level look
at these processes is presented in Table 14-1.

Table 14-1. Processes for Monitoring and Controlling Communication Mapped to the
Knowledge Area and Outputs

Process               Knowledge Area         Major Output          Performed
Monitor Stakeholder   Project Stakeholder    Work performance      Throughout the
Engagement            Management             information           project
Monitor               Project Communication * Work performance     Throughout the
Communication         Management              information          project
                                             * Change requests


As stakeholder engagement in the project needs to continue throughout the
project's lifetime, it needs to be monitored.
522   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication


      Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement
      The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process oversees stakeholder engage-
      ment; i.e., how it's going. To keep it on track, the information is distributed
      among the stakeholders and the engagement strategies and plans are modi-
      fied. Like a typical monitoring and controlling process, its main input is work
      performance data, and the main output is the work performance information.
      Figure 14-1 shows the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process in the big
      picture of stakeholder management processes.



           WZDW
                                          ^Z
                                          
                  /                                                W^Z
                 ^Z                                                 
                                        ^Z


                          ^Z                              ^Z
                                                          


                  D                                                   DZZ
                 ^Z                                                  ^Z
                                              /Z                     


      Figure 14-1. The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process in the big picture of stakeholder
      management processes


      Table 14-2 presents the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process in terms of
      its input, tools and techniques, and output.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth      523



Table 14-2. The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and
Output

Input                         Tools and Techniques           Output
1.Project management plan:    1.Data analysis:               1.Work performance
  *Communications                *Stakeholder analysis         information
   management plan               *Root-cause analysis        2.Change requests
  *Stakeholder engagement        *Alternative analysis       3.Project management
   plan                                                        updates:
                              2.Decision making:
  *Resource management                                         *Communications
                                 *Multicriteria decision
   plan                                                         management plan
                                  analysis
2.Project documents:                                           *Resource
                                 *Voting
  *Stakeholder register                                         management plan
                              3.Data reorientation:
  *Project communications                                      *Stakeholder
                                 *Stakeholder engagement        engagement plan
  *Issues log                     assessment matrix
                                                             4.Project document
  *Risk register              4.Communication skills:          updates:
  *Lessons learned register      *Feedback                     *Stakeholder register
3.Work performance data          *Presentation                 *Risk register
4.Enterprise environmental    5.Interpersonal and team         *Issues log
  factors                       skills:
                                                               *Lessons learned
5.Organizational project         *Leadership                    register
  assets
                                 *Networking
                                 *Active listening
                                 *Cultural and political
                                  awareness
                              6.Meetings


The core of performing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process is
described in the following section.


Performing the Monitor Stakeholder Management
Process
The core of performing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process using
items from the Input and Tools and Techniques columns of Table 14-2 is
described in the following steps.
Get the Project Execution Data and Results. The input item work
performance data from project execution includes the status of stakeholder
engagement in the project, such as who is supporting or opposing the project
and at what level. The other input item, project communication, contains the
project work performance report and any information that will be or has
been distributed to stakeholders.
524   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication


      Communicate. Distribute the information in project communications, which
      need to be distributed according to the communication management plan using
      communication methods like presentation. Make sure the information has been
      received and understood by using communication methods like feedback.
      Analyze Work Performance Data. Analyze the stakeholder engagement
      data in the work performance data document using data-analysis techniques,
      such as stakeholder analysis, root-cause analysis, and alternative analysis. The
      stakeholder analysis, already described in Chapter 3, is performed to determine
      the support or opposition position of stakeholders regarding the project.
      The root-cause analysis, discussed in Chapter 7, is performed to determine the
      fundamental reason for not achieving the engagement as planned. Once the
      root causes are discovered, the alternative analysis, discussed already in mul-
      tiple chapters, is performed to explore and evaluate the various options for
      responding to not achieving the engagement as planned.
      Make Decision. After conducting the alternative analysis, evaluate the vari-
      ous options for responding to not achieving the engagement as planned; make
      a decision on which option to choose by using multicriteria decision analysis
      or voting, both discussed in Chapter 12.
      Generating the Output. The data analysis generates the output item work
      performance information, which contains the current stakeholder engagement
      status, such as project support level compared to desired level as defined
      in the stakeholder engagement assessment matrix. Making a decision on which
      response option to choose generates change requests, whose implementation
      causes plan and project document updates, as listed in the output columns of
      Table 14-2.
      You will also make use of interpersonal and team skills when monitoring stake-
      holder engagement. For example, you will use leadership skills, covered in
      Chapter 2, to share your project vision with the stakeholders and motivate
      them to support the project objectives and outcome; networking, to find
      out the project support level among stakeholders; active listening, covered
      in Chapters 2 and 8, to minimize misunderstanding so as to build consen-
      sus; cultural awareness, covered in Chapter 8, to consider cultural sensitivity
      and differences in communication and engagement requirements; and political
      awareness, covered in Chapter 8, to better understand organizational strate-
      gies and power structure, and to communicate accordingly in order to maxi-
      mize project support.
      The enterprise environmental factors and organizational project assets
      that influence this process are pretty much the same as for the Managing
      Stakeholder Engagement process. Other items from input not mentioned
      have their usual roles to play, as already discussed in this chapter.
                                                                            PMP(R) in Depth          525




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 14.1

    Knowing the monitor stakeholder engagement process, answer the following:
    Q1. How will the stakeholder register and risk register be updated as a result of this
        process?
    Q2. How will the stakeholder engagement plan, communications management plan,
        and resource management plan be updated as a result of this process?


As you have seen, the communications management plan is used in monitoring
stakeholder engagement. Reflecting the two-way connection between moni-
toring stakeholder engagement and monitoring communication, the stake-
holder engagement plan is used in monitoring communication.


Monitor Communication
The Monitor Communication process makes sure that the information needs
of the project stakeholders are met throughout the entire project lifecycle
as planned in the communications management plan and stakeholder engage-
ment plan. It can trigger reruns of the Plan Communications Management and
Manage Communications processes to improve the results of communication.


Tip Monitor Communication is a high-level process in the sense that it oversees the Plan
Communications Management and Manage Communication processes to fine-tune them in order
to optimize the effective information flow among all participants in project communication, at any
and all times.


While you are directing and managing the project work, the work results
and the progress toward creating the project results are produced. Just pro-
ducing the results is no guarantee of success. Success is determined by the
performance with which the results are being produced. You need to know
the performance to keep the project on the right track. Furthermore, the
stakeholders need to know with what rate, efficiency, and work quality the
resources are being used to deliver the project output. For this, you need to
collect the project performance data and evaluate different aspects of the
project as to whether they are meeting expectations. In this process, we are
interested in the communication aspect of the project--whether communica-
tion is gaining the targeted stakeholder support for the project.
526   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication



      Caution! All performance indicators are not equal. You must evaluate the impact and
      implications of each deviation. For example, performance deviations or other issues with key
      performance indicators, such as actual versus planned schedule, cost, and quality, may trigger an
      immediate alarm while others may not. In case of alarm, the right message must be delivered to
      the right stakeholders at the right time, which can lead to a revision by rerunning the appropriate
      process or processes.


      The Monitor Communication process is presented in Table 14-3 in terms of
      its inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs.

      Table 14-3. The Monitor Communication Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                           Tools and Techniques             Output
      1.Project management plan:      1.Data reorientation:       1.Work performance
         *Communications                  *Stakeholder engagement   information
          management plan                  assessment matrix      2.Change requests
         *Stakeholder engagement 2.Interpersonal and team              3.Project management
          plan                     skills:                               updates:
         *Resource management             *Observation/                    *Communications
          plan                             conversation                     management plan
      2.Project documents:       3.Information management                  *Stakeholder engagement
         *Project communications   systems                                  plan
         *Issues log             4.Expert judgment                     4.Project document updates:
         *Lessons learned register 5.Meetings                              * Stakeholder register
      3.Work performance data                                              * Lessons learned register
      4.Enterprise environmental                                           * Issues log
        factors
      5.Organizational project
        assets



      Performing the Monitor Communication Process
      The purpose of Monitor Communication is two-fold: 1) ensure that the right
      information is being distributed to the right stakeholders at the right time
      using the right methods; and 2) check this by evaluating the project--e.g.,
      gaining the expected project support from stakeholders; if not, generate
      change requests in communication plan and management. Figure 14-2 shows
      the Monitor Communication process in the big picture of communication
      management processes.
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   527




                                        /
              ^Z                       ^Z
                                                                   ^Z
                                                                   
                      ZZ                      ^Z
                                              
                     ^Z                                hZ
                                        D              
   W                                                                    DZZ
                                       ^Z
  ZZ                                                                   ZZ
                     ZZ                
                     

                                              WZ
                                              ZZ                    WZ
            ZZ                                                      ZZ
            
                                      D
                                     ZZ


Figure 14-2. The Monitor Communication process in the big picture of stakeholder
communication management processes

With this in mind, the core of performing the Monitor Communication pro-
cess is explained in the following steps using the input and tools and tech-
niques from Table 14-3.
Get Communication-related General and "How-to" Information.
From the resource management plan, fetch current information about project
organization in terms of roles and responsibilities; project organization charts
will be useful. From the communications management plan, learn about the cur-
rent plan for generating/collecting, storing, and distributing information. You
can find out the communication strategies from the stakeholder engagement
plan. Also, the communications management plan would provide guidance on
running the Monitor Communication process.
Get the Project Execution Data and Results on Communication.
The input item work performance data from project execution includes infor-
mation about the type and quantity of information that was distributed. Also,
you can find out from project communications which communication items or
artifacts were distributed.
This data provide a good picture of what was distributed, to whom, and using
which technology and methods. The next step is to analyze and evaluate the
impact of this communication on stakeholders and the project.
528   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication


      Analyze Communication and Its Impact. To monitor and analyze com-
      munication and its impact, do the following:
           1. Review record of stakeholders' engagement issues from
              issues log, including open and resolved issues.
           2. Review the lessons learned data from the lessons learned
              register. It may suggest communication-related changes.
           3. Evaluate the stakeholder, e.g., customer, satisfaction
              surveys.
           4. Review the stakeholder engagement assessment matrix and
              compare the current engagements of stakeholders with
              the desired ones. This would indicate how effective the
              current communication is.
           5. Use tools provided by PMIS on communication data,
              including stakeholder surveys, stakeholder engagement
              assessment matrix, issues log, etc. to access the effective-
              ness and impact of communication.
           6. You can use your interpersonal and team skills such as
              observation and conversation to work with team to accom-
              plish tasks like:
               1)Determine more efficient and effective way to update
                 project performance information and distribute it.
               2)Determine how to better respond to stakeholders'
                 requests.
               3)Based on preceding reviews and evaluations,
                 determine what changes should be made to
                 communications management plan and stakeholder
                 engagement plan to make communication more
                 effective.
                   Of course, you will also be using meetings for these
                   and other controlling communication tasks.
           7. All these reviews, from steps 1 to 6, can contribute to
              generating work performance information and change
              requests, the main output of this process:
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth        529



            Work Performance Information. This document
            contains information about how project communication
            is performing and about the communication impact on
            the stakeholders. This is obtained by comparing commu-
            nication as it actually happened with as it was planned.
            This is done by actions performed in steps 1 through
            4--e.g., evaluating customer satisfaction surveys and
            stakeholder feedback--and comparing current engage-
            ment levels of stakeholders with the desired levels in the
            stakeholder engagement assessment matrix.

Work performance information would be put into the Monitor and Control Project Work process
to create the work performance report, which in turn would be communicated using the Manage
Communication process.


            Change Requests. Monitoring communication, such as
            by steps 1 through 5, may reveal the need to make com-
            munication changes to obtain the planned or expected
            results. The changes could be in any aspect of communi-
            cation, such as format, content, or the way it's distributed.
            Changes could also include new methods and procedures;
            e.g., to improve efficiency.

The change requests generated by the Monitor Communication process, or by any other process,
must be processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.



       8. Update Documents. Because project communication
          is performed according to the communications manage-
          ment plan and the communication strategies in the stake-
          holder engagement plan, these documents may be modified
          as a result of the acceptance or implementation of com-
          munication changes and would need to be updated.

            Some new issues may arise and some existing issues may
            get resolved; stakeholder communication may change;
            and some lessons may be learned--e.g., which commu-
            nication method worked better for a particular group of
            stakeholders--so, accordingly, the issues log, stakeholder
            register, and lessons learned register may need to be
            updated.
530   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication



      Caution! Do not confuse the Monitor Communication process with the Manage Communication
      process, even though you must recognize they are closely related and may seem somewhat
      overlapping. Remember the link between them: Work performance information, a main output of
      the Manage Communication process, is be put into the Monitor and Control Project Work process
      to create the work performance report, which in turn would be communicated using the Manage
      Communication process.




                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 14.2

         In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
         second column in the context of its role in communication management.

         Item                                 Role
         A.Work performance data              1. Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
                                                 process
         B.Work performance information 2. Output of Monitor Communication
         C.Work performance reports           3. Output of Monitor and Control Project
                                                 Work
         D.Project communications             4. Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
                                              5. Input to Monitor Communication
                                              6. Input to Manage Communication
                                              7. Output of Manage Communication


      The three most important takeaways from this chapter are the following:
             *    The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process is a pro-
                  cess to oversee stakeholder engagement in order to keep
                  it on track. To this end, the information is distributed
                  among the stakeholders, and the engagement strategies
                  and plans are modified.
             *    The Monitor Communication process is used to ensure
                  that communication is happening as planned in the com-
                  munications management plan and stakeholder engage-
                  ment plan; as a result, the targeted stakeholder support
                  for the project is obtained.
             *    The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement and Monitor
                  Communication processes are tightly connected.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth    531




Summary
The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process oversees stakeholder engage-
ment; i.e., how it's going. Performance is measured by comparing the project
result with the desired results. In this area, information is distributed among
the stakeholders, and the engagement strategies and plans are modified, to
keep the project on track--or bring it back on track. A similar method is used
in monitoring communication, where the main goal is to ensure that commu-
nication is happening as planned in the communications management plan and
stakeholder engagement plan; as a result, the targeted stakeholder support for
the project is obtained.
Road Ahead. Up to this point in the book, you have learned how to initi-
ate, plan, execute, and monitor and control the project. For many, if not most,
of us, it's common sense that if we start something we must complete it or
terminate it properly. The same is true for projects. So, in the next part of
this book, we will discuss how to close the project--whether completed or
terminated--properly.


Exam's Eye View
Comprehend
*The main purpose of managing stakeholder engagement is to get continued project
 support from stakeholders. It is done by managing their needs and expectations through
 their involvement in the project.
*The Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process oversees stakeholder engagement and
 converts the engagement-related data from the project execution into work performance
 information and generates necessary change requests.
*Work performance data, generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process, is
 used as an input to the Monitor Communication process to generate work performance
 information.

Look Out

*The communication management plan is an input to all the stakeholder management
 processes, including Monitor Stakeholder Engagement.
*Unresolved issues can grow to become a source of conflict.
*To manage and monitor communication, the stakeholder engagement plan is also used,
 along with the communications management plan, because it explains how to use
 appropriate stakeholder communication strategies to engage the stakeholders.
532   Chapter 14 | Monitoring Stakeholder Engagement and Communication



      Memorize

      *Stakeholder management is not about managing or controlling the stakeholders; it is
       about managing and monitoring their engagement in the project.
      *The communications management plan and stakeholder engagement plan are both
       included in the input of the Monitor Communication and Monitor Stakeholder
       Engagement processes and may be updated by either of these processes.



      Review Questions
             1. Which of the following is not an output of monitoring
                stakeholder engagement?
                  A. Performance reports
                  B. Change requests
                  C. Issues resolved
                  D. Stakeholder engagement plan changed
             2. The issues log is not an input used in the following
                process:
                  A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
                  B. Plan Communications Management
                  C. Manage Communication
                  D. Monitor Communication
             3. The sponsor of your project wants to look at the raw
                data from executing the project--that is, the work per-
                formance data. Which process should you run to get this
                information?
                  A. Manage Communication
                  B. Execute Project
                  C. Direct and Manage Project Work
                  D. Monitor Communication
                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   533



4. The sponsor of your project wants to look at the work
   performance information. Which process should you run
   to get this information?
    A. Monitor and Control Project Work
    B. Manage Communication
    C. Direct and Manage Project Work
    D.Control Scope, Control Schedule, Control Cost, or
      Monitor Communication
5. The Monitor Communication process is performed
   according to the following plan or plans: (choose the best
   answer)
    A. Communication plan
    B. Stakeholder engagement plan
    C. Stakeholder management plan
    D.Communication plan and stakeholder engagement
      plan
6. You have generated a project document named project
   communications that can be used in which of the follow-
   ing processes?
    A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    B. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement
    C. Plan Stakeholder Engagement
    D. Distribute Information
7. Which of the following is not an output of monitoring
   stakeholder engagement?
    A. Performance reports
    B. Change requests
    C. Issues resolved
    D. Stakeholder engagement plan changed
                                                                  PA R T


                                                                    V

Closing
To most of us, it may be common sense that every start has a finish. A project
that has been started will have an end. As I explained in Chapter 1, people
were doing projects even when there was no field of project management.
The underlying philosophy of project management is to perform projects
deliberately--that is, to plan them and to monitor and control them and so
forth. Finishing a project deliberately means finishing it in a controlled way, not
just letting it finish--even when it's cancelled.
The main elements of a successful project closure include ensuring that all
the planned work is completed, the planned outcome has been delivered
and transitioned to the appropriate party, the project or phase information
is archived organizational, the project is reviewed, and team resources are
released.
                                                                          CHAPTER


                                                                               15

Closing the
Project
PMP Exam Objectives            What It Really Means
5.1 Obtain final acceptance    Obtain final acceptance of the project deliverables from
    of the project             relevant stakeholders in order to confirm that project scope
    deliverables               and deliverables were achieved.
5.2 Transfer ownership of      Transfer ownership of deliverables to the assigned
    deliverables               stakeholders in accordance with the project plan in order to
                               facilitate project closure.
5.3 Obtain financial, legal,   Obtain financial, legal, and administrative closure using generally
    and administrative         accepted practices and policies in order to communicate
    closure                    formal project closure and ensure transfer of liability.
5.4 Prepare and share the      Prepare and share the final project report according to the
    final project report       communications management plan in order to document and
                               convey project performance and assist in project evaluation.
5.5 Collate lessons learned    Collate lessons learned that were documented throughout
                               the project and conduct a comprehensive project review in
                               order to update the organization's knowledge base.
5.6 Archive project         Archive project documents and materials using generally
    documents and materials accepted practices in order to comply with statutory
                            requirements and for potential use in future projects and audits.
5.7 Obtain feedback from       Obtain feedback from relevant stakeholders using appropriate
    relevant stakeholders      tools and techniques and based on the stakeholder
                               management plan in order to evaluate their satisfaction.

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0_15
538   Chapter 15 | Closing the Project


      To most of us, it may be common sense that every start has a finish. A project
      that has been started will have some kind of ending.As I explained in Chapter 1,
      people have been doing projects since before there was a field of project
      management.The underlying philosophy of project management is to perform
      projects deliberately--that is, to plan them, to monitor and control them, and
      so forth. Finishing a project deliberately means finishing it in a controlled way,
      not just letting it finish--even when it's cancelled. That's right. Whether com-
      pleted or cancelled, a project needs to be properly closed. The closing efforts
      are coordinated by the integration management process called Close Project
      or Phase.
      As you will see in this chapter, during its closure, the project meets itself from
      start to end in the self-assurance and review mode to ensure that everything
      planned has been done and been done according to the plan, as well as for a
      general review of the whole project. So, the core issue in this chapter is how
      to properly close a project. In search of an answer, we will explore three
      avenues: the big picture of the project closure in the context of the whole
      project, core project closure, and project review and lessons learned.


      Closing the Project: Big Picture
      As mentioned earlier, the closing efforts are coordinated by an integration
      management process called Close Project or Phase. The big picture of this
      process in context of the whole project is presented in Figure 15-1. As you
      can see, it involves project elements from project charter to procurement
      documentation, from business documents and requirement documentation
      to quality report and risk report, and so on. Of course, all of this involve-
      ment is around the project deliverables, which, after their acceptance has been
      ensured by the customer, need to be transitioned to the appropriate party.
      This involvement is necessary to ensure that everything planned has been
      done according to the plan so as to meet the project objectives tied to the
      organization's need, to close each project element properly, and to review the
      whole project to learn from it.
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth      539




Figure 15-1. Big picture of project closure process

As shown in Figure 15-1, the project deliverables have already been veri-
fied through the Control Quality process and accepted through the Scope
Verification process, but still need to go through the final transition to the
appropriate party, such as the customer or the sponsor. In other words, the
project needs proper closure.


Performing Project Closure
Closing the project means finalizing all activities across the project by using
the Close Project process. The formal name of the project closure process is
Close Project or Phase because it can also be used to close a phase in a multi-
phase project. Project closure includes ensuring that all the planned work has
been completed, the planned outcomes have been delivered and transitioned
to the appropriate party, the project or phase information has been archived,
the project has been reviewed, and team resources have been released. You
also need to determine and coordinate the procedures required for verifying
and documenting the project deliverables. The items that describe what the
project was planned to deliver and what it has actually delivered would be the
obvious inputs to the process of closing the project. Table 15-1 presents the
Close Project or Phase process in terms of input, tools and techniques, and
output.
540   Chapter 15 | Closing the Project


      Table 15-1. The Close Project or Phase Process: Input, Tools and Techniques, and Output

      Input                              Tools and Techniques        Output
      1.Project management plan          1.Expert judgment           1.Final project outcome
      2.Project charter                  2.Data analysis:              transition
      3.Business documents:                 *Document analysis       2.Final report
        *Business case                      *Regression analysis     3.Project document
                                                                       updates:
        *Benefit management plan            *Trend analysis
                                                                        *Lessons learned
      4.Project documents:                  *Variance analysis
                                                                         register
        *Milestone list                  3. Meetings
                                                                     4.Organizational process
        *Basis of estimates                                            assets update
        *Requirement documentation
        *Project communications
        *Quality report
        *Quality control
         measurements
        *Risk report
        *Assumptions log
        *Change log
        *Issues log
        *Risk register
        *Lessons learned register
      5.Accepted deliverables
      6.Agreements
      7.Procurement documentation
      8.Organizational project assets



      Tip Not only the completed projects, but also the terminated projects must be formally closed
      using the processes of the closing process group.


      Input to the Close Project Process
      You need a list of project deliverables that have been verified through the
      Verify Scope process and will go through the transition procedure. The proj-
      ect management plan contains guidelines on how to close the project. These
      and other input items are discussed in the following list:
              *   Two Business Documents and Project Charter.
                  The business case document and the benefits manage-
                  ment plan document are used to verify if the deliverables
                  are aligned with the business need and if the expected
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   541



    benefit would still justify the project that has been exe-
    cuted. The project charter document is needed to verify
    if the project success criteria and approval requirements
    have been met.
*   Agreements and Procurement Documentation.
    These will be needed to verify the fulfillment, to use in a
    lessons learned session, and to close the contract.
*   Project Management Plan. This defines how to close
    the project and will be useful in establishing the project
    closure procedure. The project management plan is also
    used in verifying and accepting the project deliverables
    because it explains what deliverables are expected. Note,
    however, that they have already been checked by the
    Validate Scope process and their quality has been verified
    by the Control Quality process, both of which belong to
    the monitor and control process group.
*   Project Documents. As you can imagine, we need quite
    a few project documents in this process for the purposes
    of verification, compliance, completion, evidence, evalua-
    tion, lessons learned session, and archiving. For example,
    we need the issues log to verify that there is no open
    issue; basis of estimates to evaluate how the estimates
    compared to the actual results regarding items such as
    durations, cost, and resources; requirements documenta-
    tion as evidence of compliance; and change log for les-
    sons learned and archiving. Other examples may be the
    assumptions log, lessons learned, milestone list, project
    communications, quality control measurements, quality
    report, and risk register documents.
*   Accepted Deliverables. This refers to the deliverables
    that have been verified through the Validate Scope pro-
    cess, discussed in Chapter 13. That means these deliver-
    ables meet the scope requirements acceptance criteria
    and are accepted by the customer or sponsor. In the case
    of a phase or cancelled project, these may also include
    incomplete deliverables. Such deliverables may be repre-
    sented here by approved product specifications, delivery
    receipts, work performance documents, and so on.
542   Chapter 15 | Closing the Project


             *    Organizational Process Assets. These can include
                  project closure guidelines or requirements--for exam-
                  ple, regarding product validation and acceptance criteria,
                  final project audits, project evaluations, contract closure,
                  and knowledge transfer. Also, you can learn from the his-
                  torical information what kind of project documents you
                  need to archive and in what detail you want to review the
                  project to gather and store lessons learned. Your orga-
                  nization may also have a transition criteria or procedure
                  on handing the product of the project to the appropriate
                  party.
      These input items provide information about what the project was supposed
      to deliver and what it has delivered. You use this input and some tools and
      techniques to carry out the project closure.


      Caution! It's important to understand the flow of project deliverables through different
      processes. They are generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process, verified through
      the Quality Control process, accepted by the customer through the Validate Scope process, and
      transitioned to the appropriate party through the Close Project or Phase process.


      Tools and Techniques for the Close Project Process
      The tools and techniques used for closing the project are data analysis, expert
      judgment, and meetings. Data analysis may use techniques such as document
      analysis, regression analysis, trend analysis, and variance analysis. Document
      analysis refers to using the documents to obtain or extract the information
      relevant to this process, such as organizational assets improvement, lessons
      learned, and knowledge archived for future projects. Regression analysis is
      used to determine the relationship between different project variables and
      how such relationships impact the project outcome. That information will be
      useful for future projects. The other two techniques, trend analysis and vari-
      ance analysis, are stated in Table 15-1.
      Expert advice may be obtained on topics related to closing the project. There
      will be lots of meetings regarding the project closure activities, such as close
      the contract, validate the exit criteria, confirm the acceptance of deliverables,
      evaluate the stakeholders' satisfaction, hold lessons learned sessions, wrap up,
      and celebrate.
                                                                              PMP(R) in Depth          543




                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 15.1

    Q1. Name the processes used to generate:
        A.   Lessons learned register
        B.   Lessons learned
    Q2. For what do we need data analysis during the Close Project process?



Caution! The formal name of the process to close the project or a phase of it is Close Project
or Phase. However, like other processes, I also refer to it by informal names, such as close project
or project closure. You should know the formal name of each process and then be able to recognize
from context when it's being referred to in an informal way. This will help you in the exam, and
more importantly in real-world project management.



Output of the Close Project or Phase Process
Project closure accomplishes three main things--completion of all the clos-
ing procedures; final acceptance of the project deliverables by the customer,
including handing over the deliverables to the appropriate party; and review-
ing the archiving of project-related documents. This is reflected in the follow-
ing output items.
Final Project Outcome Transition. This means that the project out-
come--i.e., product, service, or result--has been delivered and transitioned
(handed over) to the appropriate party. The appropriate party could be, for
example, another organization or a different department or group in the same
organization that will maintain and support it throughout its lifecycle.
Final Report. This presents a brief review and summary of different proj-
ect aspects in the context of project performance. For example, the project
aspects could include scope, cost, and quality objectives. The report can state
the criteria used to evaluate the scope and cost, whether that criteria was met
by the final outcome, and what the reasons were for any variances. Similarly, it
could include what criteria were used to evaluate the overall project quality
and product quality, and reasons for quality variances. Moreover, the report
can summarize the procedure and results of final project outcome validation.
Updates of Lessons Learned Register and Organizational Process
Assets. The project closure process updates project documents and the
organizational process assets.
544   Chapter 15 | Closing the Project


           *    Project Documents. The lessons learned are entered
                into the lessons learned register. They can cover any
                project-related topics. Any other project document may
                also be updated. Every ongoing document has at least one
                update: the final version.
           *    Organizational Process Assets. Documents and les-
                sons learned from the project are added to the organiza-
                tion's knowledge database for various purposes, such as
                *    for the record;
                *    to help with future projects; and
                *    to support the product or service from the project
                     under closure.
                This includes all types of important documents, from
                project documents such as the project management
                plan and documents regarding scope, schedule, cost,
                baseline, etc. to documents about lessons learned and
                knowledge accumulated throughout the project life-
                cycle; and from project closure documents regarding
                scope validation, agreements, and transfer and cus-
                tomer acceptance of the final product to operational
                and support documents such as those needed in order
                to operate and support the product or service from
                the project under closure.

                            STUDY CHECKPOINT 15.2

        Q1. What is the first process you perform in managing a project?
        Q2. What do you need before you can begin initiating your project?
                                                             PMP(R) in Depth      545



The three most important takeaways from this chapter are as follows:
      *   Before the Close Project process is performed, the proj-
          ect deliverables must be already verified through the
          Quality Control process and then validated for their
          scope by the Validate Scope process to ensure that the
          planned scope and quality have been met.
      *   In this process, the deliverables are transitioned to the
          appropriate party, such as the customer or the project
          sponsor.
      *   Once all processes and activities are completed, docu-
          ments are properly closed and archived, and the project
          is reviewed to learn lessons for the future.

Summary
All projects, big or small, terminated or completed, should go through the
closure stage, which involves ensuring that all the planned work has been
completed, the planned outcome has been delivered and transitioned to the
appropriate party, the project or phase information has been archived with
the organization, and team resources have been released. Before the Close
Project process is performed, the project deliverables must be already veri-
fied through the quality control process and then validated for their scope
by the Validate Scope process to ensure that the planned scope and quality
have been met. The procurements are also already accepted and procure-
ments contracts closed by the Control Procurement process, but procure-
ment documentation is used to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the
procurements. In the Close Project process, all verified validated deliverables
are transitioned to the appropriate party, such as the customer or the project
sponsor. The same process is used to close a project or a phase of it and is
formally called the Close Project or Phase process. Once all processes and
activities have been completed, documents are properly closed and archived,
and the project is reviewed to learn lessons for the future.
Road Ahead: A long and winding road of project management, including pos-
sible exams. Good luck on the journey.
546   Chapter 15 | Closing the Project


      Exam's Eye View
      Comprehend
      *You, the project manager, manage the project closure.
      *Project deliverables, an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work process, are
       verified for quality by the control quality process.
      *Before going through project closure, the verified deliverables must be checked for their
       scope through the Validate Scope process and accepted.
      *The deliverables accepted by the Validate Scope process then become a major input item
       to the Close Project or Phase process.

      Look Out

      *The lessons are learned throughout the project by performing the Manage Project
       Knowledge process and not only at the end of the project or phase.
      *Not only the completed projects, but also the terminated projects must be formally
       closed using the processes of the closing process group.
      *The same process is used to close both a phase of a project and the project itself: Close
       Project or Phase.

      Memorize

      *The lessons learned document is the output of two processes: Manage Project
       Knowledge and Close Project or Phase.
      *Project deliverables are generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work process,
       verified through the Quality Control process, accepted by the customer through the
       Validate Scope process, and transitioned to the appropriate party through the Close
       Project or Phase process.
      *The customer or project sponsor signs the final project outcome acceptance and closure
       documents.




      Review Questions
             1. Walking down the hallway, you hear a program manager
                saying to a project manager, "You need the performance
                reports to run this process." Which process is the pro-
                gram manager likely referring to?
                  A. Monitor and Control Project Work
                  B. Perform Integrated Change Control
                  C. Close Project or Phase
                  D. Evaluate Performance
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   547



2. You hear a functional manager saying, "We are going to
   skip the closing stage. There is no need for formalities in
   this project; it's a total waste of time." For which kind of
   projects is it appropriate to skip the closing stage?
    A. Technical projects
    B. Small and simple projects
    C. Cancelled project
    D. No projects
3. Which of the following stakeholders can authorize the
   closure of a project?
    A. Project manager
    B. Customer
    C. Project sponsor
    D. Functional manager
4. You are preparing to close a project you have been man-
   aging. Which of the following is not an input to the Close
   Project or Phase process?
    A. Project charter
    B. Project management plan
    C. Project deliverables
    D. Project benefit management plan
5. Which of the following are not an activity of the Close
   Project process?
    A. Review the project.
    B. Ensure all processes are complete and closed.
    C. Transfer the project product to the customer.
    D. Verify the quality and scope of the product.
6. Which of the following are not an activity of the Close
   Project process?
    A. Close all procurements.
    B. Ensure all processes are complete and closed.
    C. Transfer the project product to customer.
    D. Ensure that all contracts are closed.
548   Chapter 15 | Closing the Project


           7. You are in the process of closing the Stem Cells Are Us
              project. Which of the following is not an output of the
              Close Project or Phase process?
               A. Lessons learned
               B. Transition of project products
               C. Verified deliverables
               D. Closure of project documentation
                                                                        APPENDIX


                                                                          A

Answers
to Study
Checkpoint
Exercises
Chapter 1
                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.1

   Identify each of the following items as a project or an operation.
       A.   A librarian performing her daily job responsibilities
       B.   A bookseller processing customer orders
       C.   A network administrator ensuring that the network stays up and
            running 24/7
       D.   Taking a course in molecular biology

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0
550   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answers: A, B, and C are examples of operations: ongoing and repetitive efforts. D
        is a project with a definitive amount of effort (a beginning and an end) and a unique
        product or result, such as grades.



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.2

        What is the core difference between knowledge areas and process groups? Try to
        answer this question in one sentence.
        Answer: Knowledge areas are disciplines of management that represent management
        knowledge of a certain topic, such as cost and time, whereas process groups are about
        the application of that knowledge--that is, where and when to apply that knowledge;
        for example, during initiating or during planning, and so on.
        Okay, that was a long sentence. Here is the short answer: Knowledge areas are about
        knowledge of project management topics, and process groups are about applying
        that knowledge



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.3

        In the following table, match each item in the first column with a corresponding item
        in the second column:

        Knowledge Area          Action
        A. Message              1.While developing the schedule, Lora realized that there
                                  was risk involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts
                                  into a note that she wrote on her computer.
        B. Scope                2.Manage interdependencies among different processes
                                  belonging to different knowledge areas.
        C. Cost                 3.Ensure the project includes the work required to
                                  complete the project successfully and no extra work.
        D. Schedule             4.Plan the schedule and complete the project within the
                                  planned schedule.
        E. Quality              5.Plan the budget, track what you are spending, and
                                  complete the project within budget.
        F. Risk                 6.Ensure that you develop the right product that will satisfy
                                  the needs for which the project was undertaken.
        G. Procurement          7.Obtain the team to do the project work, and lead and
                                  motivate the team to keep working in the right direction
                                  in an efficient and effective way.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   551




Knowledge Area         Action
H. Resources             8.Generate and distribute the required project
                           information to the right stakeholders at the right time
                           by using the right method.
I. Communication         9.Plan for uncertain events that could happen and deal
                           with them when they do happen in such a way that the
                           possible benefit is maximized and damage is minimized.
J. Integration         10.Identify the project work that needs to be contracted
                          out of the performing organization and contract it out.

Answers:
A. 1
B. 3
C. 5
D. 4
E. 6
F. 9
G. 10
H. 7
I. 8
J. 2



                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.4

Match each item in the first column of the following table with one or more suitable
items in the second column.

Entity              May Contain
A. Project          1. Operations
B. Program          2. Projects
C. Portfolio        3. Programs
                    4. Portfolios
                    5. Activities to create a well-defined unique product
552   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answers:
        A. 5
        B. 2, 3
        C. 1, 2, 3, 4



                                  STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.5

        You are about to throw a quarter and a dime several times. What is the probability of
        the following happening?
               A.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try.
               B.   The dime will land tails up on the first try.
               C.   The quarter will land heads up and the dime will land tails up on
                    the first try.
               D.   Both the quarter and the dime will land heads up on the first try.
               E.   The quarter will land heads up on the first try and also heads up
                    on the second try.
        Answers: The quarter has a probability of 0.5 to land either way: heads up or tails up.
        The same is true for the dime.
        Considering that, the answers to A and B are 0.5, and the answers to C, D, and E are
        0.25 (0.5 x 0.5 = 0.25).




                                  STUDY CHECKPOINT 1.6

        In the following table, match each item in the first column to the corresponding item
        in the second column.

        Project Variable                         Value
        A. Level of staff                        1.Highest in the beginning and end of the
                                                   project and lowest when the project is
                                                   being executed
        B. Risk                                  2.Highest in the beginning and decreases
                                                   as the project progresses
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth     553




 Project Variable                    Value
 C.Ability to influence the product 3.Low in the beginning, maximum when
   without significantly impacting    the tasks of the project are being
   the project cost                   executed
 D. Cost                             4. Uniform throughout the project

 Answers:
 A. 3
 B. 2
 C. 2
 D. 3



Chapter 2
                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.1

 Q1. From the organization's perspective, what is the core difference between
     enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets?
 Q2. In the following table, match each item in the first column to items in the second
     column.
 Factor and Asset           Factor or Asset Examples
 Categories
 Internal factor            A. Company's email system
                            B. Checklist
 External factor            C. City laws where company is
 Processes and              D. Configuration management system
 procedures                 E. An approved external provider
 Knowledge databases        F. Commercial Risk database
                            G. Interest rate
                            H.Configuration repository from past project of the
                              company
554   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        A1: Enterprise environmental factors are about how the performing organization
            does its business, whereas organizational process assets are about how the
            organization runs its projects.
        Explanation: Enterprise environmental factors are the factors of the overall environment
        in which the organization is operating and doing its business. Organizational process
        assets are the process-related assets, and the projects are made of processes;
        therefore, the organizational process assets speak more to how the organization
        performs its projects.
        A2: Internal factor: A, E, D; External factor: C, F, G; Processes and procedures: B;
            Knowledge databases: H
        Explanation: Note that a configuration management system (D) is software used in the
        company, so it's an internal factor, and the configuration repository from past projects
        of the company (H) belongs to company's knowledge databases.



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 2.2

        You have been offered a Project B that will earn you a profit of $100,000 in three
        months. You already have an offer of a Project A that will earn you a profit of $70,000 in
        three months.
        You can only do one project during these three months, and the project requesters are
        unable to move the project durations.
        Q1. What is the opportunity cost of Project A?
        Q2. What is the opportunity cost of Project B?
        Q3. Just based on the opportunity cost, which project will you select?
        Q4. Describe what can change your decision based just on the opportunity cost.
        Answers:
        A1. $100,000, because this is the opportunity that you are missing when you take on
            Project A.
        A2. $70,000, because this is the opportunity that you are missing when you take on
            Project B.
        A3. Project B will be selected because it has a smaller opportunity cost.
        A4. Opportunity cost is only one of several criteria that are used to select projects. It
            may be that some other criteria, such as a scoring model, will produce different
            results. You have to see which method is more relevant for your case.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth      555




Chapter 3
                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.1

 Q1. True or false: It is the responsibility of the project manager to develop the project
     charter.
 Q2. True or false: Project charter is a contract between the performing entity and the
     entity for which it's being performed.
 Q3. Which process project document interfaces the project with the organization's
     strategy?
 Answers:
 A1. False. The project manager officially does not even exist when the Develop Project
     Charter process is started. That said, it's quite possible that a potential project
     manager may be asked to put together the project charter, or a specific project
     manager assignment may be part of a bid or a proposal.
 A2. False. The project charter is not a contract, as no money is involved.
 A3. Project charter



                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.2

 Knowing the Identify Stakeholders process, answer the following:
 Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholders.
 Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholders.
 Answer:
 Enterprise environmental factors: Examples of enterprise environmental factors that
 help identify stakeholders include governmental and industry standards, geographical
 distribution of facilities and resources, external local culture and trends, organizational
 culture, and organizational structure. It's important to understand the organization's
 culture and structure in order to identify some stakeholders and their possible impact
 on the project, because different people will have different levels of authority and
 influence under different cultures and structures, as discussed in Chapter 2.
556   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Organizational process assets: The stakeholder register templates and the stakeholder
        registers from previous projects can be useful when creating the stakeholder register
        for the project at hand. Another example of the organizational process assets helpful
        in identifying stakeholders is the lessons learned from previous projects. For instance,
        perhaps you learned from a previous project how you ignored a negative stakeholder,
        which caused great damage to the project.



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.3

        Q1. What is the first process you perform in managing a project?
        Q2. What do you need before you can begin initiating your project?
        Answers:
        A1. Develop Project Charter.
        A2. The input to the Develop Project Charter process: business case, project benefit
            plan, and necessary agreements.



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 3.4

        In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
        second column to describe its role during project initiation:

        Item                           Role
        A. Business documents          1. Input to developing project charter
        B. Project charter             2. Output of developing project charter
        C. Procurement documents       3. Input to identifying stakeholders
        D. Assumptions log             4. Output of identifying stakeholders

        Answers
        A. 1, 3
        B. 2, 3
        C. 1, 3
        D. 2
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth     557




Chapter 4
                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.1

 Among the following attributes, identify which are part of product scope and which are
 part of the project scope, according to PMBOK, 6th Edition.
     A.   Develop software modules to support website.
     B.   The user can only access this website after logging in.
     C.   The drug should not have more than two side effects.
     D.   The drug must be developed within one year.
     E.   The drug must be tested in-house before it goes to Food and
          Drug Administration.

 Answers:
 Project scope: A, D, E
 Product scope: B, C



                          STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.2

 Make lists of enterprise environment factors and organizational process assets that
 can influence the Collect Requirements process.
 Answers:
 Enterprise environment factors:
 Internal: Culture, infrastructure, personnel administration
 External: Marketing condition, legal restrictions
 Organizational process assets: Policies and procedures, organizational and industry
 standards, knowledge database.
558   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.3

        Assuming that the online learning system in Figure 4-3 is managed by a company
        with its own teachers:
        Q1. Name internal actors
        Q2. Name external actors
        Answers:
        A1. Internal actors: teachers and administration
        A2. External actors: students and payment system



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.4

        In the following table, match each item in the first column with an appropriate item in
        the second column:

        A.The software product must run on both Microsoft 1. Project deliverable
          Windows and Apple Macintosh.
        B. An online education website                          2. Project constraint
        C.The drug must be developed within six months.         3. Product requirement
        D.The software module must not have more than 10 4.Project management
          bugs.                                            requirement
        E. Project manager must have a PMP certification.       5.Product acceptance
                                                                  criteria

        Answers:
        A. 3
        B. 1
        C. 2
        D. 5
        E. 4
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth     559




                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 4.5

 Q1. What is the difference between management control point and control account?
 Q2. What is the difference between control account and code of account?
 Answers:
 A1. A management control point is a control account.
 A2. A code of account is a unique identifier of a work package, and a control account
     contains one or more work packages--i.e., codes of account--in it.




Chapter 5
                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.1

 Q1. Using your knowledge of enterprise environmental factors and the plan schedule
     management process, make a list of EEFs that would influence this process.
 Q2. Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the plan schedule
     management process, make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.
 Answer:
 A1. EEFs: Organizational structure and culture; available resources and skills;
     commercial database; standard estimate data; scheduling software tools; and
     organization's standards or guidelines for tailoring the standard schedule-related
     processes.
 A2. OPAs: Schedule-related organizational policies, procedures, forms and templates,
     monitoring and reporting tools, and lessons learned database from previous
     projects.



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.2

 Q1. What is the most common logical relationship used in the schedule network
     diagrams?
 Q2. What is the least common logical relationship used in the schedule network
     diagrams?
 Q3. Make a list of EEFs and OPAs that could influence the process of scheduling
     activities.
560   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answer:
        A1. Finish to start; i.e., the successor activity cannot be started until the predecessor
            activity has already been completed.
        A2. Start to finish; i.e., the successor activity cannot be completed until the predecessor
            activity has already been initiated.
        A3.
        EEFs: Government and industry standards, organization's work authorization system,
        project management information system [PMIS].
        OPAs: Related program and portfolio plans; activity-related organizational policies,
        procedures, and templates, etc.; and lessons learned database from previous projects.



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.3

              1.   Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of estimating
                   activity durations.
              2.   Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of estimating
                   activity durations.
        Answer:
        A1. EEFs: Examples of enterprise environmental factors are some databases that
            contain reference data relevant to the activity duration--for instance, how long
            it takes for a specific government agency to respond to a request. Published
            commercial information and metrics to measure productivity can also be helpful
            in duration estimates. The location of team members may also matter; e.g., due to
            different local conditions or systems.
        A2. OPAs: Organizational process assets that may influence this process include
            estimating policies; and those that are useful in estimating activity duration
            include information from previous projects and a calendar of working days and
            non-working days.



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.4

        In the program evaluation and review technique (PERT), the most-likely scenario is
        given a weight of 4 as compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and
        optimistic scenarios. The pessimistic estimate for an activity is 20 days, the optimistic
        estimate is 10 days, and most-likely estimate is 15 days. Calculate the expected
        estimate using the PERT technique.
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   561



Answer:
          te = (ntm+to+tp)/(n+2)
            = (4x15+10+20)/(4+2)
            = 90/6 =15 days



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.5

Q1. Describe how assumptions and constraints, e.g., in the project scope statement,
    can affect the schedule, as well as what you can do about it.
Q2. List EEFs and OPAs that can influence the process of schedule development.
Answers:
A1. The assumptions and constraints in the project scope statement can affect the
    project schedule and therefore must be considered in developing the schedule.
    The following two types of time- and hence schedule-related constraints should
    get special attention:
   *      Hard deadlines on start and finish dates. Some activities
          might have constraints on their start or finish dates. For example,
          there might be a situation in which an activity cannot be started
          before a certain date, or must be finished before a certain date,
          or both. Where do these date constraints come from? They can
          come from various sources, such as a date in the contract, a date
          determined by the market window, delivery of material from an
          external vendor, and the like.
   *      Time constraints on deliverables. These constraints can come
          from the customer, the sponsor, or any other stakeholder in terms
          of deadlines for certain major deliverables or milestones. Other
          projects inside or outside your organization might be depending
          on these constraints. So, once scheduled, these deadlines are
          constraints and can only be changed through the approval
          process.
Both assumptions and constraints lead to schedule risk that can be mitigated by
applying a contingency reserve in the schedule.
A2. EEFs: Communication channel--e.g., emails and videos conferences; scheduling
software; and government and industry standards.
OPAs: Organizational scheduling methodology or any other schedule-related policies
and procedures, project calendars, and schedule-related information from previous
projects, and a calendar of working days and non-working days.
562   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 5.6

        Lora Nirvana is the project manager for Sequence DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project.
        Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item in the
        second column.

        Output of the        Description
        Develop Schedule
        Process
        A. Schedule data     1.A bar chart that includes all the activities of the project
                               and also milestones. Lora points this bar chart out to the
                               project sponsor to show where they are in the execution
                               of the project.
        B.Project            2.A bar chart hanging on the calendar that has never
          document             changed since it was approved. Lora compares the current
          updates              bar chart with this bar chart to show the progress.
        C. Schedule          3.On a bar chart Lora points to the dates on which she will
                               have the DNA sample isolated and purified, when she will
                               get the DNA sample run through the genetic analyzer,
                               when she will receive the results from the analyzer, and
                               when the results will be published on the internet.
        D.Schedule           4.After realizing that their chosen vendor has a track
          baseline             record of sending the DNA analysis kits late, Lora writes
                               something into the risk register.

        Answers:
        A. 3
        B. 4
        C. 1
        D. 2
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth     563




Chapter 6
                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.1

 Use your knowledge of the Plan Resource Management process to answer the
 following questions:
 Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the process of Plan Resource Management.
 Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the process of Plan Resource Management.
 Q3. How can the assumptions log and risk register project documents be updated as
     a result of this process?
 Answers:
 A1. EEFs: Organizational culture and structure, team and physical resources available
     within organization, locations of available resources and facilities, and market
     conditions; e.g., job market to hire the talent and physical resources
 A2. OPAs: Organizational human and physical resources, policies and procedures,
     safety and security policies, template that can be used for resource management
     planning, and lessons learned and other historical information regarding resource
     management planning.
 A3. The assumptions log will be updated with changed and new assumptions regarding
     team and physical resources; e.g., locations, availability, and requirements. The
     risk register can be updated with known risks about team and physical resources.



                        STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.2

 Problem:
 An activity cost estimate goes like this:
 It will take 20 hours for a programmer to write this program. The average rate at which
 to hire a programmer is $50 per hour. Therefore, the cost of writing this program,
 assuming that everything else needed to write the program, such as a computer, is in
 place, is 20 x $50 = $1,000.
 What kind of estimation technique is at work here?
 Answer:
 Parametric estimation
564   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.3
        The pessimistic cost estimate for an activity is $5,000, the optimistic estimate is
        $3,000, and most-likely estimate is $4,000. Calculate the expected estimate by
        using the PERT technique, where the most-likely scenario is given a weight of 4 as
        compared to the weight of 1 for each of the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios.
        Answer:
        Ce = (nCm+Co+Cp)/(n+2)
          = (4x4000+3000+5000)/(4+2)
          = 24,000/6 = 4,000
        Expected cost estimate = $4,000



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.4

        Rajinder, the project manager, is now working on procurement planning for a portion
        of the project. She is looking at the following options for procuring different pieces.
        Match each consideration in the first column with the corresponding contract type in
        the second column of the following table.

        Consideration                                        Contract type
        A.Rajinder will pay $3,000 for the use of a facility 1. Fixed price (FP)
          and $5,000 per month for the employees
          working on the procured piece for the
          duration of work. However, there is a cap of
          $50,000 for the maximum cost.
        B.Rajinder will pay for the labor of the cost and    2. Time and material (T&M)
          a lump sum of $5,000.
        C.Rajinder will pay $50,000 to maintain the          3. Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
          website for the project for two years.
        D.She will provide $10,000 for developing a          4.Cost plus percentage of cost
          software program and an extra $1,000 if less         (CPPC)
          than 10 bugs are discovered in the program in
          the first year of its use.
        E.She will pay the labor cost each month plus 5% 5.Cost plus incentive fee
          of this cost as coffee and snacks at work and    (CPIF)
          for recognition and rewards for the labor.
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   565



Answers:
A. 2
B. 3
C. 1
D. 5
E. 4




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 6.5

In the following table, match each item in first column to one or more items in the
second column.
Document                           Include or discuss
1. Procurement management plan       1. Request for information (RFI)
2. Procurement strategy              2. Delivery methods
3. Statement of work (SOW)           3. Request for quotation (RFQ)
4. Bid documents                     4.Integrating procurement with project
                                       work
                                     5. Performance data
                                     6. Request for proposal (RFP)
                                     7. Stakeholders' procurement responsibilities
                                     8. Procurement phase management
                                     9. Key procurement activities
                                   10. Contract payment types
                                   11. Performance period
                                   12. Work location

Answer:
A. 4, 7, 9
B. 2, 8, 10
C. 5, 11, 12
D. 1, 3, 6
566   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


      Chapter 7
                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.1

        You are trying out a Monte Carlo simulation program that estimates the value of a
        parameter by using some random variables. You know through the data that the exact
        value should be 40. You ran the program three times, and it gave you three values: 50,
        51, and 52. Based on these values, answer the following questions:
        Q1. How precise is the program in making the estimates?
        Q2. How accurate are the estimates?
        Q3. Are the values generated by the program more accurate or more precise?
        Answers:
        A1. The program is quite precise because the values 50, 51, and 52 are very close to
            each other.
        Average value = 51
        % uncertainty = [(52-50)/51]x100 % = 3.9%
        A2. The estimates are far away from the true value, and therefore accuracy is not
            very good.
        Average % deviation = [(51-40)/40] x 100 = 27.5%
        A3. Comparing the errors in questions 1 and 2, the results are more precise and less
            accurate.



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.2

        Knowing the Plan Quality Management process, answer the following:
        Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
        Q2. Describe which OPA can influence this process.
        Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of Table 7-2 will be
            updated.
                                                                        PMP(R) in Depth     567



Answers:
As you are planning to communicate with project stakeholders, the EEFs and OPAs
that influence this process are very similar to those that influence the plan stakeholder
engagement process.
A1. EEFS: Examples of enterprise environmental factors that will influence this
    process include organizational structure; government agencies' regulations;
    rules, guidelines, and standards of the project's application area; geographical
    distribution of facilities and resources; inside and outside culture; market
    conditions; working and operational conditions of project and its deliverables.
A2. OPAs: Include the organizational quality management system, including policies,
    procedures, guidelines; quality templates, including traceability matrix and check
    sheets; and quality-related lessons learned from historical database.
A3. The risk management plan may need to be updated because the quality
    management approach might cause changes in the approach to risk management.
    The addition of quality requirements to the WBS dictionary will change the project
    scope baseline, and the addition of quality requirements will also update the
    requirements traceability matrix.
As usual, the lessons learned register is updated with lessons learned, in this case
lessons related to quality planning, to be used in the next process run. New risks
discovered will update the risk register. The stakeholder register is updated with new
information found during this process about new and existing stakeholders.



                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.3

Knowing the Identify Risks process, make lists of some EEFs and OPAs that can
influence this process.
Answers
EEFs: The environmental factors internal or external to the performing organization that
can influence the project must be considered in the risk identification process. This
might include academic and industry studies, published information, benchmarking,
and commercial databases.
OPAs: This might include risk-related information from previous projects (the
knowledge base), including lessons learned, process controls, and risk-related
templates and checklists.
568   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.4

        Perform the EMV analysis of the decision tree presented in Figure 7-5 to make a
        decision on which option to take.
        Answer
        Option      Initial Cost Risk Cost Probability EMV for Risk Cost Total cost
        Update      $50,000       $200,000     40%          0.40x$200,000          $50,000+$80,000
                                                            =$80,000               =$130,000

        Build from $70,000        $200,000     10%          0.10x$200,000          $70,000+$20,000
        scratch                                             =$20,000               =$90,000

        So, building from scratch is a better option because total cost is less.



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 7.5

        You are the project manager of a movie shooting project. The first column lists some
        actions you are taking to deal with risks. Match each item in the first column with one
        item in the second column of this table.

        Action                                                         Risk Response Type
        A.One of the scenes is to be shot in a country that has        1. Avoid
          enormous bureaucracy and red tape. They possibly can
          create roadblocks and make it difficult for you. There is
          nothing much you can plan about it.
        B.The jungle where you are going to shoot a few scenes is 2.Accept
          a wetland and very hot and humid, and the probability of
          damage happening to the equipment is very high. So, you
          have decided to buy insurance to protect you against this
          possible damage.
        C.You have learned that during a certain time of the year,     3.Exploit
          the locals come to hunt in the jungle in big numbers. So,
          you have decided not to do the shoot during that part
          of the year.
        D.Although the movie does not depend on it, it will add        4.Share
          a lot of marketing value to the movie if your cameras
          could capture an endangered species of birds that live
          in the jungle.You are choosing the time of the year for
          shooting and taking some other actions to increase the
          probability that the birds will show up.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth    569




 Action                                                        Risk Response Type
 E.The movie has something to do with Thanksgiving Day.        5. Mitigate
   You have put in some extra resources to ensure that the
   movie is completed in a timely manner for a release on
   Thanksgiving Day.
 F.You have learned that there could be mosquitoes in the     6. Enhance
   area in which you are going to shoot. So, you have planned
   to take plenty of mosquito repellant and other products
   to prevent mosquito bites.
 G.You know another movie team that's going to shoot         7. Transfer
   some scenes in the same jungle during a different time of
   the year.You have signed a contract with them to share
   or trade the shots of the endangered bird species.

 Answers:
 A. 2
 B. 7
 C. 1
 D. 6
 E. 3
 F. 5
 G. 4



Chapter 8
                         STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.1

 Saira Bano is the project manager for the Sequence the DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project.
 Match each item in the first column of the following table to the correct item in the
 second column.

 Term           Action
 A. Message     1.While developing the schedule, Saira realized that there was a risk
                  involved in the project. So, she put her thoughts into a note that
                  she wrote on her computer.
 B. Medium      2. She sent the note to the project sponsor.
 C. Encode      3. She used email to send the message.
570   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Term            Action
        D. Noise        4. The sponsor received the message.
        E. Receiver     5.The sponsor could not understand some of the acronyms and
                          terms in the email message, such as variable number of tandem
                          repeats (VNTR), a central dogma of molecular biology.
        F. Feedback     6.The sponsor responded to Saira, expressing his concern that he
                          could not exactly understand her concerns.

        Answers:
        A. 2
        B. 3
        C. 1
        D. 5
        E. 4
        F. 6



                                 STUDY CHECKPOINT 8.2

        Knowing the Plan Communication Management process, answer the following:
        Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence this process.
        Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence this process.
        Q3. Describe how the documents listed in the output column of Table 8-6 will be
            updated.
        Answer:
        As you are planning to communicate with project stakeholders, the EEFs and OPAs
        that influence this process are very similar to those that influence the plan stakeholder
        engagement process.
        A1. EEFs: Examples of enterprise environmental factors that will influence this process
            include geographical distribution of facilities and resources; communication
            channels and tools; external local culture and trends; organizational cultures,
            structure, political environment, personnel policy, and risk threshold.
        A2. OPAs: These include the organizational policies and procedures about medical,
            ethics, security, risk, communications, change data management, and so forth. Also,
            guidelines to develop, store, retrieve, and distribute information. For effective and
            efficient stakeholder communication, it's important to learn from experience. Therefore,
            the lessons learned database and historical information are especially useful.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   571



 A3. The components of the project management plan can be updated with
     communication planning-related changes, such as the communication
     management plan and stakeholder engagement plan. Communication activities
     may result in changes in the project schedule, and changes in communication
     planning may call for changes in the stakeholder register; e.g., the requirements
     of a stakeholder changed.


Chapter 9
                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.1

 Name the knowledge area for each executing process.
 Answer:
 Process              Knowledge Area Process                       Knowledge Area
 Direct and MIanage Integration           Acquire Resources,       Resource
 Project Work       Management            Manage Project Team      Management
 Manage Project                           Develop Project Team
 Knowledge
 Manage Quality       Quality             Manage                   Communication
                      Management          Communication            Management
                                          Manage Stakeholder
                                          Engagement
 Implement Risk       Risk Management Conduct Procurements Procurements
 Responses                                                 Management



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.2

 Name the processes that will use quality reports as input.
 Answer: Monitor and Control Project Work, Close Project or Phase, Validate Scope,
 Manage Communications, Control Procurements



                       STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.3

 Knowing the Manage Quality process, answer the following:
 Q1. List the organizational process assets that can influence this process.
 Q2. Which component or components of the project management plan will need to be
     modified as a result of quality activities?
572   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Q3. Which component or components of the project management plan will need to be
            modified as a result of project execution?
        Answer:
        A1. OPAs: The organizational quality management system, including policies,
            procedures, guidelines; quality templates, including traceability matrix and check
            sheets; results from previous audits; and quality-related lessons learned from
            historical database.
        A2. Scope baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline
        A3. Approach to managing quality in quality management plan



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 9.4

        True or False: The main goals of the Conduct Procurements process are to select the
        sellers, award procurement contracts to them, and obtain the procurement item.
        Answer: False. The main goals of the Conduct Procurements process are to select the
        sellers and award procurement contracts to them. The procurement item is obtained
        in the Control Procurement process.



      Chapter 10
                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.1

        Use your knowledge of the Acquire Resources process to answer the following
        questions:
        Q1. List some EEFs that can influence the process of acquiring resources.
        Q2. List some OPAs that can influence the process of acquiring resources.
        Q3. How are the documents listed for update in the output column of Table 10-2 updated?
        Answers:
        A1. EEFs: Organizational culture and structure; market conditions, e.g., job market to
            hire the talent and physical resources; and organization's existing physical and
            human resources with following information:
           *      Geographical locations
           *      Availability. It is important to know whether and when the
                  candidate is available before you attempt to obtain that member.
                                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   573



      *   Competency. Does the candidate have the skills needed to
          complete the schedule activities?
      *   Experience. Has the candidate performed similar work well in
          the past?
      *   Interests. What is the candidate's interest level in this project and
          in the work that will be assigned to him or her?
      *   Cost. What is the cost attached to each candidate in terms of
          pay? This is even more important if the member is a contractor.
A2. OPAs: Organizational policies and procedures about acquiring, selecting, and
    assigning human and physical resources; templates and forms; and lessons
    learned and other historical information.
A3.

Document                       Update Reasons
Resource management plan Record your experience of obtaining and selecting
                         resources: which technique works the best, etc.
Cost baseline                  In actually acquiring and assigning resources, cost and
                               hence cost baseline may change.
Project schedule               May change due to conditions like if one or more
                               activities took longer to finish, or the resource
                               availability, etc.
Resource requirement           May change due to change in resource requirements,
                               need for new or different resources, etc.
Resource breakdown             Obtained and assigned resources need to go into RBS.
structure (RBS)
Stakeholder register           During this process, new stakeholders will be joining,
                               and information about some old stakeholders may
                               change.
Risk register                  New resources, new assignments bring new risk with
                               them.
Lessons learned register       Record your experience of obtaining and selecting
                               resources: which technique works the best, etc.
574   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                              STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.2

        Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a conflict-resolution
        strategy. Match each comment with the corresponding strategy in the second column.

        Comment                                         Conflict Resolution Technique
        A.Let's have a face-to-face meeting and hear 1.Avoidance/withdrawal
          out both parties.
        B.Both of you have to meet halfway; you         2.Competition/forcing
          can't get everything all the time.
        C.I'm the one who is running the show here, 3.Compromising/smoothing
          and I have made the decision.
        D.OK, I see your point now. I was thinking      4.Accommodation
          more at a personal level; your view is
          more compatible with the project's
          objectives. I guess for that reason I can
          live with your approach.
        E.You guys are not even listening to my         5.Collaboration
          argument. I feel I'm wasting my time. So,
          I'm not going to discuss it with you any
          longer.
        F.Let's sit down, talk it out, and design the   6.Confronting/problem solving
          best solution that is good for all parties.

        Answers:
        A. 6
        B. 3
        C. 2
        D. 4
        E. 1
        F. 5
                                                                    PMP(R) in Depth   575




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 10.3

Each comment in the first column of the following table points to a management
theory in the second column. Match each comment with the corresponding theory in
the second column.

Scenario                                                       Motivation Theory
A.The management is real nice to the employees, and there   1.Maslow's
  are lots of perks. But I'm more concerned about my career   Hierarchy of
  path once I join this company.                              Needs Theory
B.Engineering manager Bob has a habit that employees don't 2.Herzberg's
  like. Every time he passes by a cubicle of an employee, he Motivation-
  always peeps at the computer screen over the shoulders of  Hygiene Theory
  the employee to see what the employee is really doing on
  the computer.
C.Rachel Janowicz quit her project management job with         3.McClelland's
  the Gugu Gaga company immediately after winning the            Achievement
  California super lotto. She said, "Well, my money problem      Motivation
  is solved. Now I will do what I always wanted to do."          Theory
D.I'm not going to attend this seminar. Basically, I'll be     4.McGregor's X-Y
  listening to their pitches all day long. What are the odds     Theory
  that I'll win the door prize?
E.Kushal did not really like the assignment. But he did it     5.Expectancy
  anyway because he did not want to let his manager down.        Theory

A. 2
B. 4
C. 1
D. 5
E. 3
576   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


      Chapter 11
                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.1

        Q1. Knowing the Manage Communication process, how do you think the documents
            listed for update in Table 11-1 would be updated?
        Q2. Why do you need the project stakeholder engagement plan for performing the
            Manage Communication process?
        Answer:
        A1. The communications management plan would be updated due to changes in the
            communication approach, and the stakeholder engagement plan due to changes
            in communication strategies or requirements. Accommodating the communication
            activities may change the project schedule. Arising communication issues and
            risks will generate the need to update the issues log and risk register.
        You will also be updating the lessons learned register with lessons learned from
        performing this process so as to subsequently use it to perform this process more
        effectively and efficiently.
        A2. Because the project stakeholder engagement plan describes how to use
            stakeholder communication strategies to engage the stakeholder in the project.



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.2

        Knowing the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
        Q1. Describe which EEFs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholder.
        Q2. Describe which OPAs can influence the process of Identify Stakeholder.
        Answers:
        Q1. EEFs: Examples of enterprise environmental factors that will influence this process
            include geographical distribution of facilities and resources; communication
            channels; external local culture and trends; organizational culture, structure,
            political environment, and personnel policy.
        Q2. OPAs: Include the organizational policies and procedures about medical, ethics,
            security, risk, communications, change management, etc. For effective and
            efficient stakeholder engagement management, it's important to learn from
            experience. Therefore, the lessons learned database and historical information
            are especially useful.
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth     577




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 11.3

 True or False: A stakeholder is proposing something that is not within the planned
 scope of the project. The appropriate response to this proposal is to oppose it.
 Answer: False. A project manager is not a de facto opponent to change; instead, you
 should be an agent for change. Your response should be to evaluate the change for its
 effects on the project and then put it through the approval process, where it may be
 either rejected or selected.



Chapter 12
                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.1

 Name three processes that convert work performance data into work performance
 measurements.
 Answer: Control Scope, Control Schedule, and Control Cost.



                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.2

 Q1. The performance of a project is measured against which planning element?
 Q2. Can you name four baselines?
 Answers:
 A1. Performance baseline
 A2. Scope baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline, and performance baseline



                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.3

 Q1. Many processes in the monitoring and controlling process group generate change
     requests. Name the process in this process group that is used to approve or reject
     the change requests.
 Q2. Name the processes and other sources that can generate the change requests.
578   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        Answers:
        A1. Perform Integrated Change Control
        A2. Direct and Manage Project Work process, Monitor and Control Project Work
            process, other processes in the monitor and control process group, and directly
            from stakeholders



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.4

        Q1. Which quality process generates quality control measurements?
        Q2. Which quality process uses quality control measurements?
        Q3. Which quality process generates quality metrics?
        Q4. Which quality process uses quality metrics?
        Answers:
        A1. Control Quality
        A2. Manage Quality
        A3. Plan Quality
        A4. Manage Quality and Control Quality



                               STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.5

        Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
        column.

        Data Presentation Tool     A Use
        A. Flowcharts              1.To identify the most important area of causes of defects
        B. Tally sheets            2.To find the relationship between two variables and
                                     find potential causes of defects
        C. Scatter diagrams        3.To anticipate what quality problems might be and
                                     where they might occur
        D. Histograms              4.To monitor whether the variance of a specified
                                     variable is within the acceptable limits
        E. Affinity diagrams       5.To find the frequency of defects
        F. Control charts          6.To explore all the potential causes of a problem, not
                                     just the obvious ones
        G.Cause and effect         7.To display the relative importance of different
          diagrams                   variables; e.g., its causes
                                                                     PMP(R) in Depth     579



Answers:
A. 3
B. 5
C. 2
D. 7
E. 1
F. 4
G. 6



                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.6

Match every item in the first column of the following table to the items in the second
column. An item in first column may match with more than one item in second column
and vice versa.
Item                                Appears In
A. Quality metrics                   1. Input to Plan Quality Management
B. Quality control measurements      2. Input to Plan Quality
C. Quality report                    3. Input to Control Quality
D. Test and evaluation documents     4. Output of Plan Quality Management
E. Approved change requests          5. Output of Manage Quality
 F. Work performance data            6. Output of Control Quality
G. Deliverables                      7. Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
H. Verified deliverables             8.Output of Perform Integrated Change
 I. Work performance information       Control
 J. Change requests                  9. Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
                                    10. Monitor and Control Project Work

Answers:
A. 2, 3, 4
B. 2, 6
C. 5, 10
D. 3, 5
E. 3, 8
F. 3, 9
580   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises


        G. 3
        H. 6
        I. 6, 7
        J. 5, 6



                            STUDY CHECKPOINT 12.7

        Q1. Why might you end up updating the assumptions log and lessons learned register
            during the Monitor Risks process?
        Q2. The work performance information, an output item of the risk control process, is
            an input to which process?
        Q3. Which other processes generate work performance information?
        Answers:
        A1. Like any other process where you update these two items, during this process new
            assumptions and constraints may appear, and old assumptions and constraints
            may be modified and disappear altogether, giving rise to the need to update the
            assumptions log. The lessons learned register is updated with lessons learned so
            that those lessons can be applied in subsequent runs of the process.
        A2. Monitor and Control Project Work
        A3. Monitor and control processes in all knowledge areas except project integration
            management



      Chapter 13
                            STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.1

        Q1. List some of the organizational process assets that will influence the Control
            Scope process.
        Q2. Why do you need the lessons learned register in the input of the Control Scope
            process?
                                                                      PMP(R) in Depth     581



Answers:
A1. OPAs: Policies, procedures, and guidelines related to controlling scope and
    changes; templates for work performance information; and knowledge database
    of monitoring, controlling, and reporting methods used for previous projects
A2. Lessons learned can be recorded and subsequently applied as the project
    progresses, and to record the lessons learned from the overall project.



                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.2

Q1. The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are used to validate scope.
    Why are they in Table 13-3?
Q2. The Verify Scope process belongs to which process group?
Q3. From Table 13-3, you know that the project documents requirement documentation,
    requirements traceability matrix, and lessons learned register are updated during
    the Validate Scope process. Using your knowledge about these documents, what
    do you think they are updated with in this process?
Q4. Which process will be performed first: Control Quality or Validate Scope?
Answers
A1. The project scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary are part of the scope
    baseline as listed in Table 13-3.
A2. The Verify Scope process belongs to the monitoring and controlling process group.
A3. Documents updated:
   *    Requirement documentation with validation status, such as
        validated, not validated, requirement waved, and this feature is
        even than required.
   *    Requirements traceability matrix with validation status and
        procedures or methods used in validation.
   *    Lessons learned register with lessons learned, such as
        mistakes made and how to avoid them, and which validation
        methods worked well and which did not. These lessons may be
        applied the next time the process is run.
A4. The deliverables must be verified using the quality control process before they can
    be processed through the Validate Scope process. So, quality control is usually
    performed before Validate Scope, but they can be performed simultaneously as well.
582   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.3

        Q1. Use your knowledge about the lessons learned register to figure out why we need
            it as input to the Control Schedule process.
        Q2. Knowing the Control Schedule process, make a list of organizational process
            assets that will influence this process.
        Answers:
        A1. We need the lessons learned register to record the lessons learned and
            subsequently apply them throughout the project lifetime.
        A2. Schedule control-related organizational policies, procedures, and guidelines;
            tools; monitoring and reporting methods; and the lessons learned from historical
            database, such as:
           *    The causes of schedule variance
           *    The reasons for choosing the corrective actions that were taken
           *    The effectiveness of the corrective actions



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.4

        Using your knowledge of organizational project assets and the Control Resources
        process, answer the following questions:
        Q1. Make a list of OPAs that would influence this process.
        Q2. How might the assumptions log and risk register be updated as a result of the
            Control Resources process?
        Answers:
        A1. OPAs: Organizational policies and procedures related to controlling resources and
            resource assignment and the escalation of the issues; lessons learned repository
            database from previous projects.
        A2. Assumptions log. Updated with changed or new assumptions about physical
            resources; e.g., how costly, efficient, and effective they are.
        Risk register. Updated with disappeared risks, changed risk levels, and new risks
        regarding physical resource quality, price, availability, usage, etc.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   583




                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.5

In our running example, calculate the ETC at the present CPI.
Answer:
                         BAC - EV $600, 000 - $150, 000
                ETC =            =                      = $375, 000
                           CPI            1.2

Note: CPI was calculated as 1.2 in our running example earlier in this chapter.



                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.6

Prove the validity of the following equation:
EAC = AC + BAC - EV
Answer:
The definition of EAC:
EAC = AC + ETC (1)
The definition of ETC:
ETC = BAC - EV (2)
Substitute the value of ETC from equation (2) into equation (1) to obtain:
EAC = AC + BAC - EV



                     STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.7

In our running example, calculate EAC at the present CPI.
Answer:

                     BAC - EV               $600, 000 - $150, 000
       EAC = AC +             = $125, 000 +                       = $500, 000
                       CPI                           1.2
584   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.8

        In our running example, calculate EAC at the present CPI.
        Answer:

                            BAC - EV               $600, 000 - $150, 000
               EAC = AC +            = $125, 000 +                       = $625, 000
                            CPI  SPI                     1.2* 0.75

        Note: SPI was calculated to be 0.75 in our running example earlier in this chapter.



                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 13.9

        Name three processes that convert the work performance data into work performance
        information.
        Answer: Control Scope, Control Schedule, and Control Cost



      Chapter 14
                             STUDY CHECKPOINT 14.1

        Knowing the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process, answer the following:
        Q1. How will the stakeholder register and risk register be updated as a result of this
            process?
        Q2. How will the stakeholder engagement plan, communications management plan,
            and resource management plan be updated as a result of this process?
        Answers:
        A1. The stakeholder register will be updated with any change in stakeholder
            information, such as assessment or classification, and the risk register will be
            updated with changed risk status as a result of change request implementation.
        A2. The stakeholder engagement plan may be updated with changes in engagement
            strategy, and accordingly the communications management plan will be updated;
            e.g., with change in communication strategies; and the resource management
            plan will be updated with changes in team member responsibilities regarding the
            stakeholder engagements.
                                                                       PMP(R) in Depth     585




                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 14.2

 In the following table, match each item in the first column to one or more items in the
 second column in the context of its role in communication management.

 Item                                Role
 A. Work performance data            1. Input to Monitor and Control Project Work
 B. Work performance information 2. Output of Monitor Communication
 C. Work performance reports         3. Output of Monitor and Control Project Work
 D. Project communications           4. Output of Direct and Manage Project Work
                                     5. Input to Monitor Communication
                                     6. Input to Manage Communication
                                     7. Output of Manage Communication

 Answers:
 A. 4, 5
 B. 1, 2
 C. 3, 6
 D. 5, 7



Chapter 15
                      STUDY CHECKPOINT 15.1

 Q1. Name the processes used to generate:
    A. Lessons learned register
    B. Lessons learned

 Q2. For what do we need data analysis during the Close Project process?
 Answer:
 A1a. Manage Project Knowledge
 A1b. Manage Project Knowledge, Close Project or Phase
 A2. Data-analysis techniques could be used to analyze the documents, prepare final
     report, and learn lessons.
586   Appendix A | Answers to Study Checkpoint Exercises



                            STUDY CHECKPOINT 15.2

        Q1. What is the first process you perform in managing a project?
        Q2. What do you need before you can begin initiating your project?
        Answers:
        A1. Develop Project Charter
        A2. The input to the Develop Project Charter process: business case, project benefit
            plan, and necessary agreements
                                                                  APPENDIX


                                                                          B

Answers and
Explanations for
Chapter Review
Questions
Chapter 1
       1. Answer: D
            D is the correct answer because the defining
            characteristics of a project are that it must be
            temporary (with a start and a finish date) and must
            produce a unique (new) product.
            A and B are incorrect because it's possible to have a
            project that will involve only one person, and there
            could be a project without an individual called the
            project manager. The only two defining characteristics
            of a project are that it is temporary and unique.

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0
588   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               C is incorrect because an operation can have a plan
               and a budget, too.
           2. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because building a library is
               temporary--that is, it will have a start and a finish
               date, and it will be a new library.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because running a donut
               shop, keeping a network up and running, and running a
               warehouse are all ongoing operations.
           3. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because the names of the
               five process groups are initiating, planning, executing,
               monitoring and controlling, and closing.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because there are no
               process groups with the names of starting, organizing
               and preparing, or implementing.
           4. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because team management
               is not a knowledge area itself; this task is part of the
               knowledge area called human resource management.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because these are three of
               the ten project management knowledge areas.
           5. Answer: A
               A is the correct and best answer because the project
               plan is developed starting from the concept and going
               through the project management plan.
               B and C are incorrect because B includes the project
               lifecycle and C is the lifecycle. Progressive elaboration
               does not include the lifecycle of the project; its goal is
               to plan the project. Because the project planning can
               develop (or change) throughout the project lifecycle,
               progressive elaboration can continue through the
               project lifecycle, but it does not include the work of
               the lifecycle.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   589



6. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because:
   The probability that OTF will deliver = 3/4
   The probability that ST will deliver = 1-2/3 = 1/3
   The probability that both will deliver = 3/4 X 1/3 = 1/4
   = 0.25
7. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because it's a false statement.
   Operations are ongoing and do not have a planned
   closure or end as a project does.
   A, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
   true statements about both projects and operations.
8. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because it sounds like a group
   of interrelated projects, which would nicely fit into a
   program.
   A is an incorrect answer because a project usually has
   only one project manager.
   C is incorrect because the undertaking is temporary
   and has a set of unique products.
   D is incorrect because a portfolio may contain projects
   and programs, and this conversation is being held at
   the program level and not at the portfolio level.

9. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because adding parental guide
   notices is a legal requirement.
   B is incorrect because adding these notices is primarily
   a legal requirement.
   C and D are incorrect because work has nothing to
   do with the product and technology.
590   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          10. Answer: A, B, C
               A, B, and C are correct because they list valid project
               management areas.
               D is incorrect because project time management is
               not a valid project management area.
          11. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because no processes have to
               be performed in each project.
          12. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because every output either
               is a terminal output or becomes an input to another
               process.
          13. Answer: A
               A, and not others, is correct because procurements
               are conducted using the Conduct Procurements
               process, which belongs to executing process group.

      Chapter 2
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the project-oriented
               type provides the greatest authority, high to almost
               full, for the project manager.
               A and C are incorrect because the authority of
               the project manager is none to low in a functional
               organization and low to high in a matrix organization.
               D is incorrect because the authority of the project
               manager is low to moderate in virtual organization.
           2. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the authority of
               the project manager is none to low in a functional
               organization.
               B and C are incorrect because the authority of the
               project manager is high to full in a project-oriented
               organization and low to high in a matrix organization.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   591



   D is incorrect because the authority of the project
   manager is low to moderate in a virtual organization.
3. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because technical project
   management skills, leadership skills, and strategic and
   business management skills constitute the PMI Talent
   Triangle.
   A, B, and D are incorrect answers because "IT part
   of project management skills" is not the same as
   technical project management skills; strategic and
   "business management skills" are more than just the
   knowledge of the business strategy of the organization;
   and "knowledge of IT part of the company's business"
   is not the same as strategic and business management
   skills.
4. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because it belongs to technical
   project management skills and not to strategic and
   business management skills.
5. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because the PMO provides
   high to almost full project resource availability for the
   project manager.
   B is incorrect because the hybrid structure doesn't
   provide high to almost full project resource availability
   for the project manager.
   C and D are incorrect because the multi-divisional
   and organic structures only provide none to little
   project resource availability for the project manager.

6. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because a project manager
   is responsible for achieving the project objectives
   regardless of the structure of the organization.
   A, B, and C are incorrect because the authority of
   project managers may vary over structures, but the
   responsibility for meeting the project objectives stays
   with the project manager.
592   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           7. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because environmental
               factors may have positive or negative impacts on the
               project; for example, they may expand or constrain
               project options.
               A and B are incorrect because environmental factors
               may have positive or negative impacts.
               D is incorrect because environmental factors are
               hardly ever neutral; certainly, not all of them. You must
               be aware of them and try to use them for the success
               of the project.
           8. Answer: B, C, D
               B, C, and D are all included in technical project
               management skills.
               A is wrong because technical project management
               means IT related only.
           9. Answer: A, D
               A and D are correct because the code of conduct of
               the performing organization is an internal factor, and
               so is the geographically distributed virtual team.
               B is incorrect because code of conduct in a country--
               or city, in this case--is an external factor.
               C is incorrect because standardized cost estimate
               data is an external factor; just because it's on or being
               viewed on the company's computer system does not
               change this fact.

          10. Answer: B and C
               The two project management business documents
               are 1) project business case, and 2) project benefit
               management plan. The summary of need analysis is
               included in the project business case, and the project
               charter is a project management document, but it's
               not called a business document.
                                                         PMP(R) in Depth   593



  11. Answer: C

      The project charter is the only document that is
      issued to authorize the project. The business case
      document is only used to authorize the project
      management activities to continue until the project is
      finally authorized or disapproved.

  12. Answer: C
      According to PMBOK, the project sponsor authorizes
      the project.

Chapter 3
   1. Answer: A
      A is correct because the management of the
      performing organization or sponsor issues the project
      charter.
      B is incorrect because issuing a project charter is the
      responsibility of the performing organization, and a
      stakeholder does not even have to be a member of
      the performing organization.
      C is incorrect because issuing a project charter is the
      responsibility of the performing organization, and a
      customer does not even have to be a member of the
      performing organization.
      D is incorrect because the charter authorizes the
      project manager and not vice versa.
   2. Answer: B
      B is the correct answer because the project charter is
      created by the Develop Project Charter process, the
      only integration management process in the initiation
      process group.
      A and C are incorrect because the business case and
      project benefit management plan are inputs to the
      Develop Project Charter process.
      D is incorrect because there is no standard document
      called preliminary project scope statement.
594   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           3. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the project charter
               names the project manager and provides the project
               manager the authority to use organizational resources
               to run the project.
               A is incorrect because the sponsor is not authorized
               by the project charter; the opposite might be true.
               C and D are incorrect because these tasks are
               performed in the Identify Stakeholders process.
           4. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because the project schedule
               is developed during planning. However, a milestone
               schedule may be included in the project charter.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these items may
               be included in the project charter.
           5. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because a hard deadline
               imposed on a project is an example of a constraint.
               A constraint is a restriction (or a limitation) that can
               affect the performance of the project.
               A is incorrect because an assumption is a factor that
               you believe to be true; it is not a condition, such as a
               hard deadline.
               C is incorrect because a hard deadline tells very little
               about the actual schedule.
               D is incorrect because a constraint is not a risk, but it
               can possibly cause a risk.
           6. Answer: B
               B is correct because assumptions represent
               uncertainty and hence risk. Assumptions must be
               validated and analyzed as part of risk management at
               various stages of the project.
               A is incorrect because assumptions by definition
               represent uncertainty, and as a project manager it
               is your responsibility to validate the assumptions at
               various stages of the project.
               C is incorrect because it is not the correct definition
               of assumption.
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   595



    D is incorrect because you can start the project with
    the assumptions. All you have to do is validate them at
    various stages of the project and analyze them as part
    of risk management.
7. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because it is the project
    sponsor who signs the final closure documents and
    can send the project to closure at any stage of the
    project.
    A is incorrect because the project manager is
    responsible for managing all the activities needed to
    close the project, but the closure must be authorized
    by the sponsor.
    B and D are incorrect because neither the customer
    nor the functional manager can authorize the project
    closure according to the standard.
8. Answer: B
    B is correct, and others are incorrect, because
    stakeholder cube is the right model name in this case.
9. Answer: C
    C is correct because influence is coming from a peer
    whose project competes for resources.
    A is incorrect because a project manager's peers are
    not from management.
    B and D are incorrect because Cosmo is neither an
    end user or supplier for project "Teach the Congress,"
    nor is he a team member or temporary worker from
    project "Teach the Congress."
10. Answer: A
    A is the correct answer because the project initiation
    process group generates no document called
    statement of work.
    B, C, D are incorrect answers because they refer to
    the documents generated by the processes in the
    project initiation process group.
596   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          11. Answer: B, C

               B is the correct answer because the project charter
               names the project manager and provides the project
               manager the authority to use organizational resources
               to run the project.
               C is the correct answer because the project charter
               interfaces between the project and the organization's
               strategic objectives.
               A is incorrect because the sponsor is not authorized
               by the project charter; the opposite might be true.
               D is incorrect because this task is performed by the
               Identify Stakeholders process.

          12. Answer: C

               C is the correct answer because the stakeholders
               register is the output of identifying stakeholders--not
               an input.
               A, B, and D are all incorrect because they can be input
               to this process. Note that the stakeholder register
               template may be an input as part of the organizational
               process assets.
          13. Answer: A
               A is correct because the benefit management plan is
               an input to developing the project charter, which in
               turn is an input to identifying stakeholders.
               B is incorrect because the benefit management plan is
               an input to developing the project charter.
               C and D are incorrect because the project charter is
               an input to identifying stakeholders.
                                                           PMP(R) in Depth   597




Chapter 4
   1. Answer: D
      D is the correct answer because work packages don't
      have to appear in the order in which the work will be
      performed. This sequencing will be done later.
      A, B, and C are incorrect answers because these are
      the characteristics of the WBS.

   2. Answer: D

      D is correct because the project charter is created in
      the initiation stage, and it is an input item to creating
      the requirements documentation and the scope
      statement.
      A is incorrect because the project charter is an input
      item to creating the project scope statement.
      B is incorrect because the project scope statement is
      an input item to creating the WBS.
      C is incorrect because the project charter is an input
      to creating the requirements documentation.
   3. Answer: A
      A is correct because the Create WBS process is used
      to create the WBS.
      B and C are incorrect because there are no standard
      processes named Project Work process or Develop
      WBS.
      D is incorrect because project initiating is a process
      group that includes two processes: one to develop the
      project charter and one to identify stakeholders.
   4. Answer: B
      B is correct because the Define Scope process is used
      to create the project scope statement.
      A is incorrect because the Create WBS process is
      used to create the WBS.
      C is incorrect because there is no such standard
      process named Create Project Scope.
598   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               D is incorrect because project initiating is a process
               group that includes two processes: one to develop the
               project charter and one to identify stakeholders.
           5. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the Plan Scope
               Management process also generates the requirement
               management plan.
               A, B, and D are incorrect because all these are true
               statements about the project scope management
               plan, the other output of the Plan Scope Management
               process.

           6. Answer: A

               A is correct because the components in the lowest
               level of the WBS hierarchy are called work packages.
               B is incorrect because a control account might consist
               of more than one work package.
               C is incorrect because if a phase is represented in the
               WBS, it will be represented at a much higher level.
               D is incorrect because a milestone might consist of
               more than one work package.
           7. Answer: A, B, C, D
               A, B, C, D is correct because all of these are included
               in the project scope statement.
           8. Answer: D
               D is correct because the scope statement, the WBS
               document, and the WBS dictionary combined make
               the scope baseline for the project.
               A is incorrect because the WBS dictionary is missing
               from the list.
               B is incorrect because you must include the WBS
               document and the WBS dictionary in the scope
               baseline.
               C is incorrect because you must include the scope
               statement and the WBS dictionary in the scope
               baseline along with the WBS document.
                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   599



 9. Answer: D
    D is correct because you, the project manager, create
    the WBS with help from the project team.
    A is incorrect because the project manager creates
    the WBS with help from the team.
    B and C are incorrect because neither the customer
    nor the upper management of the performing
    organization creates the WBS.

10. Answer: B
    B is correct because the WBS is not part of the proj-
    ect scope statement; it is an output of the Create
    WBS process, to which the scope statement is an
    input item.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because all these items are
    parts of the scope statement.

11. Answer: C
    B is the correct answer because the requirement
    management plan and the scope management plan are
    the output of the Plan Scope Management process.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because they are not true
    statements.

12. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because job shadowing is
    another name for the observations technique for col-
    lecting product requirements, which is a part of the
    Collect Requirements process.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because job shadowing is
    not a standard tool or technique for these processes.

13. Answer: A, B, C, D
    A, B, C, D are all correct because requirements
    documentation is an input to the Define Scope
    process that generates the project scope statement,
    the Create WBS process that generates the WBS, and
    the Control Scope that generates work performance
    information.
600   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          14. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer, and the others are not,
               because the project management plan is the only output
               of the Develop Project Management Plan process,
               the only process that belongs to the integration
               management knowledge area and project planning
               process group.
          15. Answer: A, B, C, D

               A, B, C, D are correct because all of these are included
               in the input into the Develop Project Management
               Plan process. Note that the project management plan
               integrates all the subsidiary plans, baselines, and other
               plan documents.


      Chapter 5
           1. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the precedence dia-
               gramming method is the most commonly used net-
               work diagramming method that can be used in the
               activity sequencing process to represent any of the
               four kinds of logical dependency relationships.
               A and B are incorrect because CPM and simulations
               are used in the schedule development process.
               D is incorrect because the arrow diagramming method
               is not a popular method and is not even included in
               the standard.

           2. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because crashing is used to
               compress the schedule by adding more resources to
               the project.
               A and D are incorrect because the network
               diagramming method and the sequencing method do
               not need crashing.
               C is incorrect because crashing does not reduce
               cost. It may very well increase cost when you commit
               additional resources.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   601



3. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because an activity has
   external dependency when it relies on factors outside
   the project.
   A is incorrect because Activity Y has a mandatory
   dependency on Activity X, which legally or inherently
   depends on X. It's possible to track down the tourist
   even after the season.
   C is incorrect because there is no such dependency
   called internal.
   D is incorrect because we don't have an internal
   dependency here.

4. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because finish-to-start depen-
   dency means that the successor (B) activity cannot
   start until the predecessor (A) activity is finished.
   A is incorrect because the start-to-finish relationship
   means that the successor activity cannot finish until
   the predecessor activity is started.
   C is incorrect because we do not have enough
   information to say that this dependency is mandatory.
   D is incorrect because although there is a dependency
   between two activities, that does not mean they are
   on the critical path.

5. Answer: A

   A is the correct answer because each activity on the
   critical path has a zero float time, and therefore if an
   activity is delayed it will delay the entire project.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because these are incorrect
   statements about the activities on the critical path.
6. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the analogous
   estimating technique estimates the duration of an
   activity based on the duration of a similar activity in a
   previous project.
602   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               A is incorrect because parametric estimating uses
               parameters such as the productivity rate of the
               resource assigned to the activity.
               B is incorrect because the individual in this example
               used the analogous method and not expert judgment,
               even though he happened to be an expert--we don't
               know in which field.
               D is incorrect because the Delphi technique is not for
               activity duration estimating.
           7. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because float time is the
               positive difference between the allowed late start date
               and the early start date of a schedule activity without
               changing the schedule finish date.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because these are not valid
               terms used to describe delaying an activity without
               changing the schedule finish date.

           8. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because by doing some activi-
               ties in parallel (fast tracking), you might be able to
               compress the schedule without adding cost.
               A is incorrect because crashing usually results in
               increased cost because it involves adding extra
               resources.
               C is incorrect because the project sponsor is
               sponsoring (paying for) the project. So, asking for a
               new sponsor does not make sense; it can only trigger
               the sponsor to ask for a new project manager.
               D is incorrect because you do not want to bypass the
               sponsor on budgetary matters since the budget will
               need the sponsor's approval.
           9. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because it has the longest
               sequence: 8 + 6 + 8 = 22.
               A is incorrect because this path is only 20 units long.
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   603



    B is incorrect because there is no such path as Start-
    I-G-E-Finish in this network diagram.
    D is incorrect because this path is only 21 units long,
    which is less than 22.
10. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer because the float time for G
    is zero because it is on the critical path.
    A, B, and C are incorrect because G is on the critical
    path and must have a float time of zero.
11. Answer: C

    C is the correct answer because if you consider all
    the paths in the network diagram, the path Start-I-G-
    H-Finish adds up to 22, which is longer than any other
    path in the diagram.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because the length of a path
    is not measured by the number of nodes in it.

12. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because in the three-point
    method in this case using the weighted average is: (9 +
    18 + 4 x 12)1/6 = 12.5.
    A is incorrect because a weight of 4 is assigned to the
    most-likely scenario as compared to the weight of 1
    for each of the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios.
    C and D are incorrect because the duration estimate
    should be the weighted average of the three points.
13. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because the activity duration
    is calculated after an activity has been defined.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because the WBS, project
    scope statement, and WBS dictionary (as parts of the
    scope baseline) are valid input items to the Define
    Activities process.
604   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          14. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because work performance
               data is an input to this process and not an output.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these items
               could be parts of the output of the schedule control
               process.
          15. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the project charter
               is an input to only one schedule management process,
               and that is the Plan Schedule Management process.
               A, B, and D are the incorrect answers because the
               project charter is an input to only one schedule
               management process, and that is Plan Schedule
               Management.

      Chapter 6
           1. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because a chart that displays
               the resource assignments for each activity is an
               example of a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM).
               A is incorrect because a project organization chart
               represents the relationships between the different
               roles in the project, and that is not what management
               wants.
               B is incorrect because the WBS contains work
               packages, not activities and resource requirements.
               C is incorrect because management wants the
               resource requirements for each activity, not just a list
               of roles and responsibilities.

           2. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the resource
               requirements document is not the output of the Plan
               Resource Management process.
               A, B, and D are incorrect because all these items are
               the output of the resource planning process.
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   605



3. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the team charter is
   an output of the Plan Resources process.
   A, B, and D are incorrect because these are false
   statements about the team charter document.
4. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because you need resources
   figured out before you can estimate costs.
   A and C are incorrect because you cannot estimate
   costs until you have a resource plan to figure out
   resources, and you cannot determine budget until you
   have cost estimates.
   D is incorrect because you need resources figured
   out before you can plan for cost management.
5. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer, and the other answers are
   incorrect, because the activity source needs to be
   known before you can estimate the activity duration
   to schedule; and resources and schedule need to be
   known for estimating cost and determining budget.
6. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because a contingency
   reserve is applied both to activity durations (time) and
   cost estimates.
   B, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
   true statements about the contingency reserve.
7. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because the cost baseline is
   an output of the Determine Budget process.
   B is incorrect because there is no standard process
   with this name.
   C is incorrect because the Estimate Costs process is
   used to estimate the costs, and these estimates need
   to be aggregated to determine the budget.
   D is incorrect because cost baseline is an input to the
   control cost project.
606   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           8. Answer: A
               10% accuracy leads to an uncertainty of $500 x 10
               / 100 = $50
               Therefore, Range = $450 - $550
           9. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer and the others are not
               because the project charter, schedule management
               plan, and risk management plan are listed as input to
               the Plan Cost Management process in PMBOK, and
               the quality management plan is not.
          10. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because the cost overrun in
               the firm fixed price (FFP) contract is borne by the
               seller.
               A is incorrect because in cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)
               cost overrun is shared by the buyer and seller.
               B is incorrect because in time and materials (T&M),
               the increased cost due to the increased quantity of
               resources, such as work hours by a contractor, is
               borne by the buyer.
               C is incorrect because in a cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
               contract, cost overrun is paid by the buyer, as the
               seller is reimbursed for all allowable costs.
          11. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because it uses the rates for
               labor, and materials costs are fixed.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because the given scenario
               does not match the definitions of these contract types.
          12. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because SOW is an output of
               the planning procurements process.
               A, C, and D are incorrect answers because all of these
               are true statements.
                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   607



13. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because the cost overrun
    is paid by the buyer in cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
    contracts.
    A is incorrect because the firm fixed-price contract
    presents risk to both buyer and seller because the
    fixed price might turn out to be above or below the
    actual cost.
    B and D are incorrect because the fee in these cases
    does not rise with the increase of the actual cost.
14. Answer: A
    A is the correct answer because in this scenario the
    hourly rate sounds like a good option.
    B and C are incorrect because the reimbursable cost
    does not make sense in this case, and you don't have
    to add a fee to the cost.
    D is incorrect because you cannot correctly estimate
    the total price because you do not know how many
    programs are required.

15. Answer: D

    D is the correct answer because the seller proposal is
    a response to the bidding documents.
    A, B, C are incorrect because all of these are bidding
    documents.
16. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because the amount of work
    and hence the cost cannot be determined at this
    point. According to CPFF, all costs are reimbursed
    to the seller, and a fixed fee as a percentage of the
    original estimate is also paid.
    A is incorrect because the amount of work and hence
    the cost cannot be determined at this point.
608   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               B is incorrect because a time and materials contract
               is used in a situation where both cost reimbursement
               and fixed-price features need to be applied. This is not
               the case here.
               D is incorrect because there is no such contract type
               as cost plus time.
          17. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because make-or-buy analysis
               is a technique used in the procurement planning
               process called Plan Procurements.
               A is incorrect because make-or-buy decisions are
               already made in the Conduct Procurements process.
               B is incorrect because there is no standard process
               called Administer Procurement.
               D is incorrect because Control Procurement is not
               the process in which make-or-buy decisions are made.

      Chapter 7
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because a risk can have a
               negative or a positive effect on a project.
               A, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
               true statements about project risks.
           2. Answer: A

               A is correct because the risk register is the output of
               the risk identification process, but it is not used as an
               input because it does not exist before this process.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because the risk register
               is an input item to Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
               Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, Plan Risk Responses,
               Implement Risk Responses, and Monitor Risks.
                                                       PMP(R) in Depth   609



3. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because there is no standard
   technique called Delphi used in the Identify Risks
   process according to the PMBOK, Sixth Edition.
   A, C, and D are incorrect answers because
   brainstorming is the data-gathering technique, and
   SWOT analysis and root-cause analysis are the data-
   analysis techniques, used for identifying risks.
4. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because, depending upon the
   experience of the team, risks can be moved directly
   after the identification process to the quantitative
   analysis process without performing qualitative
   analysis.
   B, C, and D are incorrect answers because these are
   true statements.
5. Answer: B
   B is correct because building redundancy into a
   system is an example of mitigating the risk.
   A is incorrect because the risk can still happen because
   you have not changed the plan, such as moving the
   server center to some other city.
   C is incorrect because accepting a risk means no
   proactive action is taken; this is not the case here.
   D is incorrect because you have not transferred the
   risk to a third party.
6. Answer: D
   D is correct because the risk has been transferred to
   a third party.
   A is incorrect because the risk can still happen because
   you have not changed the plan, such as eliminating the
   need for that part of the system.
   B is incorrect because mitigating the risk does not
   involve transferring the risk to a third party.
   C is incorrect because accepting a risk means no
   proactive action is taken.
610   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           7. Answer: C
               C is correct because the numerical analysis of a risk is
               called quantitative risk analysis.
               A is incorrect because assigning numbers does not
               necessarily mean you are performing a Monte Carlo
               simulation, although it is one of the tools used to
               perform quantitative analysis.
               B is incorrect because qualitative analysis does not
               involve numerical analysis, such as EMV calculations.
               D is incorrect because risk response planning will be
               based on the results of risk analysis.
           8. Answer: D
               D is correct because the probability of the risk is 50%,
               and the probability of the positive impact is 40%, so the
               total probability for the positive impact to happen is

                                   0.5 x 0.4 = 0.2.

               EMV = Probability x Value of the outcome = 0.2 x
               $200,000 = $40,000
               A, B, and C are incorrect because they show wrong
               values for EMV.
           9. Answer: A
               A is correct because the probability of the risk is 50%,
               and the probability of the positive impact is 40%, so the
               total probability for the positive impact to happen is

                                   0.5 x 0.4 = 0.2.

               EMV = Probability x Value of the outcome = 0.2 x
               $200,000 = $40,000
               Similarly, EMV for threat = 0.3 x $50,000 = -$15,000
               Therefore, EMV for the risk = $40,000 - $15,000 =
               $25,000
               B, C, and D are incorrect because they show wrong
               values for EMV.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   611



10. Answer: D
    D is correct because secondary risks are those risks
    that arise as a result of risk responses.
    A is incorrect because a residual risk is a risk that
    remains after a response has been performed.
    B is incorrect because, depending upon the nature of
    the secondary risk, it may have any priority.
    C is incorrect because the risk response will depend
    upon the analysis results of the risk.
11. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer because there is no such
    standard risk response named risk rejection.
    A, B, and C are all incorrect answers because these
    are valid risk responses.
12. Answer: A
    A is correct because SWOT is a risk identification
    technique that identifies risks by examining the
    strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
    (SWOT) of a given project.
    B is incorrect because this is a wrong statement about
    SWOT.
    C and D are incorrect because SWOT is a technique
    used in risk identification, not in risk response planning,
    nor in quantitative risk analysis.
13. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because you need to perform
    quantitative risk analysis to create a list of risks
    prioritized based on the total effect of each risk on
    the overall project objectives.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because these are the
    possible output items from qualitative risk analysis.
612   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          14. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because the decision about a
               risk-related contractual agreement can be an output
               of risk response planning, not of the quantitative risk
               analysis.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all these are the
               possible output items from the quantitative risk
               analysis.
          15. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because benchmarking is a
               quality planning technique that compares the practices,
               products, or services of a project with those of
               some reference projects for the purpose of learning,
               improving, and creating the basis for measuring
               performance.
               A is incorrect because you can always brainstorm,
               but it does not have to compare the results of similar
               activities.
               C is incorrect because, although it is a quality planning
               technique, it involves striking a balance between cost
               and benefit (which are not similar).
               D is incorrect because quality metrics are not quality
               planning techniques; these are output items of the
               quality planning process.
          16. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because matrix diagrams are
               not used to explore the effects of defects; the tool for
               that would be cause and effect diagrams.
               A, B, and D are incorrect because all three are true
               statements about matrix diagrams.
          17. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because quality metrics are
               not used to find the key quality metrics important for
               project success; the tool for that would be the matrix
               diagrams.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because all three are true
               statements about the quality metrics.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   613



  18. Answer: D

      D is the correct answer because flowcharts are not
      used in figuring out the frequency of defects from
      different attributes of a product during inspection; the
      tool for that would be the check sheets.
      A, B, and C are incorrect because all three are true
      statements about the flowcharts.

  19. Answer: A

      A is the correct answer because there is no standard
      process named Perform Quality Assurance.
      B, C, and D are incorrect because all three are true
      statements about the mind-mapping technique.
  20. Answer: A
      A is the correct answer.
      B is incorrect because Shewhart defined the plan-do-
      check-act cycle of quality management, and Deming
      modified it.
      C and D are incorrect because Crosby and Juan have
      made contributions to the knowledge base of quality
      management, but they did not define the plan-do-
      check- act cycle.

Chapter 8
   1. Answer: C
      C is correct because this is what the stakeholder
      engagement plan is for.
      A and B are incorrect because these are not
      documents, but rather tools and techniques.
      D is incorrect because the stakeholder register
      contains information about the stakeholders and not
      the management strategies about them.
614   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           2. Answer: A
               A is correct and the others are not because the
               stakeholder register document is the only of the listed
               items that is not generated during the Plan Stakeholder
               Engagement process; it's generated during the Identify
               Stakeholders process instead.
           3. Answer: D

               D is correct because managing and controlling
               stakeholder engagement is the core of stakeholder
               management.
               A and C are incorrect because you can neither
               manage nor control stakeholders at large; you can
               only engage them.
               B is incorrect because managing stakeholder
               expectations is a part of this knowledge area, not the
               whole single focus.

           4. Answer: A
               A is correct and the others are not because project
               business documents are input to only A of the given
               options. Manage Stakeholder Expectations and Plan
               Stakeholder Management from the list are not even
               standard processes.
           5. Answer: E
               All of these are communication skills, including
               listening. Without listening actively, you wouldn't be
               able to respond effectively.
           6. Answer: D
               D is the best answer because both basic and more
               complex interactive communication models have the
               feature of delivering messages and ensuring that they
               are understood.
               A is incorrect because the basic sender/receiver
               communication model does not have the feature of
               ensuring the message is understood.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   615



   7. Answer: A
      A is the correct answer because, by trying to
      understand the phrases and terms, you are trying to
      decode the message, and those phrases and terms are
      acting as noise.
      B and C are incorrect because this is a message sent
      by the team member and is not a response.
      D is incorrect because we don't know in which
      language the message is written.
   8. Answer: D

      D is the correct answer because stakeholder
      management strategies are in the stakeholder
      engagement plan, an input to communication planning.
      A, B, and C are incorrect because all these items
      are part of the communication management plan, an
      output of communication planning.

   9. Answer: D
      D is the correct answer, and the others are not,
      because communication, in singular, refers to the act
      of communicating, such as sending an email message,
      while communications, in plural, refers to the arti-
      facts of communication, such as meeting minutes and
      reports.

Chapter 9
   1. Answer: C
      C is correct because it's not true. This process is per-
      formed throughout the project.
      A, B, and C are incorrect because these are true
      statements.

   2. Answer: A and D
      A and D are the correct answers because the Manage
      Project Knowledge and Close Project or Phase
      processes both generate the lessons learned output.
616   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               B and C are incorrect because these processes do
               not produce the lessons learned output.
           3. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because deliverables are an
               output of directing and managing project work, but
               are not accepted deliverables; they still need to go
               through other processes to get accepted.
               B, C, and D are incorrect answers because the issues
               log, work performance data, and change requests are
               generated by the Direct and Manage Project Work
               process.
           4. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer and the others are not
               because work performance data is not the input to
               the Manage Quality Process; the others are. The work
               performance data is input to the Control Quality
               process.
           5. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the Manage Quality
               process incorporates the organization's quality policy
               and procedures into quality activities.
               A is incorrect because quality control is the process
               to verify project deliverables.
               C is incorrect because Plan Quality is the process to
               identify quality requirements and standards and how
               to determine if they are satisfied.
               D is incorrect because there is not a standard quality
               process called Quality Assurance.
           6. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because quality audits is a
               technique in the Manage Quality process.
               A and B are incorrect because auditing is a tool used
               in Manage Quality.
               C is incorrect because there is no standard process
               called Perform Quality Assurance.
                                                         PMP(R) in Depth   617



7. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because there is no
    document called risk response management plan. The
    risk response-related activities are inserted into the
    appropriate project and plan documents.
    A, B, and D are incorrect answers because all are true
    statements.
8. Answer: A
    A, and not B or C, is the correct answer because
    sellers send proposals in response to buyers looking
    for sellers during the Conduct Procurements process.
    D is incorrect because there is no standard process
    called Close Procurements, as procurements are
    closed in the Control Procurements process.
9. Answer: A
    A is the correct answer because the quality audit is a
    technique for performing the Manage Quality process.
    B and C are incorrect because the quality audit is a
    technique for performing quality assurance, whereas
    quality planning is about determining which quality
    standards are relevant to the project and how to
    satisfy them. Controlling quality is about verifying
    project deliverables.
    D is incorrect because there is no such quality
    management process as Quality Inspection.
10. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because quality planning is
    the process to plan for quality, which is the degree to
    which the project requirements are met.
    A is incorrect because quality control is the process
    to monitor specific project results to ensure they
    meet the planned quality standards.
    C is incorrect because Manage Quality is the process
    of applying (not planning) the planned quality activities
    to ensure (and verify) that the requirements are met.
    D is incorrect because this answer is not relevant to
    the given scenario.
618   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


      Chapter 10
           1. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because collaboration offers
               a win-win resolution. Remember that a variation
               of collaboration is also called confronting/problem
               solving. If that was one of the options instead of
               collaboration, then that would be the answer.
               A is incorrect because avoidance ignores the problem
               rather than solves it.
               B is incorrect because in compromising, both parties
               give up something and might look at the resolution as
               a lose-lose proposition.
               C is incorrect because accommodation offers a win-
               lose resolution; one party gives up something to
               accommodate the interests of the other party.

           2. Answer: D
              D is the correct answer because you are forcing your
              way on the other party.
               A and B are incorrect because you are neither
               ignoring the problem nor compromising.
               C is incorrect because you are not accommodating
               the other side.

           3. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because change in budget has
               very little to do directly with team development.
               A and B are incorrect answers because the project
               kickoff meeting is an indirect method to start team
               development, and effective resolution of a conflict
               does contribute to team building.
               C is also incorrect because during times when the
               team is in a low-morale mode, you should be able to
               lift the team morale and thereby contribute to team
               development.
                                                         PMP(R) in Depth   619



4. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because staff assignments are
    an output of the Acquire Project Team process.
    A is incorrect because the human resource plan
    contains roles and responsibilities and not all the staff
    assignments.
    B is incorrect because staff assignments are an input
    to the Develop Project Team process.
    D is incorrect because there is no standard process
    named Make Staff Assignments.
5. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because a virtual team is one
    of the options, depending on the project, when you
    are acquiring the team.
    A, B, and D are incorrect answers because virtual
    teams are a tool in acquiring the team.
6. Answer: B

    B is the correct answer because the term soft skills
    refers to interpersonal skills.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because these skills are not
    referred to as soft skills.
7. Answer: A

    A is the correct answer because the survey technique
    is a data-gathering technique used by experts to reach
    consensus on a topic. However, in acquiring the team,
    you want to use all the influence and negotiations at
    your disposal to get the best team.
    B, C, and D are incorrect because these are valid
    techniques to be used for acquiring the team.

8. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because Theory X managers
   think that employees dislike their work and will try to
   avoid it.
    A is incorrect because there is no standard
    management theory called Theory Alpha.
620   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               C is incorrect because Theory Y managers trust their
               employees.
               D is incorrect because McClelland's theory states
               that the need for achievement, affiliation, and power
               motivates employees.
           9. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because Theory Y managers
               trust their employees.
               A is incorrect because there is no standard
               management theory called Theory Alpha.
               B is incorrect because Theory X managers think that
               employees dislike their work and will try to avoid it.
               D is incorrect because McClelland's theory states
               that the need for achievement, affiliation, and power
               motivates employees. C is the more appropriate
               answer in this case.
          10. Answer: D
              D is the correct answer because McClelland's theory
              states that the need for achievement, affiliation, and
              power motivates employees.
               A is incorrect because there is no standard
               management theory called Theory Alpha.
               B is incorrect because Theory X managers think that
               employees dislike their work and will try to avoid it.
               C is incorrect because Theory Y managers trust their
               employees. D is the more appropriate answer in this
               case.


      Chapter 11
           1. Answer: A
              A is the correct answer because work performance
              information is an output of the monitor communication
              management process.
               B, C, and D are incorrect answers because all these
               items are part of the project communications, an
               output of the Manage Communication process.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   621



2. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because the issues log is not
   an input to the Plan Communications Management
   process, which determines the "how to's" of
   communication.
   A is incorrect because the issues log is used in
   planning stakeholder engagement to learn about the
   stakeholders' issues.
   C and D are incorrect because the issues log is used in the
   Manage Communication and Monitor Communication
   processes to communicate information about issues to
   the stakeholders and monitor their communications.

3. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because project communications
   are an output of the Manage Communication process
   and not an input.
   A, B, and D are incorrect because these items are
   input to the Manage Communication process; the
   stakeholder engagement plan is so because it explains
   how to use appropriate stakeholder communication
   strategies to engage the stakeholders.

4. Answer: B
   B is correct because the process of Manage
   Communication significantly adds to the organiza-
   tional process assets in the form of project reports,
   status reports, project presentations, stakeholder
   notifications, and other communication artifacts and
   records.
   A, C, and D are incorrect because these items will not
   certainly be modified.

5. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because the Manage
   Communication process is used to distribute reports
   and other information to stakeholders.
   A, B, and C are incorrect because none of them is the
   standard name for any project management process.
622   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           6. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because work performance
               data is the output of the Direct and Manage Project
               Work process.
               A and D are incorrect because neither of these
               processes generates work performance data.
               B is incorrect because no standard project management
               process is called Execute Project.
           7. Answer: B
               B is correct and the others are not because the
               communications management plan is the only item
               out of the list that is input to all the processes of
               stakeholder management.
           8. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because change requests are
               an output item of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
               process.
               A is incorrect because communications is not an
               output item of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
               process.
               C is incorrect because negotiation is a tool and not an
               output item of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
               process.
               D is incorrect because work performance information
               is an output of monitoring and controlling processes
               and not of execution processes.

      Chapter 12
           1. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because it's true.
               B is an incorrect answer because the Direct and
               Manage Project Work process only process the
               approved change requests.
               C is an incorrect answer because the Monitor and
               Control Project Work process generates and does
               not process the change requests.
                                                    PMP(R) in Depth   623



   D is an incorrect answer because there is no standard
   process called Process Change Requests.

2. Answer: A

   A is the correct answer because changes can happen
   and need to be processed throughout the lifecycle of
   a project.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because change requests
   can be requested by processes spread across the
   process groups.
3. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because the recommendations
   for corrective and preventive actions and change
   requests must be processed through the Perform
   Integrated Change Control process for approval.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because changes and
   recommendations are approved through the Perform
   Integrated Change Control process.
4. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because approved change
   requests are implemented through the Direct and
   Manage Project Work process.
   A is incorrect because project management is
   performed through processes.
   C is incorrect because the Perform Integrated Change
   Control process is used to process the change
   requests, and not to implement them.
   D is incorrect because the Monitor and Control
   Project Work process generates the change requests
   and does not implement them.
624   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


           5. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because performance reports
               are input into the Perform Integrated Change Control
               process.
               A and C are incorrect because the Monitor and
               Control Project Work process generates performance
               reports and does not need them, and performance
               reports are not input into the Close Project process.
               D is incorrect because there is no standard process
               with this name.
           6. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer, and the others are not,
               because the Ishikawa diagram is a tool used in both
               the Quality Control and Manage Quality processes to
               explore all the potential causes of a problem.

           7. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because a control chart is
               used to plot the results to determine whether they
               are within the acceptable limits.
               B is incorrect because a cause and effect diagram, also
               called an Ishikawa diagram or a fishbone diagram, is
               used to explore all the possible causes of a problem.
               C is incorrect because inspection is done to examine
               whether an activity, component, product, service, or
               result conforms to specific requirements.
               D is incorrect because a scatter diagram is used to
               find the relationship between two variables, such as
               cause and effect.
           8. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because a cause and effect
               diagram can be used to identify the potential effects
               of defects; start fixing the defects with the worst and
               most unacceptable effects.
               A is incorrect because a control chart is used to plot
               the results to determine whether they are within
               acceptable limits.
                                                      PMP(R) in Depth   625



    C is incorrect because inspection is used to determine
    if a product conforms to a standard.
    D is incorrect because a scatter diagram is used to
    find the relationship between two variables, such as
    cause and effect, or two causes.
9. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because, by using statistical
    sampling, you will pick a few samples of the code
    at random and get them reviewed. The results will
    represent the quality of the whole code, statistically
    speaking.
    A is incorrect because this is not an unreasonable
    demand.
    C is incorrect because testing tools cannot serve the
    purpose of a code review, and the customer wants the
    code review.
    D is incorrect because you have limited resources.
10. Answer: C
    C is the correct answer because quality control
    measurements are an output of controlling quality.
    A, B, and D are incorrect because all these items are
    included in the input to quality control.
11. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer because change control
    tools are a technique listed to be used in the Perform
    Integrated Change Control process.
    A, B, and C are incorrect because all of these are
    tools and techniques for the Control Quality process.
    Remember, the cause and effect diagrams are also
    called Ishikawa diagrams and fishbone diagrams.

12. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because risk-related recom-
   mendations for corrective actions are the output of
   the risk monitoring and controlling process.
   A, B, and C are incorrect because the outputs of these
   processes do not include recommended corrective
   actions.
626   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


          13. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the recommendations
               for corrective and preventive actions and change
               requests must be processed through the integrated
               change control process for approval.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because changes and
               recommendations are approved through the
               integrated change control process.
          14. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because there is no
               document called risk response management plan.
               The risk response-related activities are inserted into
               appropriate project and plan documents.
               A, B, and D are incorrect answers because they all are
               true statements.
          15. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because work performance
               information is an output of the Monitor Risks process,
               not its input.
               A, C, and D are incorrect because these items are
               included in the input of monitoring risks.
          16. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the deliverables must
               go through the Validate Scope process before going
               through the Close Project process, and before the
               scope can be validated, they must be verified through
               the Control Quality process.
               A is incorrect because the deliverables must be
               verified through the Control Quality process before
               their scope can be validated.
               C and D are incorrect because the Control
               Procurements process must be performed before you
               have all the accepted products that will go through the
               Close Project or Phase process.
                                                          PMP(R) in Depth   627



  17. Answer: B

      B is the correct answer because the deliverables
      accepted through procurement closure must go
      through project closure to hand them over to the
      customer or the sponsor.
      A, C, and D are incorrect because all these activities
      are part of the Control Procurements process.
  18. Answer: A
      A is the correct answer, and the others are
      wrong, because Control Procurements uses work
      performance data generated by the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process, and itself generates
      change requests, which would be processed through
      the Perform Integrated Change Control process.

Chapter 13
   1. Answer: A, B
      A is the correct answer because the project charter
      is an input to collecting requirements, and the
      requirement documentation, an output of Collect
      Requirements, is an input to creating the WBS.
      B is correct because the scope and quality depend on
      requirements, and the verified deliverables, an output
      of Control Quality, is an input to validating the scope.
      C is incorrect because requirements are an input to
      defining scope.
      D is incorrect because verified deliverables, an output
      of Control Quality, is an input to validating the scope.
   2. Answer: B
      B is the correct answer because the control account
      is the node in the WBS that is used as a control
      management point where scope, schedule, and cost
      are integrated for the purpose of monitoring and
      controlling the performance; e.g., comparing with
      earned value.
628   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               A is incorrect because the code of account is the
               number system used to uniquely identify each work
               package.
               C and D are incorrect because there are no standard
               terms called management account and performance
               node to refer to any node in the WBS.
           3. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because the correct action
               here is to find the source of the change requests and
               process the requests through the Perform Integrated
               Change Control process.
               A is incorrect because you are taking action without
               doing your homework: investigation.
               B is incorrect because you should not let anyone
               apply changes without their having been approved.
               D is incorrect because the correct course of action
               here is to find out the source of the change request
               and ensure that the request goes through the approval
               process.
           4. Answer: A
              A is the correct answer because there is no room for
              float times on the critical path.
               B and C are incorrect because the critical path
               controls the finish date only for a given start date and
               vice versa.
               D is incorrect because the critical path is the longest
               sequence in time, not the shortest.
           5. Answer: C
               C is correct because the team member is offering a
               valid reason for the change, and it does not affect the
               finish date of the project. However, you must change
               the schedule to reflect the new duration estimate.
               B is incorrect because you must change the schedule
               to reflect the new duration estimate that you accepted.
               A is incorrect because you do not need to consult
               with the functional manager in making this decision
               because the team member is offering a valid reason
               for the change, and it does not affect the finish date
               of the project.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   629



   D is incorrect because this change does not qualify to
   be processed through the integrated change control
   process. The key line in the question is: Activity is not
   on the critical path.
6. Answer: B
   D is the correct answer because Control Resources
   is used to synchronize planned, allotted, and used
   resources.
   B and D are incorrect because the Control Resources
   process is used to synchronize planned, allotted, and
   used resources.
   C is incorrect because there is no standard process
   named Manage Resources.
7. Answer: B
   B is the correct answer because the formula for
   earned value is: EV = BAC x (work completed/total
   work required)
   which means

     EV = $600,000 x (5 miles / 15 miles) = $200,000

   A is incorrect because $160,000 is the actual cost
   (AC) and not the earned value (EV).
   C is incorrect because earned value is proportional to
   the fraction of work performed and not the fraction
   of time passed.
   D is incorrect because $600,000 is the budget at
   completion (BAC), not the EV.
8. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the formula for
   planned value is: PV = BAC x (time passed / total
   schedule time)
   which means

    PV = $600,000 x (3 weeks / 12 weeks) = $150,000
   A is incorrect because $160,000 is the actual cost
   (AC) and not the planned value (EV).
630   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


               B is incorrect because planned value is proportional
               to the fraction of time passed, not the fraction of
               work performed.
               D is incorrect because $600,000 is the budget at
               completion (BAC), not the PV.
           9. Answer: A
               A is the correct answer because the formula for cost
               variance is: CV = EV - AC
               which means

                      CV = $200,000 - $160,000 = $40,000

               B is incorrect because CV is equal to EV - AC, not
               EV - PV.
               C is incorrect because it calculates the total cost for
               12 weeks based on the AC for three weeks and then
               subtracts it from the BAC, which is the wrong method
               to calculate CV.
               D is incorrect because it calculates the total cost
               for 15 miles based on the AC for five miles and then
               subtracts it from the BAC, which is the wrong method
               to calculate CV.
          10. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the formula for
               schedule variance is: SV = EV - PV
               which means

                       SV = $200,000 - $150,000 = $50,000

               A is incorrect because SV is equal to EV - PV, not
               EV - AC.
               C and D are incorrect because SV is measured in
               units of cost, not in units of time.
                                                        PMP(R) in Depth   631



11. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because a CPI value greater
    than one means the cost performance of the project
    is better than planned, and an SPI value of greater than
    one means the schedule performance of the project is
    better than planned.
    A, C, and D are incorrect because a CPI value greater
    than one means the cost performance of the project
    is better than planned, and an SPI value of greater than
    one means the schedule performance of the project is
    better than planned.

12. Answer: D
    D is the correct answer, and B is incorrect, because
    the integrated performance measurement baseline
    refers to schedule baseline, scope baseline, and cost
    baseline.
    A and C are incorrect because there is no time
    baseline.

13. Answer: B
    B is the correct answer because controlling scope,
    schedule, and cost generates work performance
    information.
    A is incorrect because the Monitor and Control
    Project Work process is used to generate the
    performance reports and uses work performance
    information as input.
    C is incorrect because there is no standard process
    with the name Develop Project Work Performance
    Report.
    D is incorrect because the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process does not generate work performance
    information; it generates work performance data
    instead.
632   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


      Chapter 14
           1. Answer: A
               A is correct because work performance information,
               not performance reports, is an output of monitoring
               stakeholder engagement.
               B, C, and D are incorrect because they all can be
               output of monitoring stakeholder engagement.
           2. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because the issues log is not
               an input to the Plan Communications Management
               process, which determines the "how to's" of
               communication.
               A is incorrect because the issues log is used in
               planning stakeholder engagement to learn about the
               stakeholders' issues.
               C and D are incorrect because the issues log is
               used in the Manage Communication and Monitor
               Communication processes to communicate the
               information about issues to the stakeholders and
               monitor these communications.

           3. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because work performance
               data is the output of the Direct and Manage Project
               Work process.
               A and D are incorrect because neither of these
               processes generates work performance data.
               B is incorrect because no standard project
               management process is called Execute Project.

           4. Answer: D

               D is the correct answer because processes in the
               monitoring and controlling process group, other than
               those in integration management, generate work
               performance information.
                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   633



   A is incorrect because work performance information
   is an input to the monitor and control project work
   process and is used to create performance reports.
   B and C is incorrect because neither Manage
   Communication nor Direct and Manage Project Work
   generate work performance information. The Direct
   and Manage Project Work process does generate
   work performance data.
5. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer and A and B are not
   because the Monitor Communication process is
   performed according to the communication plan
   and the stakeholder engagement plan, and not the
   communication plan alone or stakeholder engagement
   plan alone.
   C is incorrect because there is no standard project
   management plan called stakeholder management
   plan.
6. Answer: B

   B is correct because project communication is an
   input to the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process.
   A and C are incorrect because project communication
   is not used in these processes as a standard document.
   D is incorrect because there is no standard process
   named Distribute Information.

7. Answer: A
   A is correct because work performance information,
   not performance reports, is an output of monitoring
   stakeholder engagement.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because they all can be
   outputs of monitoring stakeholder engagement.
634   Appendix B | Answers and Explanations for Chapter Review Questions


      Chapter 15
           1. Answer: B
               B is the correct answer because performance reports
               are input into the Perform Integrated Change Control
               process.
               A and C are incorrect because the Monitor and
               Control Project Work process generates performance
               reports and does not need them; and performance
               reports are not input into the Close Project process.
               D is incorrect because there is no standard process
               with this name.
           2. Answer: D
               D is the correct answer because no project, small or
               large or even cancelled ones, should skip the closing
               stage.
               A, B, and C are incorrect because no project should
               skip the closing stage. Each project must go through a
               proper closure.
           3. Answer: C
               C is the correct answer because it is the project
               sponsor who signs the final closure documents and
               can send the project to closure at any stage of the
               project.
               A is incorrect because the project manager is
               responsible for managing all the activities needed to
               close the project, but the closure must be authorized
               by the sponsor.
               B and D are incorrect because neither the customer
               nor the functional manager can authorize the project
               closure according to the standard.
                                                     PMP(R) in Depth   635



4. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because the project
   deliverables must be accepted by running them through
   the Validate Scope process before they can become an
   input to the Close Project or Phase process.
   A, B, and D are incorrect because the project
   management plan is a valid input to the Close Project
   or Phase process.
5. Answer: D
   D is the correct answer because the project
   deliverables are already verified through the quality
   control process and then validated for their scope by
   the Validate Scope process to ensure that the planned
   scope and quality have been met.
   A, B, and C are incorrect because all these activities
   are conducted during the Close Project process.
6. Answer: A
   A is the correct answer because the procurements
   are already accepted and closed by the Control
   Procurement process.
   B, C, and D are incorrect because all these activities
   are conducted during the Close Project process.
7. Answer: C
   C is the correct answer because verified deliverables
   are the output of the Control Quality process.
   A, B, and D are incorrect because all these items are
   the output of the Close Project process.
                                                                   G L O S S A RY


                                                                          G

Glossary
360-degree survey. A form of feedback from all around the entity being
evaluated. It is not emphasized in PMBOK, Sixth Edition, but it is a concept
worth knowing.
activity. A component of project work.
activity definition. Define Activity is the process of identifying the specific
activities that need to be scheduled and performed to produce the project
deliverables.
activity duration. The time measured in calendar units between the start
and finish of a schedule activity.
activity duration estimating. The process of estimating the time in work
periods individually for each schedule activity required for activity completion.
A work period is a measurement of time during which the work is in progress;
it is measured in hours, days, or months depending upon the size of the activity.
activity resource estimating. The process of estimating the types and
amounts of resources that will be required to perform each schedule activity.
activity sequencing. The process of identifying and documenting the
dependencies among schedule activities; which activities precede which.
actual cost (AC).The total cost actually incurred in performing the work for
a project or a project activity until a specific point on the timescale.
affinity diagrams. A technique used to classify a large set of ideas into
different groups for the purpose of reviewing or analyzing them.
alternatives analysis. A technique used to evaluate and rank the available
options to perform project work.

(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0
638   Glossary


      analogous estimating. A technique used to estimate the duration or cost
      of an activity or project based on the duration or cost of a similar activity in
      a previous project or the project itself.
      assumption. A factor that you consider to be true without any proof or
      verification. Assumptions can appear in both the input and the output of
      various processes in some form.
      assumptions log. A project document that records and tracks all the project
      assumptions and constraints throughout the project.
      assumptions analysis. A technique used to examine the validity of an
      assumption and thereby identify the risk resulting from the inaccuracy,
      inconsistency, or incompleteness of each assumption.
      asynchronous communication. A communication in which the two
      communicating entities do not have to be present at each end of the
      communication line at the same time. Email is an example of asynchronous
      communication because when the sender of the email pushes the Send button,
      the intended recipient of the email message does not have to be logged on to
      the email server.
      baseline. A reference plan for project elements, such as schedule, scope, and
      cost, against which the actual project progress can be compared to measure
      performance deviations.The reference plan can be the original or the modified
      plan.
      benchmarking. Comparing the practices, products, or services of a
      project with those of some reference projects for the purposes of learning,
      improvement, and creating a basis for measuring performance.
      bid documents. All the documents used to get information from the sellers,
      such as quotations and proposals.
      bottom-up estimation. A technique to estimate the cost and duration of
      a project or its parts by summing the estimates of components subordinate
      to it in the WBS.
      brainstorming. A creative technique generally used in a group environment
      to gather ideas as candidates for a solution to a problem or an issue without
      any immediate evaluation of these ideas. The evaluation and analysis of these
      ideas happen later.
      budget. The approved aggregation of cost estimates for a project or a part
      of it with a timeline assigned to it.
      budget at completion (BAC). The total budget authorized for performing
      the project work.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth     639



cause and effect diagram. A diagram used to explore all the potential
causes (inputs) that result in a single effect (output), such as a problem or a
defect. It may help to find the root cause of a problem.
change control board. A formal group of stakeholders with the authority
to process change requests, which includes reviewing, approving, rejecting, or
delaying them.
change control system. A collection of formal documented procedures
that specifies how the project deliverables and documents will be changed,
controlled, and approved.
change request. A request for deviating from the project plan or related
policies or procedures, such as modifying scope, schedule, or cost. Change
requests may include recommendations for corrective and preventive actions.
claim. An assertion, demand, or request made by a buyer against the seller
or vice versa for consideration or compensation under the terms of a legal
contract.
close project or phase. A process used to finalize all activities across all of
the process groups to formally close the project or a phase of it.
code of accounts. A numbering system used to uniquely identify each
component of a WBS.
communication management plan. A document that describes the
communication needs and expectations of the project and how these needs
and expectations will be met.
communication requirement analysis. A technique used to determine
the information needs of the project stakeholders by using methods such as
workshops, interviews, and the lessons learned database.
confidence level. A statistical term that refers to the certainty attached to
an estimate and is often represented in percentage form, such as a 95 percent
confidence level.
configuration management. Refers to controlling the characteristics of
a product, a service, or a result of a project. It includes documenting the
features of a product or a service, controlling and documenting changes to
the features, and providing support for auditing the products for conformance
to requirements.
constraint. A restriction (or a limitation) that can affect the performance of
the project.
contingency. A future event or condition that is possible but cannot be
predicted with certainty. In this case, an action will be contingent upon the
condition--that is, the action will be executed only if the condition happens.
640   Glossary


      contingency reserve. Funds or time reserved in addition to the calculated
      estimates to deal with contingencies, such as uncertainties in the duration
      used in the schedule and the cost used in the budget.
      context diagrams. Visual displays of how different aspects of a system and
      different kinds of uses interact with each other.
      contract. A mutually binding agreement between a buyer and a seller that
      obligates the seller to provide the specified product, service, or result and
      obligates the buyer to make the payment for it.
      control. To analyze the performance of the project and make and implement
      recommendations for corrective actions or other changes to bring the project
      back on track.
      control account. A node in the WBS that acts as a management control
      point where scope, schedule, and actual cost are integrated and compared to
      the earned value to measure project performance.
      control chart. A chart or diagram used to monitor whether the variance of
      a specified variable is within the acceptable limits dictated by quality control.
      COQ. Cost of quality; the total cost of quality-related efforts throughout the
      product lifecycle.
      corrective actions. Actions recommended for execution in the future in
      order to bring project performance back in line with the project management
      plan.
      cost baseline.The planned budget for the project over a time period, used as
      a basis against which to monitor, control, and measure the cost performance
      of the project. The cost performance is measured by comparing the actual
      cost to the planned cost over a time period.
      cost performance index (CPI). A measure of the cost efficiency of a
      project calculated by dividing earned value (EV) by actual cost (AC).
      cost variance (CV). A measure of cost performance obtained by subtracting
      actual value (AC) from earned value (EV). A positive result indicates good
      performance, whereas a negative result indicates bad performance.
      CPFF. Cost plus fixed fee; a contract type.
      CPIF. Cost plus incentive fee; a contract type.
      CPPC. Cost plus percentage of cost; a contract type.
      crashing. A project schedule compression technique used to decrease the
      project duration with minimal additional cost. A number of alternatives are
      analyzed, including the assignment of additional resources.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth      641



critical path. The longest path (sequence of activities) in a project schedule
network diagram. Because it is the longest path, it determines the duration of
the project.
critical path method (CPM). A schedule network analysis technique used
to identify the minimum project duration, the schedule's flexibility, and the
critical path of the project schedule network diagram.
decision-tree analysis. A technique that uses a decision-tree diagram to
choose from different available options; each option may be represented by a
branch of the tree. EMV analysis is done along each branch, which helps one
make a decision about which option to choose.
decode. To convert the received message from the media back into useful
ideas and thoughts.
decomposition. A planning technique used to subdivide the project scope,
including deliverables, into smaller and smaller manageable tasks called work
packages.
defect. An imperfection or deficiency that keeps a component from meeting
its requirements or specifications. A defect is caused by an error (problem)
and can be repaired by fixing the error.
deliverable. A unique and verifiable product, a capability to provide a service,
or a result that must be produced to complete a project or a process or
phase of the project.
develop team. A process of improving the team competence at the
individual member level and at the team level, and to improve the overall team
environment in order to improve the project performance.
distribute information. The process of making information available to
stakeholders according to the project management plan.
earned value (EV) or budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP).
The value of the actually performed work expressed in terms of the approved
budget for a project or a project activity for a given time period.
earned value management (EVM) or earned value technique (EVT).
A management methodology and technique to measure project progress by
comparing integrated measures of scope, schedule, and cost with the planned
performance baseline.
emotional intelligence. The ability to detect, perceive, access, and manage
the emotions of self, other people, and different groups of people.
encode. To convert thoughts and ideas into a message that could be
transmitted through the media.
642   Glossary


      enterprise environmental factors. Factors internal or external to the
      performing organization that can influence the project's success, such as the
      organization's culture, infrastructure, existing skill set, market conditions, and
      project management software. These are input to both the project charter
      and the preliminary project scope statement.
      estimate at completion (EAC) at budgeted rate.The estimate from the
      current point in time of how much it will cost to complete the entire project
      or an entire project activity for which the budget at completion (BAC) is
      given. The value of the EAC is obtained by adding the value of the ETC at the
      budgeted rate to the AC.
      estimate at completion (EAC) at current CPI. The estimate from the
      current point in time of how much it will cost to complete the entire project
      or an entire project activity for which the BAC is given. The value of EAC is
      obtained by adding the value of ETC at the current CPI to AC.
      estimate to complete (ETC) at budgeted rate. The expected cost,
      estimated by assuming future performance will be at the budgeted rate, to
      complete the remaining work for the project or for a project activity.
      estimate to complete (ETC) at present CPI. The expected cost,
      estimated by assuming the future performance will be at the current CPI, to
      complete the remaining work for the project or for a project activity.
      expected monetary value (EMV) analysis. A statistical technique used
      to calculate the expected outcome when there are multiple possible outcome
      values with probabilities assigned to them.
      experiment design. A statistical method that can be used to identify the
      factors that can influence a set of specific variables of a product or a process
      under development or in production.
      fast tracking. A project schedule compression technique used to decrease
      the project duration by performing project phases or some schedule activities
      within a phase simultaneously when they would normally be performed in
      sequence.
      float time. The positive difference between the late start date and the early
      start date of a schedule activity without delaying the schedule.
      flowchart. A diagram that depicts the inputs, actions, and outputs of one or
      more processes in a system.
      FP. Fixed price; a contract type.
      Gantt chart. A bar chart used to display project schedule, with x-axis
      representing time and y-axis representing activities drawn as horizontal bars;
      each bar starts from the start date and stops at the end date of the activity.
      histogram. A bar chart that shows a distribution of variables.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      643



incentive fee. A set of financial motives for the seller in relation to cost,
schedule, and performance, such as a bonus.
initiating process group. A process group that contains two processes:
develop project charter and identify project stakeholders.
inspection. A technique to examine whether a work project or result
conforms to specific standards.
issue. An item or a matter that is under discussion or dispute and for
which there are most likely opposing views and disagreements among the
stakeholders.
issues log. A tool such as a document to manage issues; includes opening,
modifying, tracking, documenting, and resolving the issues.
knowledge area. A knowledge area in project management is defined by its
knowledge requirements related to managing a specific aspect of a project, such
as cost, by using a set of processes. PMI recognizes a total of ten knowledge
areas, such as cost management and resource management.
lag. A technique to modify a dependency relationship by delaying the successor
activity. For example, a lag of five days in a finish-to-start relationship means
the successor activity cannot start until five days after the predecessor activity
has ended.
lead. A technique to modify a dependency relationship by accelerating
the successor activity. For example, a lead of five days in a finish-to-start
relationship means the successor activity can start up to five days before the
finish date of the predecessor activity.
logical relationship. A dependency between two project schedule activities
or between a schedule activity and a schedule milestone.
manage project knowledge. A process of creating new knowledge by
using the existing knowledge to meet the project objectives.
management reserve (MS). The part of the project budget or schedule
time not included in the performance measurement baseline and reserved to
deal with unseen missed work within the project scope.
managing stakeholder engagement. A process used for communicating
and working with stakeholders to stay on the same page regarding the
project requirements by addressing their needs and issues as they arise and
appropriately involving them in the project.
methodology. A system of procedures and techniques practiced in a disci-
pline to accomplish a task. For example, a risk management methodology is
used in the discipline of project management to determine how risk manage-
ment processes will be performed.
644   Glossary


      milestone. A significant point (or event) in the life of a project, such as the
      delivery of a project outcome.
      mind mapping. A technique to put all the ideas from multiple brainstorming
      sessions into a single map to expose the similarities and differences among
      them; this will also help to create new ideas.
      mitigation. The process of taking action to reduce or prevent the impact of
      a disaster that is expected to occur.
      model. A set of rules to describe how something works, which takes input
      and makes predictions as output.
      monitor. To collect project performance data, convert the data to perfor-
      mance measurements, and report this performance information.
      monitor risks. To track identified risks, identify new risks, monitor residual
      risks, implement risk response plans, and evaluate risk management processes.
      Monte Carlo simulation. An analysis technique that randomly generates
      values for uncertain elements (that is, variables) and takes them as input to a
      model to generate output that represents various project output scenarios.
      organization. A group of individuals organized to work for some purpose
      or mission.
      organizational process assets. The processes and process-related assets of
      the organizations participating in the project that can be used to perform the
      project successfully, such as processes, plans, templates, guidelines, knowledge
      base, and policies and procedures.
      parametric estimating. A quantitative technique used to calculate the cost
      or activity duration using historical data and appropriate project parameters.
      performance measurement baseline (PMB). An approved integrated
      plan consisting of scope, schedule, and cost baselines and used to make
      performance measurements by comparing the actual project result against
      this baseline.
      performance report. A document or a presentation that presents the
      project progress in terms of status and some parameters, such as earned
      value management parameters, based on the analysis of work performance
      information/data.
      performing organization. The organization that is performing the project.
      planning component. A WBS component at the bottom level of a branch
      of the WBS hierarchy for which some planning can be performed.
      planning package. A WBS component that is below the control account
      and has well-defined work content but does not yet have a detailed schedule.
                                                                PMP(R) in Depth      645



portfolio. A set of projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and operations
managed in a coordinated fashion to obtain business objectives in the strategic
plan of the organization.
portfolio management. The centralized management of one or more
portfolios, which includes identifying, authorizing, prioritizing, managing, and
controlling projects.
precedence diagramming method (PDM).A technique used to construct
a project schedule network diagram in which a node (a box) represents an
activity and an arrow represents the dependency relationship.
preventive actions. Directions to perform an activity that will reduce the
probability of negative consequences associated with project risks. These
preventive actions are recommended by the QA process during process
analysis.
process. A set of interrelated activities performed with the goal of obtaining
a specified set of products, results, or services. Processes have one or more
input items that are converted into one or more output items.
process analysis. A technique used to identify the needed improvements in
a process by examining the constraints, invaluable activities, inefficiencies, and
other problems.
procurement. Refers to obtaining (purchasing or renting) products, services,
or results from outside the project team to complete the project.
procurements. Purchases and acquisitions that are needed to complete the
project but that cannot be produced by the in-house project team.
procurement audit. A structured review of the procurement contracts
and process; it looks for completeness, accuracy, and effectiveness with the
purpose of identifying successes and failures from the planning.
procurement management. The execution of a set of processes used
to obtain products, services, or results from outside the project team to
complete the project.
procurement management plan. A document that describes how
procurements will be managed.
product scope. Features and functions that characterize a product, service,
or result to be delivered by the project.
program. A set of related projects, subsidiary programs, and activities managed
in a coordinated fashion to improve overall efficiency and effectiveness that
may not be obtained by managing the projects individually.
program management. The centralized coordinated management of a
specific program to achieve its strategic goals, objectives, and benefits.
646   Glossary


      program management office (PMO). An entity in an organization that
      is responsible for providing centralized coordinated support to the program
      managers who are managing programs and unrelated projects.
      progressive elaboration. A technique used to continuously improve a plan
      by working out more details and providing better accuracy as more-detailed
      and -specific information becomes available as the project progresses.
      project business documents. Refers to two documents: business case and
      benefit management plan.
      project calendar. A calendar of working days or shifts used to establish
      when a schedule activity can be performed. A calendar typically specifies
      holidays and weekends as days when a schedule activity cannot be performed.
      project charter. A document containing the high-level information of the
      project issued by the project initiator, such as the sponsor, that formally
      authorizes the project, names the project manager, and authorizes the project
      manager to use the organization's resources for the project.
      project interfaces. The formal and informal boundaries and relationships
      among team members, departments, organizations, or functions. An example
      might be how the development department and the QA department interact
      with each other while working on the same project.
      project management information system (PMIS). An information
      system that consists of tools used to store, integrate, and retrieve information,
      such as the outputs of the project management processes.This can be used to
      support all stages of the project, from initiating to closing.
      project management plan. An approved document that describes how the
      project will be executed, monitored and controlled, and closed.
      project performance. Measure of actual project progress against planned
      progress.
      project/product transition. Handing over of the project output to the
      appropriate party.
      project schedule. A schedule that consists of planned dates for performing
      schedule activities and meeting schedule milestones.
      project schedule network diagram. A schematic display of logical
      relationships among the project schedule activities. The time flow in these
      diagrams is from left to right.
      project scope. The work that must be performed (and only that work)
      to deliver products, services, or results with specified features that were
      promised by the project. The project scope draws boundaries around the
      project--what is included and what is not.
                                                               PMP(R) in Depth      647



project scope creep. Changes applied to the project scope without going
through the approval process--the integrated change control process.
qualitative risk analysis. A process used to prioritize risks by estimating
the probability of their occurrence and their impact on the project.
quality. The degree to which a set of characteristics of project deliverables
and objectives fulfills the project requirements.
quality audit. A structured and independent review to determine whether
project activities comply with the policies, processes, and procedures of the
project and the performing organization.
quality control. Monitoring the results of executing the quality management
activities to ensure the project outputs are complete and accurate as planned
and recommend necessary changes and actions to conform with the quality
plans.
quality management plan. A management plan that describes how the
project management team will implement the quality policy of the performing
organization for the specific project.
quality metrics. An operational criterion that defines in specific terms what
something (such as a characteristic or a feature) is and how the quality control
process measures it.
quality planning. The process of identifying the quality standards relevant to
the project at hand and determining how to satisfy these standards.
quality policy. The policy stating the high-level direction of an organization
with respect to quality; applied to actions in project quality management.
quantitative risk analysis. A process used to perform numerical analysis to
estimate the effect of each identified risk on the overall project objectives and
deliverables and prioritize the risks accordingly.
RAM. Responsibility assignment matrix; a matrix used to specify the
relationships between schedule activities, the roles to perform those activities,
and the team members assigned to the roles.
requirement. A condition, characteristic, or capability that a specific out-
come of the project must have.
residual risk. A risk that remains after the risk response has been performed.
resource breakdown structure (RBS). A hierarchical structure of
resource types required to complete the schedule activities of a project.
risk. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or
negative effect on meeting the project objectives.
648   Glossary


      risk breakdown structure (RBS). A hierarchical structure that breaks
      down the identified risk categories into subcategories. In developing this
      structure, you will end up identifying various areas and causes of potential
      risks.
      risk identification. A process used to identify the risks for a given project
      and record their characteristics in a document called the risk register.
      risk management plan. A document that describes how risk management
      will be structured and performed for the project at hand. It becomes part of
      the project management plan.
      risk management planning. A process used to determine how to approach,
      plan, and execute risk management activities for a given project. This process
      produces the risk management plan.
      risk register. A document that contains detailed information on each
      identified risk.
      risk trigger. An alert that indicates a risk event has occurred or is about to
      occur.
      role. A defined function that contains a set of responsibilities to be performed
      by a team member, such as a programmer or a tester.
      rolling wave planning. A case progressive elaboration in which the work
      to be performed now and in the near future is planned only at a higher level.
      scatter diagram. A diagram used to show the pattern of the relationship
      between two variables--an independent variable and another variable that
      depends on the independent variable.
      schedule activity. A scheduled task (component of work) performed during
      the lifecycle of a project.
      schedule baseline. A specific version of the project schedule developed
      from the schedule network analysis and the schedule model data. This is the
      approved version of the schedule, with a start date and an end date, and it is
      used as the basis against which the project schedule performance is measured.
      schedule compression. A technique used to shorten the schedule without
      changing the scope.
      schedule development. The process of creating the project schedule by
      analyzing schedule activity sequences, schedule activity durations, resource
      requirements, and schedule constraints.
      schedule milestone. A significant event in the project schedule, such as the
      completion of a major deliverable.
                                                              PMP(R) in Depth     649



schedule network analysis. A technique used to generate a project sched-
ule by identifying the early and late start and finish dates for the project.
schedule performance index (SPI). A measure of the schedule efficiency
of a project calculated by dividing earned value (EV) by planned value (PV).
schedule variance. A schedule performance variable measured by subtract-
ing the planned value (PV) from the earned value (EV).
schedule revision. An update to the project schedule that includes changing
the project start date, end date, or both.
scope baseline. The approved project scope, which includes the project
scope statement, the WBS, and the corresponding WBS dictionary.
scope definition. The process used to develop the detailed project scope
statement.
scope planning. The process of developing the project scope management
plan.
secondary risk. A risk that arises as a result of implementing a risk response.
simulation. Any analytical method used to imitate a real-life system.
stakeholder register. A document that identifies the project stakeholders
and relevant information about them.
statistical sampling. Randomly selecting a part of the population for study.
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis.
An analysis technique used to examine a given project from the perspectives
of its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats to the project or the
organization.
subprojects. Parts of the main project that are independent enough that
each can be performed by separate project teams.
synchronous communication. Communication in which both the sender
and the receiver have to be present at the same time, such as face-to-face
project meetings and teleconferencing.
T&M. Time and material; a contract type.
variance. A measurable deviation in the value of a project variable, such as
cost, from a known baseline or expected value.
variance analysis. A technique used to assess the magnitude of variation
in the value of a variable (such as actual cost from the baseline or expected
value), determine the cause of the variance, and decide whether corrective
action is required.
650   Glossary


      verify scope. The process of formally accepting the completed project
      deliverables.
      virtual team. A team of members working on the same project with
      few or no face-to-face meetings. Various technologies, such as email, video
      conferencing, and the World Wide Web, are used to facilitate communication
      among team members.
      war room. A conference room used for project team meetings.
      work breakdown structure (WBS). A deliverable-oriented hierarchical
      structure that displays the decomposition of deliverables into work that must
      be performed to accomplish the project objectives and create the project
      deliverables.
      work package. A deliverable or a task at the lowest level of each branch of
      the WBS for which the duration and cost, etc., can be managed.
      workaround. A response to a negative risk that has occurred. A workaround
      is based on a quick solution and is not planned in advance of the risk-
      occurrence event.
                                                                            I
Index
A                                              Brainstorming, 638

Active listening, 424                          Budget, 638

Activity                                       Budget at completion (BAC), 638
    definition, 637                            Budgeted cost of work
    duration, 637                                       performed (BCWP), 500, 641
    resource estimating, 637
    sequencing, 637                            C
Actual cost (AC), 637                          Cash flow (CF), 77
Affinity diagrams, 131, 364, 637               Cause and effect
Algebraic equations, 33                                 diagram, 639
Alternative dispute resolution (ADR), 471      Change control board, 639
Alternatives analysis, 637                     Change control system, 639
Analogous estimating techniques, 175, 638      Change log, 318
Assumptions, 318                               Change request, 639
   analysis, 638                               Claim, 639
   and constraints, 138-139
                                               Close Project or Phase, 639
   definition, 638
                                                  description, 539
   log, 638
                                                  flowchart, 538-539
Asynchronous communication, 332, 638              input
                                                      accepted deliverables, 541
B                                                     agreements and procurement
Baseline, 35, 638                                       documentation, 541
                                                      business documents and project
Basic interactive model, 331                            charter, 540
Benchmarking, 638                                     organizational
Benefit cost ratio (BCR), 76                            process assets, 542
                                                      project documents, 541
Bid documents, 638
                                                      project management plan, 541
Bottom-up estimation, 638                         output, 540, 543-544
Bottom-up technique, 177                          tools and techniques, 539-540, 542



(c) Paul Sanghera 2019
P. Sanghera, PMP(R) in Depth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3910-0
652   Index


      Code of accounts, 639                            statement of work (SOW), 371
      Collect Requirements process                     tools and techniques, 372-373
         context diagram, 132-133                   Confidence level, 639
         data-gathering techniques (see Data-       Configuration management, 639
               gathering techniques)
                                                    Conflict-resolution strategy, 406
         data-presentation techniques, 131-132
         decision-making techniques, 133            Constraint, 639
         documentation, 133-135                     Context diagrams, 132-133, 640
         for project, 127-129                       Contingency, 639
         prototyping, 132
         requirement management                     Contingency reserve, 640
               plan, 126-127                        Contract negotiations, 373
         traceability matrix, 134-135               Contracts, 242, 640
      Communication management plan. see also          consideration, 235
                Manage Communication process           cost-reimbursable, 233-234
        cultural awareness, 334                        fixed-price, 232-233
        definition, 639                                T&M, 234
        effectively common, 321                        types and risk bearers, 234-235
        interactive, 332                            Control
        models, 330                                    account, 640
        one-way, 333                                   chart, 640
        output, 334-335                                definition, 640
        planning project, 324-326
                                                    Controlling process group, 19
        PMI's models, 329-330
        political awareness, 333                    Control Procurements
        processes, 322-323                             audits and inspections, 471
        project documents, 336                         change requests, 471-472
        requirements, 326-328                          close, 472
        skills, 314                                    goals, 468
        style assessment, 334                          information management, 470
        technical jargon, 321                          input, tools and techniques,
        techniques, 314                                       and output, 468-469
        technology, 328                                sellers' data, 470
        tools and techniques, 325, 326                 work performance information, 471
      Communication requirement analysis, 639       Control Resources process, 413
      Communication skills, 424                     Corrective actions, 640
      Communication technology, 423                 Cost baseline, 640
      Conduct procurement process                   Cost management plan
         bidding document, 371                         budget, 215
         expert judgment, 373                          choice of processes, 218
         outputs                                       data-analysis techniques, 218
              agreements, 374                          Determine Budget (see Determine
              changes and updates, 374                       Budget process)
              selected sellers, 374                    enterprise environmental factors, 218
         perform, 371                                  Estimate Costs (see Estimate Costs
         project cost and schedule baselines, 371            process)
         risk register, 371                            expert judgment, 218
                                                                                      Index   653



    input, tools and techniques,                 Data-presentation techniques, 205
           and output, 217                          and analysis techniques
    organizational project assets, 218                   affinity diagram, 131
    performance measurement, 219                         context diagram tool, 132-133
    process groups, 216                                  idea/mind mapping, 131
    project charter, 217                                 nominal group technique, 131
    schedule management plan and risk                    prototype, 132
           management plan, 217                     flowcharts, 262-263
    stakeholders, 218                               logical data model, 262
    units, precision, and accuracy, 219             matrix diagrams, 261
    WBS, 219                                        mind mapping, 262
Cost of quality (COQ), 640                          quality control
                                                         cause and effect diagrams, 458-460
Cost performance index (CPI), 640
                                                         control charts, 457-458
Cost plus award fee (CPAF), 234                          histograms, 457
Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF), 234, 640                     scatter diagrams, 456
Cost plus incentive fee (CPIF), 234, 640                 uses, 461
                                                    test and inspection planning, 262
Cost plus percentage of cost (CPPC), 640
                                                 Decision-making techniques, 133, 177,
Cost-reimbursable contracts                               446, 451
   actual cost, 233
   CPAF, 234                                     Decision-tree analysis, 641
   CPFF, 234                                     Decode, 641
   CPIF, 234                                     Decomposition, 641
   fee, 233
                                                 Defect, 641
Cost variance (CV), 640
                                                 Define Activities, 158
Crashing, 187, 640                                  generating output
Critical path method (CPM), 182-184, 641                 activity list, 165
                                                         attributes, 165
D                                                        change requests and updates, 166
                                                         milestone list, 166
Data-analysis techniques                                 work packages, 165
   assumptions and constraint analysis, 275         input, tools and techniques,
   cost-benefit analysis, 261                              and output, 162-163
   cost of quality, 261                             project scope baseline
   decision-making technique, 261                        enterprise environmental
   root-cause analysis, 275                                factors, 164
   SWOT analysis, 276                                    organizational process assets, 164
Data-gathering techniques, 93, 455-456                   project scope statement, 164
   benchmarking, 130, 260                                WBS and WBS dictionary, 163
   brainstorming, 131, 275                       Define Scope process
   brainstorming and interviews, 260                documentation updates, 140-141
   checklists, 274                                  organizational process, 136
   facilitated workshop, 130                        project scope statement, 138-140
   focus group, 130                                 tools and techniques, 137-138
   interviewing, 275
   interview, questionnaires, and surveys, 130   360-degree survey, 637
   job shadowing, 130                            Deliverables, 139, 641
654   Index


      Design for X (DfX), 365                               resource optimization, 184
      Determine Budget process, 215                         schedule compression, 186
         analogous and parametric estimates, 227            schedule network analysis, 182
         contingency reserves and management                simulations, 186
                reserves, 227                               "What if" scenario analysis, 185
         cost aggregation, 227                      Develop team, 641
         financing, 227                             Directing and Managing Project Work
         input, tools and techniques,                  input
                and output, 226                             approved change requests, 351
         reserve analysis, 227                              enterprise environmental factors, 351
      Develop Project Charter process                       organizational process assets, 352
         agreements, 91                                     project documents, 351
         data-gathering, 93                                 project management plan, 350
         description, 90                               output
         enterprise environmental factors, 91-92            change requests, 354-355
         expert judgment, 93                                deliverables, 353
         input, tools and techniques,                       issues log, 353
                and output, 90-91                           updates, 355
         interpersonal and team skills, 93                  work performance data, 353
         meetings, 93                                  tools and techniques, 352-353
         organizational process assets, 92          Discounted cash flow (DCF), 77
         output
                                                    Discretionary dependencies, 169
             assumptions log, 94
             project charter, 94-96                 Distribute information, 641
         project sponsor, 105
         standard process, 105                      E
      Develop Schedule process                      Earned value management (EVM), 498, 641
         information                                Earned value technique (EVT), 498, 641
             activity relationship, 180
             basic activity, 180                    Emotional intelligence, 641
             global, 180                            Encode, 641
             risks, 180                             Enterprise environmental
         input, 179                                           factors (EEFs), 46, 147, 318, 642
         output, 179                                   description, 47
             change requests and updates to            types, 48-49
                documents, 189
                                                    Estimate Activity Duration, 158
             description, 190
                                                        activity list and attributes, 174
             project calendars, 188
                                                        description, 172
             project schedule, 187
                                                        input, 172-173
             schedule baseline, 188
                                                        output, 172-173, 178
             schedule data, 188
                                                        project scope baseline, 174
         SDB project, 190
                                                        RBS, resource calendar, and team
         tools and techniques, 179
                                                               assignments, 175
             agile release planning and PMIS, 187
                                                        resource requirements, 174
             applying leads and lags, 186
                                                        tools and techniques, 172-173
             critical path, 182-184
                                                             alternative analysis and
             network diagram and activity
                                                               decision-making, 177
                durations, 181
                                                             analogous estimating, 175
                                                                                        Index   655



        bottom-up, 177                                  lessons learned register, 222
        expert judgment and meetings, 178               organizational process
        parametric estimating, 176                         assets, 222
        reserve analysis, 177                           project schedule, 221
        three-point estimating, 176-177                 quality management plan, 221
Estimate Activity Resources process                     resource requirements, 221
    human and physical resources, 211                   risk register, 221
    input, 211                                      input, tools and techniques,
    output, 211                                            and output, 220
        activity resource requirements, 214         output
        bases of estimations, 214                       activity cost estimates, 225
        RBS, 215                                        estimate bases, 225
        updates to project documents, 215               updates, 226
    requirements                                    scope statement, WBS, and WBS
        activity-level resource                            dictionary, 220-221
           information, 212                         team and physical resources, 219
        cost, risk, and information, 212        Execution of project work
        enterprise environmental factors, 213      implement risk response
        organizational process assets, 213               process, 367-368
        resource calendars, 212                    Manage Project Knowledge (see Manage
    tools and techniques, 211                            Project Knowledge process)
        alternatives analysis, 214                 managing quality
        analogous estimation, 213                        (see Quality management process)
        bottom-up estimating, 213                  processes, 348-349
        parametric estimating, 214              Expected monetary value (EMV)
        project management software, 214                 analysis, 290-291, 642
        published estimating data, 214
                                                Experiment design, 642
Estimate at completion (EAC)
                                                Expert judgment, 79, 93, 446
    budgeted rate, 642
    current CPI, 642                            External dependency, 169
    present CPI, 642
Estimate Costs process, 215                     F
    cost-related information                    Fast tracking, 187, 642
        alternatives analysis, 224              Firm fixed price (FFP), 233
        analogous estimation, 223
        bottom-up estimation, 223               Fixed-price contracts
        contingency reserve, 224                    FFP, 233
        cost of quality, 224                        FPEPA, 233
        decision making, 224                        FPIF, 233
        methods, 222                            Fixed price (FP), 642
        parametric estimation, 223              Fixed price incentive fee (FPIF), 233
        PMIS, 224
                                                Fixed price with economic price adjustment
        three-point estimates, 224
                                                          (FPEPA), 233
    information sources
        cost management plan, 222               Float time, 642
        enterprise environmental                Flowcharts, 364, 642
          factors, 222                          Functional organizations, 55-56
656   Index


      G                                              J
      Gantt chart, 642                               Job shadowing, 130
      Global variables, 34-35
                                                     K
      H                                              Knowledge area, 643
      Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory, 410
      Histogram, 642                                 L
      Hybrid organization, 58                        Lag, 643
                                                     Lead, 643
      I                                              Leadership skills
      Idea mapping, 131                                 collaborative and conflict resolver, 70
                                                        effective communicator, 70
      Identify Stakeholders process
                                                        hands-on skills, 70
          change requests, 104
                                                        leadership, 69
          data analysis, 100-101
                                                        positive and optimistic, 70
          data presentation, 101-102
                                                        pro-integrity, 70
          gathering data, 99-100
                                                        social personality traits, 70
          input, tools and techniques,
                                                        team builder, 70
                 and output, 98
                                                        visionary, 70
          iterative process, 99
          negative stakeholders, 97                  Logical relationship, 643
          output                                     Lump-sum contract, 233
               assessment, 104
               classification, 104                   M
               identification, 103
                                                     Manage Communication process, 322
               stakeholder register, 103
                                                        communication skills, 424
          positive stakeholders, 97
                                                        communication technology and PMIS, 423
          power level and interest level, 102-103
                                                        dimensions, 427
      Implement risk response process, 367-368          information sources
      Incentive fee, 643                                    performance reporting, 422
      Initiating process group, 643                         presentation, 423
           description, 88                                  quality and risk reports, 422
           flowchart, 89                                    work performance reports, 422
           identifying stake holders (see Identify      input, tools and techniques,
                   Stakeholders process)                       and output, 421
           initiation contexts, 88, 106                 interpersonal and team skills
           project charter (see Develop Project             active listening, 424
                   Charter process)                         meeting management techniques, 424
                                                            networking, 424
      Inspection, 643
                                                        mechanisms, 427
      Interactive communication, 332                    output
      Internal dependency, 169                              organizational process assets
      Internal return rate (IRR), 77                           update, 428
                                                            project communications, 428
      Issue, 643                                            project document update, 428
      Issues log, 643                                   sender-receiver models, 425-426
                                                                                   Index     657



   and stakeholder engagement, 420             Mind mapping, 131, 319, 644
   tools, 425                                  Mitigation, 644
Management reserve (MS), 643                   Model, 644
Manage Project Knowledge process,              Monitor, 644
         356, 643
                                               Monitor Communication process, 322
   enterprise environmental factors, 357
                                                 change requests, 529
   lesson learned, 359
                                                 communication and impact, 528-529
   organizational process assets, 358
                                                 communication management
   project deliverables, 357
                                                        processes, 526-527
   project management plan and project
                                                 inputs, tools and techniques, and
         documents, 357
                                                        outputs, 526
   tools and techniques, 358-359
                                                 project execution data and results, 527
   updates, 359
                                                 project lifecycle, 525
Manage Project Team Process                      resource management plan, 527
   assessment and performance                    resources, 525
           information, 400                      role in communication
   facilitate team management, 401-402                  management, 530
   information, 400                              work performance information, 529
   output
                                               Monitoring and Controlling Project Work
         change requests, 407
                                                 baselines, 440
         organizational process assets, 408
                                                 controlling quality (see Quality control)
         updates, 407
                                                 Control Procurements (see Control
   project team assignments, 400
                                                        Procurements)
   tools and techniques
                                                 Direct and Manage Project Work
         conflict management, 403-405
                                                        process, 442
         decision making, 402
                                                 flowchart, 441-442
         emotional intelligence, 403
                                                 input, 444-445
         influencing, 402
                                                 Monitor Risks process, 463
Managing stakeholder engagement, 643             output, 444
   change requests, 431                               change requests, 447
   communication management plan, 431                 project document update, 447
   expectations containment, 429                      work performance reports, 447
   input, tools and techniques,                  performance deviations, 440
          and output, 430                        Perform Integrated Change Control (see
   involvement for confirmation, 429                    Perform Integrated Change
   risk, concerns, and issues, 429                      Control)
   stakeholder register, 431                     tasks, 443
   strategy, 431                                 tools and techniques, 444
Mandatory dependencies, 168                           data-analysis, 446
Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Theory, 409, 410          decision-making techniques, 446
                                                      expert judgment, 446
Matrix organizations, 57-59
                                                 tracking, reviewing, and reporting, 443
McClelland's Achievement Motivation
                                               Monitoring process group, 19
         Theory, 411
                                               Monitor Risks process, 644
Meeting management techniques, 424
                                                 audit, 466
Methodology, 643                                 change requests, 467
Milestone, 644                                   information, 464-465
658   Index


      Monitor Risks process (cont.)                   standard guidelines and criteria, 50
        input, tools and techniques,                  standardized processes
               and output, 464                              and procedures, 50
        modify documents, 467                         templates, 50
        project risk results, 465                 Organizations, 644
        reserve analysis, 466                        functional, 55-56
        risk dynamics, 464                           hybrid, 58
        risk reviews meetings, 466                   influences, projects, 59
        technical performance measurements, 466      matrix, 57-59
        work performance information, 465            multi-divisional, 60
      Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process         non-project friendly, 54
        communication management, 521                organic, 60
        decision analysis, 524                       project-friendly, 54
        enterprise environmental factors, 524        project-oriented, 56-57
        input, tools and techniques,                 virtual, 60
               and output, 522-523
        interpersonal and team skills, 524        P
        knowledge area and outputs, 521
                                                  Parametric estimating, 176, 644
        organizational project assets, 524
        project communications, 524               Payback period (PBP), 77
        project execution data and results, 523   Performance measurement
        stakeholder management processes, 522              baseline (PMB), 18, 644
        work performance data, 524                Performance report, 644
        work performance information, 524
                                                  Performing organization, 644
      Monte Carlo simulation, 644
                                                  Perform Integrated Change
      Multi-divisional organization, 60                     Control, 441-442
                                                      change requests, 448
      N                                               input
      Net present value (NPV), 76                         change requests, 450
                                                          enterprise environmental factors, 450
      Networking, 424
                                                          organizational process assets, 450
      Nominal group technique, 131                        project documents, 450
      Non-project friendly organizations, 54              project management plan, 449
                                                          work performance reports, 450
      O                                               output, 449
                                                          approved change requests, 451
      One-way communication, 333
                                                          project plan and project document
      Opportunity cost, 79                                  updates, 452
      Organic organization, 60                        project integration management, 443
      Organizational breakdown                        tools and techniques, 449
               structure (OBS), 146, 205                  change control tools, 451
                                                          data analysis, 451
      Organizational process                              decision-making techniques, 451
               assets (OPAs), 46, 147, 318, 644           expert judgment and meetings, 451
         categories, 50
         description, 48                          Plan communication, 322
         knowledge database repository, 51-52     Plan Cost Management process. see Cost
         requirements, 51                                  management plan
                                                                                  Index   659



Planning component, 644                         project management
Planning package, 644                               continuous improvement, 256
                                                    customer satisfaction, 256
Planning process group, 18
                                                    prevention, 256
Planning project                                    responsibility, 256
    addresses, 117                              stakeholders, 258
    components of, 118                          tools and techniques, 258
Plan Procurement Management                         data-analysis, 260-261
    conduct procurements, 228                       data-gathering techniques, 260
    contracts (see Contracts)                       data presentation, 261-262
    control procurements, 228                Plan Risk Response process
    and coordination, 242                        contingency, 300
    enterprise environmental factors, 232        data analysis and decision-making,
    high-level project information, 231                 300-301
    input, 230                                   goals, 294
    organizational process assets, 232           input, 295-296
    output, 230                                  output
        bidding documents, 240-241                   change requests, 303
        independent cost estimates, 241              document updates, 302
        make-or-buy decision, 239                    risk register and risk report
        procurement strategy, 239                       updates, 302
        source selection criteria, 239           response strategies
    plan procurements, 228                           opportunities, 299
    process groups and major output, 229             overall project risk, 300
    requirement documentation, 231                   threats, 297-298
    resource management plan and resource        tools and techniques, 295
           requirements, 231
                                             PMI's models
    risks and stakeholders, 232
                                                interactive model, 331
    roles, 228
                                                sender/receiver model, 330
    scope baseline, 231
    tools and techniques, 230                Portfolio, 28-30, 645
        make-or-buy decision analysis, 236   Portfolio management, 645
        market research analysis, 236        Precedence diagramming
        source selection analysis, 236-238             method (PDM), 191, 645
Plan Quality Management process                 applying leads and lags, 171
    description, 252                            dependencies
    grade, 255                                      finish to finish, 170
    input, 258                                      finish to start, 170
        assumptions and risks, 259                  start to finish, 170
        information, 259                            start to start, 170
        quality requirements, 259               description, 172
        quality standards, 259                  network diagram constructed, 171
        stakeholder information, 259            predecessor/successor
    output, 258, 263-264                               relationship, 169-170
    precision and accuracy, 255              Present value (PV), 76
    prevention and inspection, 255
                                             Preventive actions, 645
    processes of, 253-254
660   Index


      Probability                                       organizational culture
         algebraic equations, 33                            management style, 53
         definition, 32                                     policies, 53
         expected value, 33                                 project management style, 53
         random variable, 33                                project policies and procedures, 54
         standard deviation, 33                             project selection, 53
         variance, 33                                       team performance assessments, 54
      Problem solving, 405                                  values and vision, 53
                                                            work environment, 53
      Process, 645
                                                        organizational structures
      Process analysis, 645                                   (see Organizations)
      Process groups                                    PMO, 60-61
         closing, 20                                    project authorization, 78
         controlling, 19                                project management business
         executing, 18-19                                     documents (see Project
         initiating, 17                                       management business documents)
         monitoring, 19                                 project selection
         planning, 18                                       expert judgment, 79
                                                            opportunity cost, 79
      Procurement, 645
                                                            project management activities, 78
      Procurement audit, 645                            project stakeholders (see Project
      Procurement management, 645                             stakeholders)
      Procurement management plan, 645              Project-friendly organizations, 54

      Procurement negotiations, 373                 Projectinitiation. see Initiating process group
                                                    Project interfaces, 646
      Product acceptance criteria, 138
                                                    Project management
      Product scope, 645
                                                        effectiveness, 12
      Program, 27, 30-31, 645                           flowchart, 36-37
      Program management, 645                           groups, 4
      Program management office (PMO), 646              knowledge areas, 3, 5
                                                             communication, 22
      Progressive elaboration, 12-13, 646
                                                             cost, 21
      Project                                                integration, 21
          assumptions and constraints, 138-139               mapping to process groups, 24-25
          business documents, 646                            procurement, 23
          calendar, 646                                      quality, 22
          charter, 646                                       resource, 21
          closure (see Close Project process)                risk, 23
          initiation context, 10                             schedule, 21
          operations, 8-9                                    scope, 21
          organization categories, 9-11                      stakeholder, 22
          temporary, 6                                  lifecycle, 4
          unique product, 7                             organization, 4-5
      Project environment                               phase, 4
          EEFs, 46-49                                   phase gate, 5
          elements, 47                                  PMI, 11
          OPAs (see Organizational process assets       portfolio, 28-29, 31
                (OPAs))                                 processes, 5, 13-15
                                                                                    Index    661



    program, 27-28                                  dependencies
    progressive elaboration, 12-13                      discretionary, 169
    stakeholders, 5                                     external, 169
    tailoring, 5                                        internal, 169
    temporary effort/endeavor, 4                        mandatory, 168
Project management business documents               description, 167-168
    project benefit management plan, 75             PDM (see Precedence diagramming
    project business case                                 method (PDM))
        business analysis of situation, 73      Project scope, 646
        business need, 73                       Project scope creep, 647
        evaluation, 74
                                                Project stakeholder management
        option, 74
                                                    planning, 316-317
        recommendation, 74
                                                    process, 315, 316
    project success measures
        BCR, 76                                 Project stakeholders, 48
        CF and DCF, 77                              categories, 61
        factors, 75                                 customer/user, 63
        IRR, 77                                     description, 61
        PBP, 77                                     functional managers, 63
        PV and NPV, 76                              influence, 64
        ROI, 76                                     negative stakeholders, 62
                                                    operational management, 63
Project management information system
                                                    PMO, 62
         (PMIS), 187, 224, 352, 646
                                                    portfolio manager and portfolio review
Project Management Institute (PMI), 11                     board, 62
Project management office (PMO), 57, 60-62          positive stakeholders, 61
Project management plan, 646                        program manager, 62
                                                    project manager (see Project manager)
Project manager
                                                    project team, 62
    communication, 65-66
                                                    sellers and business partners, 63
    communication strategy, 66
                                                    sponsor, 64
    influencing, 71
    leadership skills (see Leadership skills)   Prototype model, 132
    negotiation, 71                             Pull communication, 333
    organizational structure, 65                Push communication, 333
    PMI talent triangle, 66-67
    problem solving, 72
    role of, 65                                 Q
    strategic and business management
           skills, 68-69                        Qualitative risk analysis, 647
    technical project management skills, 67        cost-effective, 284
                                                   description, 278
Project-oriented organizations, 56-57              information, 280
Project performance, 646                           input, 279
Project/product transition, 646                    output
                                                        risk register, 283-284
Project schedule, 646
                                                        risk report, 284
Project schedule management. see Schedule          tools and techniques, 279
          management                                    expert judgment, 283
Project schedule network diagrams, 646                  hierarchical charts, 282
662   Index


      Qualitative risk analysis (cont.)                  input, 285-287
              probability and impact                     output, risk report, 293
                matrix, 281-282                          tools and techniques
              risk categorization, 283                       decision-tree analysis, 291-292
              risk data quality, 280                         EMV analysis, 290-291
              risk parameters, 281                           influence diagram, 292
              risk probability and impact, 280               interviewing, 287
      Quality                                                interviews and expert judgment, 292
         audit, 364-365, 647                                 modeling and simulation, 290
         control, 647                                        probability distributions, 288-289
         definition, 647                                     sensitivity analysis, 289
         management plan, 647
         metrics, 647                                R
         planning, 647                               Random variable, 33
         policy, 647
                                                     Receiver model, 331
      Quality assurance (QA), 360                    Requirement, 647
      Quality control                                Requirement management plan, 126-127
         input, 453-454
                                                     Reserve analysis, 177
         management activities, 453
         output, 453                                 Residual risk, 647
              change requests, 462                   Resource breakdown
              quality control measurements, 462               structure (RBS), 175, 205, 215, 647
              verified deliverables, 462             Resource leveling, 184
              work performance information, 462
                                                     Resource management plan, 317
         tools and techniques, 453
                                                        acquiring and selecting
              data analysis, 456
                                                             goal and output, 386-387
              data gathering, 455-456
                                                             tools and techniques, 387-388
              data-presentation
                                                        cost and procurement, 201
                (see Data-presentation techniques)
                                                        Develop Team process (see Team
              inspection, 460
                                                               development process)
              testing and product evaluation, 461
                                                        financial resources, 200
      Quality Management process                        generating, 204
         change requests, 366                           goals, 203
         data gathering and analysis                    input, 203-204
              document analysis, 363                    Manage Project Team (see Manage
              process analysis, 363                            Project Team process)
              root-cause analysis, 363                  output, 203
         data-presentation techniques, 364                   authority, 209
         multicriteria decision analysis, 364                competency, 208
         performing, 361                                     identifying and acquiring
         quality audits, 364                                   resources, 208
         quality reports, 365-366                            roles and responsibilities, 208
         tests and evaluations, 362, 366                     staff management plan, 209
         tools, 365                                     processes, 383-384
      Quantitative risk analysis, 647                   project, team resource requirements,
         description, 278                                      roles and responsibilities, 202
         goals, 285                                     team and physical resources, 200
                                                                                       Index    663



   team charter, 210                               Plan Risk Management, 267-269
   tools and techniques, 203                       processes of, 265-267
       data-presentation techniques, 205           qualitative risk analysis (see Qualitative
       hierarchical charts, 205                           risk analysis)
       organizational theories, 207                quantitative risk analysis
       RAM, 205-207                                       (see Quantitative risk analysis)
       text-oriented formats, 206                  risk response planning (see Plan Risk
Resource optimization                                     Response process)
   resource leveling, 184                          tools and techniques, 268
   resource smoothing, 185                     Role, 648
Responsibility assignment                      Rolling wave planning, 144, 648
         matrix (RAM), 205-207, 647
Return on investment (ROI), 76                 S
Risk                                           Scatter diagram, 648
    definition, 647                            Schedule activity, 648
    identification, 648
                                               Schedule baseline, 648
    management planning, 648
    RBS, 648                                   Schedule compression, 648
    register, 648                                 crashing, 187
    trigger, 648                                  critical stakeholder expectations, 186
                                                  fast tracking, 187
Risk breakdown structure (RBS), 648
                                               Schedule development, 648
Risk identification process
    input, 273                                 Schedule management
    output, 273                                   activity, 156
        risk register, 276-277                    activity duration, 156
        risk report, 277                          Control Schedule process, 190-191
    sources, 274                                  Define Activities, 162
    stasks, 273                                   Estimate Activity Duration (see Estimate
    tools and techniques, 273                            Activity Duration)
        data-analysis techniques, 275-276         flow diagram, 157
        data-gathering techniques, 274-275        lead to schedule development, 157
                                                  logical relationship, 156
Risk management plan
                                                  Plan Schedule Management
    characteristics, 265
                                                       input, tools and techniques, 159-160
    development, 268-269
                                                       questions, 161
    elements
                                                  PMP exam objectives, 155
        identifying and assigning
                                                  process groups, 158-159
           resources, 269
                                                  project schedule development
        probability and impact matrix, 272
                                                         (see Develop Schedule process)
        risk categories, 270
                                                  schedule activity, 156
        risk probability and impact, 270-272
                                                  schedule milestone, 157
        risk reporting and tracking, 272
                                                  sequencing activities
        stakeholders' risk tolerance, 270
                                                       input, tools and techniques, and
        strategy and methodology, 269
                                                         output, 167
    identification (see Risk identification
                                                       project schedule networkdiagrams
           process)
                                                         (see Project schedule network
    input, 268
                                                         diagrams)
    output, 268
664   Index


      Schedule management (cont.)                    Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
         usages, 158                                           threats (SWOT) analysis, 276, 649
         work packages, 156                          Subprojects, 649
      Schedule milestone, 157, 648                   Synchronous communication, 332, 649
      Schedule network analysis, 182, 649
      Schedule performance index (SPI), 649          T, U
      Schedule revision, 649                         Team development process
      Schedule variance, 649                            output
                                                            change request and document
      Scope baseline, 649
                                                              updates, 398
      Scope definition, 649                                 team performance assessment, 398
      Scope management plan                             progressive stages, Tuckman model, 395
         definition, 119                                tools and techniques
         development approach, 126                          co-location and virtual teams, 392
         processes, 120-122                                 communication technologies, 392
         project management, 122-125                        individual and team assessments,
      Scope planning, 649                                     397
                                                            interpersonal and general
      Secondary risk, 649                                     management skills, 392
      Sender/receiver model, 331                            observation and conversation, 397
      Sequence DNA of a Buffalo (SDB) project, 190          recognition and rewards, 397
                                                            team-building activities, 394-395
      Simulation, 649
                                                            training, 396
      Smoothing, 405
                                                     Technical project management skills, 67
      Staff management plan, 209
                                                     Temporary effort/endeavor, 6-7
      Stakeholder engagement plan
                                                     Term of Reference (TOR), 241
          assessment matrix, 320
          change log, 318                            Text-oriented formats, 206
          compaing results, 319                      Theories of motivation
          data analysis, 319                            Expectancy Theory, 411
          decision making, 319                          Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene
          enterprise environmental factors, 318               Theory, 410
          information project level, 317                Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Theory, 409
          levels of, 319                                McClelland's Achievement Motivation
          mind mapping, 319                                   Theory, 411
          organizational process assets, 318            McGregor's X-Y Theory, 411
          stakeholder register, 317                  Three-point estimating technique, 176-177
      Stakeholder management plan, 320               Time and material (T&M)
      Stakeholder register, 103, 649                          contracts, 234, 649
      Standard deviation, 33
      Statement of work (SOW), 241, 243, 371         V
      Statistical sampling, 649
                                                     Variance, 649
      Strategic and business management skills, 68
                                                     Variance analysis, 649
          alignment level, 68-69
          organization level, 68-69                  Verify scope, 650
          project level, 68-69                       Virtual organization, 60
      Strategic plan/strategic business plan, 10     Virtual team, 650
                                                                      Index   665




W, X,Y, Z                                 decomposition, 142-144
                                          output, 144
War room, 650                             scope
Workaround, 650                                 baseline, 144-146
Work breakdown structure (WBS), 116,   Work packages, 142, 156, 650
        120, 219, 650                  Wrapper technique, 182
  create, 141-142
