Copyrighted Material

(c) Copyright 2018 by SSI Logic. Printed and bound in the United States of America. All rights
reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, or incorporated into any information retrieval system, electronic or
mechanical, without the written permission of the copyright owner.
Edition 2018.

Although the author and publisher of this work have made every effort to ensure accuracy and
completeness of content entered in this book, we assume no responsibility for errors, inaccuracies,
omissions, or inconsistencies included herein. Any similarities of people, places, or organizations are
completely unintentional.

Published by SSI Logic


                     Looking for more PMP exam prep, courseware and classes?
                                 Visit us at www.PMTraining.com

ISBN 10: 982576803
ISBN 13: 9780982576809

All inquiries should be addressed via email to:
support@pmtraining.com

or by mail post to:
PMTraining
340 S Lemon Ave #9038
Walnut, CA 91789

"PMI", "PMP", "PgMP", "CAPM", and "PMBOK Guide" are registered marks of Project Management
Institute, Inc.
Table of Contents

Introduction

    Welcome
    PMP Exam Overview

Practice Exams and Quizzes

    PMP Lite Mock Exam 1
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Management Framework
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 2
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Integration Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 3
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Scope Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 4
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Schedule Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 5
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 6
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Cost Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 7
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 8
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Quality Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 9
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 10
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Resource Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 11
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 12
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Communications Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 13
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 14
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Risk Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 15
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 16
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Procurement Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 17
    Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Stakeholder Management
    PMP Lite Mock Exam 18
    PMP Focus Area Test: Professional and Social Responsibility

PMP Formula Cheat Sheet

    PMP Formulas

Additional Resources

    Exam Taking Tips
INTRODUCTION
Welcome
Thank you for selecting SSI Logic's PMP(R) Exam Prep - Questions,
Answers, and Explanations for your Project Management Professional
(PMP)(R) study needs. The goal of this book is to provide condensed mock
exams and practice tests which allow you to become comfortable with the
pace, subject matter, and difficulty of the PMP exam.

The content in this book is designed to optimize the time you spend studying
in multiple ways.

1. Practice exams in this book are condensed to be completed in one hour;
   allowing you to balance your time between practice tests and offline study.

2. Passing score requirements in this book are slightly higher than the real
   exam; allowing you to naturally adjust to a higher test score requirement.

3. Practice exams included in this book cover the entire scope of the PMP
   exam, while shorter quizzes focus only on specific Knowledge Areas
   outlined in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
   (PMBOK(R) Guide) -- Sixth Edition.

The practice exam content in this book is structured into two general types of
exam preparation:

     * "Lite" Mock Exams, which allow you to test your knowledge across
       condensed versions of the PMP exam; designed to be completed within one
       hour.

     * Knowledge Area Quizzes, which reflect brief practice tests focused on
       specific Knowledge Areas outlined in the PMBOK(R) Guide, designed to be
       completed in 15 minutes.
PMP Exam Updates as of March 2018
This book reflects the updated version of the PMP exam put into place
worldwide starting March 26, 2018. While many refinements have been
applied to the material to be tested on, a particular focus has been placed on
an agile approach integrated with traditional project management.

Please note: The PMBOK(R) Guide - Sixth Edition is the definitive
reference text for the PMP certification exam.

To accommodate the updated exam content, this book has been revised
extensively so that exam and PMBOK Guide revisions are taken into
account.


PMP(R) Exam Overview

The content in this book reflect the PMP exam version updated March 26,
2018; and are based on the content contained within the PMBOK(R) Guide -
Sixth Edition.

About the Project Management Professional (PMP) Certification

The PMP certification is managed by the Project Management Institute
(PMI(R)) and reflects the PMI's project management processes as published in
the PMBOK(R) Guide. Since 1984, the PMP certification has been one of the
most sought-after project management credentials available.

The average salary of a PMP certified manager is 16% higher than
individuals without the PMP certification.

The PMP certification is a globally recognized credential, and individuals are
encouraged to remain active via PMI's Continuing Certification
Requirements (CCRs). Only individuals who maintain active PMP
credentials may refer to themselves as Project Management Professionals.
Individuals do not need to be a member of PMI to earn a PMP credential.

The minimum requirements in attaining the PMP certification:
* Education: At a minimum, A high school diploma is required
* Project management experience
      o 36 months and 4500 hours of professional experience for individuals with a
        bachelor's degree or global equivalent (within the past 8 years)
      o 60 months and 7500 hours of professional experience for individuals
        without a bachelor's degree or equivalent (within the past 8 years)
* Project Management Education: 35 contact hours of formal education
* Ethics: Agree to PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
* Pass the PMP Exam

PMP Exam Details

The PMP exam is designed to objectively assess and measure project
management knowledge. Concepts covered in the PMP exam are directly
derived from the PMBOK(R) Guide, an internationally recognized standard
(IEEE Std 1490-2003) which outlines project management fundamentals; and
is applicable to a wide range of industries.

The actual exam is offered in both a computer-based testing (CBT)
environment, as well as through proctored paper-based exams. A summary of
the exam structure and passing requirements are as follows:

* There are 200 total multiple-choice questions which make up the PMP
  exam
* 25 randomly placed "pretest questions" are included, and do not count
  towards the pass/fail determination
* Individuals have four hours to complete the exam
* Only correct answers count, and a passing score is determined by "sound
  psychometric analysis". This method indicates that scores reflect the
  difficulty of the questions answered. *

* For the purposes of this book, a numeric scoring system will be applied,
allowing students to easily measure their knowledge.
The Ten Knowledge Areas of the PMBOK(R) Guide

The ten knowledge areas outlined in the PMBOK(R) Guide and covered by the
PMP exam are listed below.

* Project Integration Management
* Project Scope Management
* Project Schedule Management
* Project Cost Management
* Project Quality Management
* Project Resource Management
* Project Communications Management
* Project Risk Management
* Project Procurement Management
* Project Stakeholder Management

Additionally, the PMP practice exam content in this book include questions
on the overall Project Management Framework and Professional
Responsibility; reflecting the real PMP exam.

The ten knowledge areas contain a total of 49 processes which are applied to
five basic process groups. These five basic process groups, or "domains",
are common across all projects and listed below along with the percentage of
questions one should expect on the PMP exam:

 1. Initiating (13%)
 2. Planning (24%)
 3. Executing (31%)
 4. Monitoring and Controlling (25%)
 5. Closing (7%)
PRACTICE EXAMS AND QUIZZES
PMP Lite Mock Exam 1
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 1
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK(R)
Guide knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. During the development of the project stakeholder engagement plan, a
   project manager is usually dependent on the voice of the project
   stakeholders to obtain expert opinion. Which of the following is an
   important tool available to the project manager for gathering and
   organizing stakeholders' information?

      A. Fishbone diagrams

      B. Control charts

      C. Histograms

      D. Focus groups
2. During which of the following project processes do key stakeholders
   engage with the project for the first time?

     A. Develop Project Charter

     B. Identify Stakeholders

     C. Collect Requirements

     D. Plan Stakeholder Engagement

3. Which of the following components of a project scope statement is useful
   in reducing scope creep?

     A. Acceptance criteria

     B. Deliverables

     C. Scope description

     D. Exclusions

4. As you create the Activity List, which technique is recommended for
   subdividing the project into smaller components called activities?

     A. Decomposition

     B. Rolling Wave Planning

     C. Expert Judgment

     D. Deconstruction

5. During the development of the project stakeholder engagement plan, the
   project manager is usually dependent on the expert judgment of senior
  stakeholders to identify and plan effective stakeholder management
  strategies. Which of the following stakeholders cannot guide the project
  manager in developing effective strategies for internal stakeholders?

     A. Sponsor

     B. Identified key stakeholders

     C. Customers

     D. Project team members

6. The Create WBS process identifies the deliverables at the __________
   level in the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).

     A. Lowest

     B. Any

     C. Tenth

     D. Highest

7. What is the primary risk when including reserves, or contingency
   allowances, in your cost estimate?

     A. Cancelling your project

     B. Understating the cost estimate

     C. Overstating the cost estimate

     D. Tracking the funds

8. Which of the following statements most accurately describes a project
  scenario?

      A. Changes in project scope during the initial phases of the project are very
         expensive.

      B. The influence of the stakeholders is the same all through the project.

      C. Staffing peaks during the execution phase of a project.

      D. The next phase of a project should never start until the deliverables for the
         previous phase are completely reviewed and approved.

9. Which of the following is not an organizational process asset used during
   the Plan Resource Management process?

      A. Template for resource management plan

      B. Resource management policies and procedures

      C. Historical information about previous projects

      D. Standardized stakeholder list

10. During the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, a number of
    project documents might get updated. Which of the following project
    documents get updated the most during this process?

      A. Stakeholder register

      B. Risk register

      C. Project reports

      D. Project presentations
11. Few project managers collect lessons-learned information throughout the
    project's life. Most tackle this in the final days of the project or, worse,
    after the project is complete. What is the negative consequence of this
    approach?

      A. It makes compiling and obtaining project information difficult.

      B. It might result in further expenses on the project.

      C. The project's NPV becomes zero.

      D. It requires hiring a specialist to do the job.

12. After brainstorming potential project risks, what is the recommended
    method for prioritizing these risks and their mitigation plans?

      A. RACI chart

      B. Control chart

      C. Fishbone diagram

      D. Probability and impact matrix

13. If you are managing changes to the project's cost baseline, which process
    are you using?

      A. Negotiate Costs

      B. Estimate Costs

      C. Control Costs

      D. Determine Budget
14. During the Control Procurements process, a number of documents might
    get updated due to various reasons. Which of the following components
    of the project management plan is least likely to get updated during this
    process?

      A. Quality management plan

      B. Procurement management plan

      C. Schedule baseline

      D. Cost baseline

15. In order to facilitate project configuration and change management on
    complex projects, a project manager relies on configuration and change
    management tools. Such tools:

      A. Can be manual or automatic; the selection depends on the project's
         environment and requirements.

      B. Must be manual; a complex project requires all change requests to be
         manually signed.

      C. Must be automatic; a complex project requires complex change control
         procedures.

      D. Change control must be manual, but the configuration control may be
         automatic.

16. Various tools and techniques determine project requirements during the
    Collect Requirements process. These requirements form the basis for
    defining the project scope. One of the responsibilities of a project
    manager is to identify key project deliverables during this exercise.
    Where are the key project deliverables documented?
      A. Scope Management Plan

      B. Requirements Management Plan

      C. Project Scope Statement

      D. Accepted Deliverables

17. The most detailed level of the WBS is the _______________ .

      A. Control Account

      B. Work package

      C. Scope statement

      D. Accepted Deliverable

18. Which of the following is a hierarchical representation of project risks?

      A. Risk Register

      B. Risk Mitigation

      C. Risk Categories

      D. Risk Breakdown Structure

19. If an investment in a project returns 15 percent annually, how much
    should you invest to get $5 million by the end of the fifth year?

      A. 2485884

      B. 2857143
      C. 2501376

      D. 2685292

20. A business is considering more than a dozen infrastructure upgrade
    projects. These projects, once delivered, will add to the organization's
    overall performance but will not contribute to any of the revenue
    streams. Prior to initiating any such project, the value of the project to
    the organization must be determined. Which of the following is the most
    important factor to consider in such a scenario?

      A. Net Present Value (NPV) of the projects

      B. Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of the projects

      C. Alignment with the strategic goals

      D. Investment requirement

21. If a project manager believes that a particular subcontract needs to be
    terminated, which of the following can provide guidance on the contract
    termination procedure?

      A. The contract termination procedures in the organizational process assets

      B. The termination clause of the specific subcontract

      C. The change control procedures in the project management plan

      D. The contract termination procedures in the project procurements
         management plan

22. Which of these types of precedence relationships is least commonly used
    in the Precedence Diagramming Method?
      A. Start to Start

      B. Finish to Finish

      C. Finish to Start

      D. Start to Finish

23. A RACI chart is an example of a _________________.

      A. Network

      B. Flowchart

      C. Responsibility assignment matrix

      D. Hierarchical-type organization chart

24. If the project's current total earned value (EV) is $100,000 and the actual
    amount spent (AC) is $95,000, what is the cost variance of the project?

      A. The cost variance is $1.05

      B. The cost variance is $5,000

      C. The cost variance is $0.95

      D. The cost variance is $-5,000

25. A contractor is currently constructing a new building for your
    organization on a cost-plus-incentive contract. You just received the
    project status report from the contractor's project manager. According to
    the report, the project's CPI is 1.5. You are shocked because you believe
    the project costs are out of control. Upon investigation, you learn the $1
    million advance payment (20 percent of the estimated project cost) given
   to the contractor at the start of the project was included in the project's
   earned value. Further, the cost of the inventory at the project site was
   excluded from the total actual costs. According to the contract, your
   company reimburses only the costs for the completed deliverables and
   not for the supplies in the project's inventory. In this scenario, the
   reported project's CPI is incorrect because:

     A. Actual cost is understated.

     B. Earned value is overstated, and actual cost is understated.

     C. Earned value is overstated.

     D. Both the earned value and the actual cost are overstated.

26. Each critical project communication requirement must be carefully
    analyzed. One good way is to use a communication model to design
    effective communications. What is the sequence of steps in a basic
    communication model?

     A. Encode -> Decode -> Transmit -> Acknowledge -> Feedback

     B. Encode -> Transmit -> Decode -> Acknowledge -> Feedback

     C. Decode -> Encode -> Transmit -> Acknowledge -> Feedback

     D. Encode -> Transmit -> Decode -> Feedback -> Acknowledge

27. Recently, a junior team member has challenged the project management
    approach since not all requirements identified during the Collect
    Requirements process were documented in the project scope statement.
    You are the project manager, what should you do first?

     A. Remove the junior team member from the team as this is a disciplinary
        issue.
      B. Analyze the objection and determine if the requirements were deliberately
         dropped during the Define Scope process.

      C. Engage the project sponsor to resolve the issue.

      D. Accept your mistake and include the missed requirements.

28. Project knowledge management is concerned with managing which type
    of project knowledge?

      A. Both "explicit" and "tacit" knowledge

      B. "Explicit" knowledge; as this can be readily codified

      C. "Tacit" knowledge; as this is difficult to express

      D. "Tacit" knowledge; as this involves beliefs, insights, experience and
         "know-how"

29. Jane is currently reviewing a list of project proposals. All the proposed
    projects achieve some of the organizational strategic objectives and their
    expected costs are known. However, Jane cannot execute all the projects
    due to the funding limitation. How shall Jane determine which projects
    she needs to execute this year?

      A. Select the high-budget projects and drop the low-budget projects

      B. Select the low-budget projects and drop the high-budget projects

      C. Select the projects that maximize organizational revenue

      D. Select the projects that maximize the business value

30. Increasing the number of resources in order to crash a project schedule
    does not always cut the time by the same factor. In worst cases, too many
    resources assigned to an activity may actually increase the activity
    duration. This is because:

      A. Decrease in cost budget

      B. Required additional coordination

      C. Funding limit reconciliation

      D. Additional risk introduced due to crashing

31. A project manager scheduled a review at the end of a phase, with the
    objective of obtaining authorization to close the current project phase
    and initiate the next phase. Which of the following is an incorrect way of
    describing this review?

      A. Phase gate

      B. Phase planning

      C. Kill point

      D. Stage gate

32. Which of the following tools and techniques is useful to process work
    performance data to identify sources of project defects during the
    Control Quality process?

      A. Data analysis

      B. Salience model

      C. Schedule model

      D. Communication model
33. The Requirements Traceability Matrix helps in tracing all the following
    except:

     A. Requirements to project objectives

     B. Requirements to project scope

     C. Requirements to test strategy

     D. Requirements to project risk

34. Which of the following should you not use as an input into creating the
    WBS structure?

     A. Bill of Material (BOM)

     B. Project scope statement

     C. Organizational process assets

     D. Requirements documentation

35. Which of the following processes are usually performed once or at
    predefined points in the project:

     A. "Develop Project Charter" and "Close Project or Phase"

     B. "Develop Project Charter" and "Develop Project Management Plan"

     C. "Develop Project Management Plan" and "Direct and Manage Project
        Work"

     D. "Direct and Manage Project Work" and "Monitor and Control Project
        Work"
36. Which term best describes the Identify Risks process?

      A. Finite

      B. Redundant

      C. Iterative

      D. Inconsequential

37. During the Plan Risk Management process, assigning ___________ will
    help you and the project team identify all important risks and work more
    effectively during the identification process.

      A. Risk factors

      B. Blame

      C. Risk mitigation plans

      D. Risk categories

38. Which of these processes is not a Project Schedule Management
    process?

      A. Create WBS

      B. Develop Schedule

      C. Define Activities

      D. Sequence Activities

39. The technique most commonly used by project management software
    packages to construct a project schedule model is:
     A. Precedence diagramming method (PDM)

     B. Finish-to-Start (FS)

     C. Activity-In-Node (AIN)

     D. Node-On-Activity (NOA)

40. Which of the following defines the total scope of the project and
    represents the work specified in the current approved project scope
    statement?

     A. Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)

     B. Bill of Material (BOM)

     C. Project Charter

     D. Requirements Breakdown Structure (RBS)

41. If you are creating a new WBS for your project, what should you do to
    save time during the creation process?

     A. Delegate the WBS creation since it is not an important process.

     B. Skip the WBS process.

     C. Use a previous WBS from a similar project as a template.

     D. Create a less detailed WBS.

42. Which of these precedence relationships is most commonly used in the
    Precedence Diagramming Method?

     A. Finish-to-Start
      B. Start-to-Finish

      C. Start-to-Start

      D. Finish-to-Finish

43. The output of the Validate Scope process is accepted deliverables that
    are formally signed off by the stakeholders. The stakeholders, on some
    projects, can get involved with the project as early as:

      A. During the project initiation

      B. During the project planning

      C. During the project execution

      D. During the project monitoring & controlling

44. An effective quality audit should be:

      A. Structured and independent

      B. Informal and independent

      C. Informal and internal

      D. Structured and internal

45. What is the traditional way to display a reporting structure among project
    team members?

      A. Text-oriented role description

      B. Flowchart
      C. Project organization charts

      D. Matrix-based responsibility chart

46. Kevin is assigned to a software development project that will start in the
    near future and is currently tailoring the PMBOK processes to satisfy the
    project's specific needs. Kevin wants to introduce a new process,
    "Identify Key Deliverables", to the existing six project scope
    management processes. Although he understands that project
    deliverables identification is already in the PMBOK scope management
    processes, he believes that having a dedicated process will stress the
    importance of determining and agreeing to key project deliverables. The
    best position for the new "Identify Key Deliverables" process should be
    between which of the following two processes?

      A. Define Scope and Create WBS

      B. Create WBS and Validate Scope

      C. Plan Scope Management and Collect Requirements

      D. Collect Requirements and Define Scope

47. During which stages of a project should the project manager be most
    active in managing project stakeholders' needs and expectations?

      A. Initiating and planning

      B. Planning and executing

      C. Executing and controlling

      D. Controlling and closing

48. Project risks should be identified by:
      A. Those invited to the risk identification process only

      B. Key project stakeholders only

      C. The project manager only

      D. All project personnel

49. A control chart should always contain:

      A. Upper and lower warning limits

      B. The moving average

      C. Upper and lower control limits

      D. Upper and lower specification limits

50. When is Rolling Wave Planning useful in a project?

      A. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to help you achieve the
         appropriate level of detail in each work package at the right time.

      B. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to determine the correct
         sequencing for long-term items.

      C. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to help you organize team
         members' activities within a large project group.

      D. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to help you determine which
         activities are more important and to do them first.
PMP Lite Mock Exam 1
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - Fishbone diagrams, control charts and histograms are quality
   management tools. The question is asking for a tool that helps the project
   manager collect stakeholder information and focus group is one of the
   effective tools available to the project manager. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 511] [Project Stakeholder Management]

2. A - Project stakeholders are involved in each of the project management
   processes. The Develop Project Charter is the first project management
   process where the key project stakeholders get engaged for the first time.
   Stakeholders provide expert judgment and participate in facilitated
   sessions during the charter development. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 80]
   [Project Integration Management]

3. D - Project exclusions identifies what is excluded from the       project.
   Explicitly stating what is out of scope for the project helps     manage
   stakeholders' expectation and can reduce scope creep. Other        choices
   cannot help more in this regard. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154]    [Project
   Framework]

4. A - The decomposition technique allows the project manager to create
   smaller and more manageable pieces of work from the larger work
   packages. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 185] [Project Schedule
   Management]

5. C - Only internal stakeholders can provide expert judgment on effective
   management strategies for internal stakeholders. Project customers are
   important stakeholders but usually they lack the knowledge on internal
   stakeholders, and hence cannot provide accurate feedback. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 550] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. A - The Create WBS process identifies the deliverables at the lowest level
   in the WBS, the work package. Project work packages are typically
   decomposed into smaller components called activities, which represent the
   work that is necessary to complete the work package. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 157] [Project Schedule Management]

7. C - Contingency funds are used to handle cost uncertainty due to
   unforeseen events during a project. These funds are generally used for
   items that are likely to occur but are not certain to occur. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 245] [Project Cost Management]

8. C - Staffing is typically highest during the execution phase of the project.
   The other three responses may not hold true. Projects can move forward
   into subsequent phases without the deliverables of the prior phase being
   completely approved; this is known as fast tracking. Changes during the
   initial phases of the project are the least expensive. The influence of the
   stakeholders is highest during the start of the project and declines as the
   project moves to completion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 549] [Project
   Framework]

9. D - Standardized stakeholder list is not a valid organizational process asset
   used in the Plan Resource Management process. The other choices are
   valid assets. Other assets include historical information on organizational
   structures that have worked in previous projects and organizational
   processes and policies. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 315] [Project Resource
   Management]

10. A - Project reports and presentation distributed to the stakeholders get
    archived in the organizational process assets during this process.
    Stakeholder register is the project document that gets updated the most
    during this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 529] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

11. A - When lessons-learned gathering and documentation is postponed till
    the very end, the project manager must scramble for bits and pieces of
   project history to compile into a lessons-learned document. Often,
   because the project is in closeout, the project manager has only a few
   team members remaining, which makes compiling and obtaining project
   information from the remaining few resources difficult. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Pages 98, 100] [Project Integration Management]

12. D - A probability and impact matrix will help filter the high-risk items
    and high-impact items from the others, so that you can focus your
    attention on these riskier items. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 425] [Project
    Risk Management]

13. C - Control Costs is the process of managing the project's costs and the
    changes that threaten the bottom line. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 257]
    [Project Cost Management]

14. A - The procurement management plan, schedule baseline, and the cost
    baseline typically gets updated as result of a significant change in
    procurement contracts or strategy. However, the quality management
    plan is least likely to get updated during this process since quality
    requirements always need to be met by all contractors. The contractors
    can be allowed more money or time to complete the works but cannot be
    allowed to compromise the quality of the works. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 500] [Project Procurement Management]

15. A - In order to facilitate configuration and change management, manual
    or automated tools may be used. Tool selection should be based on the
    needs of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 118] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

16. C - The project scope statement provides the product description,
    acceptance criteria, key deliverables, project boundaries, assumptions,
    and constraints about the project. The scope management plan and the
    requirements management plan are the subsidiary plans of the overall
    project management plan and they detail how the project team needs to
    manage the project scope and requirements respectively. These plan do
   not document the actual scope of the project. Accepted Deliverables is
   the wrong answer since deliverables are accepted post completion and
   validation, the identification of the key deliverable is done early during
   the planning phase of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154]
   [Project Scope Management]

17. B - The work package is the lowest and most detailed level of the WBS
    and can be scheduled, cost estimated, monitored, and controlled.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 157] [Project Scope Management]

18. D - The Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical presentation
    of the project risks sorted by risk categories. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    405] [Project Risk Management]

19. A - Present Value = Future Value / (1 + interest rate)^(Period) =
    5,000,000 / (1 + 15%)^5 = 2,485,884 [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 34,
    http://www.investopedia.com/walkthrough/corporate-finance/3/time-
    value-money/present-value-discounting.aspx]   [Project    Integration
    Management]

20. C - Projects help in achieving organizational goals whey they are aligned
    with the organization's strategy. If the projects are misaligned with the
    organizational strategic goals, they are most likely to produce
    undesirable results either in the short-term or the long-term. NPV and
    IRR calculations are great measures, however, these are not applicable
    since these projects will not contribute to any of the revenue streams.
    Investment requirement is important but is useless on the projects that
    are not aligned with the strategic goals of the organization. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Pages 34, 35] [Project Integration Management]

21. B - Each contract is unique and so are its obligations, provisions and
    clauses. Any contract that need to be terminated must be terminated in
    accordance with the termination clause of that contract. These contract
    termination provisions are agreed and signed off by both parties at the
    time of the contract award. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 489] [Project
    Procurement Management]

22. D - Start to Finish relationships indicate that the next task cannot be
    completed until the one preceding it has started. This type is not
    commonly used. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190] [Project Schedule
    Management]

23. C - A RACI chart outlines in matrix form, the project tasks and for each
    task, who is responsible, who is accountable, whom to consult, and
    whom to inform. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317] [Project Resource
    Management]

24. B - The cost variance (CV) equals EV - AC. In this case, the CV =
    $5,000. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Project Cost Management]

25. C - In this scenario the earned value has been overstated while the
    reported actual cost is ok. Earned value should be the sum of PVs of all
    completed activities. The initial 20% advance should not be part of this.
    Further, since the buyer is not liable for the inventory cost and only
    reimburses the costs associated with completed deliverables, the cost of
    the inventory does not become part of the actual cost until that inventory
    is consumed during the construction process. The inventory is an asset
    for the contactor until it is consumed on the project and at that time it
    becomes a cost for the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Project
    Communications Management]

26. B - Encode -> Transmit -> Decode -> Acknowledge -> Feedback is the
    right sequence. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 371, 372] [Project
    Communications Management]

27. B - All the requirements identified in Collect Requirements may not be
    included in the project as the Define Scope process selects the final
    project requirements from the requirements documentation developed
    during the Collect Requirement process. Analyzing the objection and
    determining if the requirements were deliberately dropped during the
    Define Scope process is the best response. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    151] [Project Risk Management]

28. A - Knowledge is commonly split into explicit (knowledge that can be
    readily codified using words, pictures, and numbers) and tacit
    (knowledge that is personal and difficult to express). Knowledge
    management is concerned with managing both tacit and explicit
    knowledge. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 100] [Project Procurement
    Management]

29. D - Project should never be prioritized based on their budgets. Selecting
    the projects that maximize organizational revenue or selecting the
    projects that maximize the business value seem good options. However,
    adding to business value takes precedence over adding the organizational
    revenue, since there can be projects that add more to the revenue but add
    less to the business value. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 7] [Project
    Integration Management]

30. B - Increasing the number of resources in order to crash a project
    schedule does not always cut the time by the same factor. In worst cases,
    too many resources to the activity may actually increase the duration due
    to required additional coordination. Other choices are either not
    applicable or do not directly influence the project schedule. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 197] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. B - Stage Gates, Phase Gates and Kill Points all refer to a phase end
    review with the objective of obtaining authorization to close the current
    phase and start the next one. This is a retrospective review of the current
    phase. Phase planning, on the other hand, is performed early during the
    planning phase of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 21] [Project
    Framework]

32. A - The question is asking for a tool and technique used during the
    Control Quality process. Data Analysis is a tool and technique of the
    Control Quality process used to identify source of defects. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Pages 303] [Project Quality Management]

33. D - Requirements Traceability Matrix is an output of the Collect
    Requirements process. It is used for tracing requirements to project
    scope, objectives, and test strategy. Tracing requirements to project risk
    is not a valid use. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 149] [Project Scope
    Management]

34. A - The Bill of Material (BOM) is not used as an input in the Create
    WBS process. The other three are valid inputs. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 156] [Project Scope Management]

35. A - The "Develop Project Charter" and the "Close Project or Phase"
    process are used once or at predefined points in the project. The other
    choices have at least one process that is either performed continuously or
    periodically as needed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 22] [Project
    Integration Management]

36. C - The Identify Risks process is an ongoing, iterative process as risks
    are often identified throughout the project's life cycle. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 409] [Project Risk Management]

37. D - Risk categories provide a structure that ensures a comprehensive
    process of systematically identifying risks and that contributes to the
    effectiveness and quality of the process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 405]
    [Project Risk Management]

38. A - Create WBS is a process in the Project Scope Management area. The
    other options are all Project Schedule Management processes. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 25] [Project Schedule Management]

39. A - The method used by most project management software packages to
    construct a project schedule model is Precedence diagramming method.
    This method uses boxes or rectangles, called nodes, to represent
    activities. It connects the nodes with arrows showing the logical
    relationships among them. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 189] [Project
    Schedule Management]

40. A - The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the work to be
    performed by the project team. It defines the total scope of the project. It
    represents the work specified in the currently approved project scope
    statement. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 157] [Project Scope Management]

41. C - Creating the WBS is a very important process, but often a previous
    WBS can be used as a template to save time and avoid the risk of
    forgetting something important. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 157] [Project
    Scope Management]

42. A - Finish-to-Start relationships indicate that the next task is not able to
    start until the one preceding it is completed. This is the most commonly
    used type of activity relationship. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190]
    [Project Schedule Management]

43. A - The stakeholders may get involved as early as project initiation to
    provide inputs about required quality of deliverables so that Control
    Quality can assess the performance and recommend necessary changes.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131] [Project Resource Management]

44. A - To provide the best results, a quality audit should be a structured
    process performed by an independent entity. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    294] [Project Quality Management]

45. C - A hierarchical-type organization chart can clearly show roles and
    reporting relationships within a team. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 319]
    [Project Resource Management]

46. D - The identification of key project deliverables can only be done once
    the project requirements are collected, analyzed and documented. This is
    done during the Collect Requirements process. Further, the key project
    deliverables are documented in the project scope statement which is an
    output of the Define Scope process. The best position of the newly
    proposed "Identify Key Deliverables" process should be between the
    Collect Requirement and Define Scope processes. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Pages 129, 130] [Project Integration Management]

47. A - The ability of stakeholders to influence the project is typically
    highest during the initial stages and gets progressively lower as the
    project progresses. The project manager should more actively manage
    the project stakeholders during the project initiation and planning phases
    in comparison to the later stages of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 549] [Project Stakeholder Management]

48. D - While it is not feasible to invite everyone to the risk identification
    meetings, everyone should be encouraged to identify risks as they
    encounter them. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 411] [Project Risk
    Management]

49. C - Upper and lower control limits allow the control chart to serve its
    purpose of indicating when a process is in or out of control. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 304] [Project Quality Management]

50. A - Rolling Wave Planning is a technique used to create a more detailed
    work plan while keeping the right level of detail for each activity:
    Activities happening sooner have more detail than those further in the
    future. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 185] [Project Schedule Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Management Framework
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Management Framework
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project
Management Framework knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. Which of the following is not a PMBOK Knowledge Area?

      A. Procurement management

      B. Integration management

      C. Execution management

      D. Communications management

2. A project manager is managing a research project. Typically, research
   projects are not clearly defined and involve a lot of uncertainty. The
   project has four phases in which a phase can only start when its previous
   phase is complete. What project lifecycle and phase-to-phase relationship
  should the project manager use for this project?

      A. Predictive lifecycle with sequential phase to phase relationship

      B. Iterative lifecycle with sequential phase to phase relationship

      C. Predictive lifecycle with overlapping phase to phase relationship

      D. Iterative lifecycle with overlapping phase to phase relationship

3. The transition from one phase to another within a project's lifecycle (e.g.,
   from design to manufacturing) is typically marked by:

      A. Kill point

      B. Monte Carlo

      C. Constraint

      D. Decision tree

4. The resource optimization technique during the Control Schedule process
   allows a project manager to:

      A. Schedule training sessions for the project team members to optimize their
         performance.

      B. Schedule activities considering both the resource availability and the
         project time.

      C. Provide monetary incentives to project team members to boost their
         performance.

      D. Allow overtime so that team members get motivated to work during non-
         working hours.
5. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor?

      A. Configuration management knowledge base

      B. Change control procedures

      C. Historical information

      D. Commercial databases

6. Estimating the type and quantities of material, people, equipment, and
   supplies required to perform each activity is:

      A. Estimate Activity Workload

      B. Estimate Activity Input

      C. Resource calendars

      D. Estimate Activity Resources

7. Projects operating in agile environments where a high degree of
   uncertainty exists and where the scope is not yet fully defined, may not
   benefit from detailed cost calculations due to frequent changes. Instead,
   lightweight estimation methods can be used to generate a fast, high-level
   forecast of project labor costs, which can then be easily adjusted as
   changes arise. Detailed estimates are:

      A. Reserved for short-term planning horizons in a just-in-time fashion.

      B. Never developed in an agile project.

      C. Only developed if the project stakeholders allow the project manager to
         do so.
      D. Developed early during the project but are never updated due to frequent
         changes.

8. Fill in the blank. _______________ indicates that planning and
   documentation are iterative or ongoing activities.

      A. Progressive management

      B. Iterative elaboration

      C. Waterfall development

      D. Progressive elaboration

9. A single point of failure (SPOF) is the part of a system that, upon failure,
   stops the entire system from working or makes the system useless. Which
   of the following events can render a knowledge management system
   ineffective?

      A. If project team is not motivated.

      B. Project team is geographically distributed.

      C. When project knowledge cannot be classified as explicit or tacit.

      D. Knowledge is shared using a mixture of knowledge management tools
         and techniques.

10. Which of the following is not a project competing constraint?

      A. Budget

      B. Procurement

      C. Risk
D. Resource
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Management Framework
Answer Key and Explanations
1. C - Execution management is not a PMBOK knowledge area. Note that
   execution is a process group. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Pages 23, 24] [Project
   Framework]

2. B - The project manager should use the Iterative life cycle since project
   phases and activities will most probably be repeated as the project team's
   understanding of the project and requirements increases. Further, since any
   project phase can only start once its previous phase has been completed,
   the phase-to-phase relationship should be sequential. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 19] [Project Framework]

3. A - The transition from one phase to another within a project's lifecycle
   typically involves, and is usually defined by, some form of technical
   transfer or handoff. This is also called a kill point. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 21] [Project Framework]

4. B - Resource optimization technique during the Control Schedule process
   allows a project manager to schedule activities considering both the
   resource availability and the project time. Other choices are invalid.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 227] [Project Framework]

5. D - Commercial databases are considered enterprise environmental
   factors. The other choices are organizational process assets. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Pages 39-41] [Project Framework]

6. D - Estimate Activity Resources is the process of estimating the type and
   quantities of material, people, equipment and supplies required to perform
   each activity. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 320] [Project Framework]
7. A - In agile/adaptive environments, detailed estimates are reserved for
   short-term planning horizons in a just-in-time fashion. The rest of the
   choices are incorrect. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 234] [Project
   Framework]

8. D - Progressive elaboration is a characteristic of projects. It allows a
   project management team to manage the project to a greater level as the
   project evolves. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 565] [Project Framework]

9. A - The most important part of knowledge management is creating an
   atmosphere of trust so that people are motivated to share their knowledge.
   Even the best knowledge management tools and techniques will not work
   if people are not motivated to share what they know or don't pay attention
   to what others know. None of the other choices pose a more serious threat
   than this. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 100] [Project Framework]

10. B - Six competing project constraints are scope, quality, schedule,
    budget, resources and risk. Procurement is not a project competing
    constraint. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 28] [Project Framework]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 2
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 2
Total Questions: 51
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 36 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. A good project manager always gathers and documents lessons learned
   throughout the project lifecycle rather than delaying the effort until the
   project closure. Which of the following is not a risk associated with
   postponing the lessons-learned gathering effort until the very end of the
   project?

      A. The project manager has fewer resources available.

      B. The project's earned value decreases.

      C. Not all lessons learned might get captured.

      D. The effort might seem boring and non-value-adding.
2. Laurence is the PMO manager at ANZ Company. The CEO of the
   company asked Laurence to review the business requirements and develop
   the current year's capital management plan. The capital management plan
   will outline the key business deliverables (capital projects) and will go to
   the board for final approval. Which of the following organizational
   artifacts should Laurence review to analyze the business requirements for
   the current fiscal year?

      A. Lessons Learned

      B. Capital budget for the current year

      C. Organizational Process Assets

      D. Organizational Strategy

3. Maintaining good supplier relationships should be important to all project
   managers. A good buyer-seller relationship is a partnership that results in a
   win-win situation that nurtures both parties. Which of the following is both
   a short- and long-term benefit of treating a supplier with courtesy, honesty,
   and fairness?

      A. There is no need to have formal contracts in place

      B. Delivery of quality products and services at the best price

      C. The buyer can delay the payments without jeopardizing the relationship

      D. The supplier can charge a price higher than the market price

4. James is managing a shopping mall construction project. During the
   project execution, he learns the project communications management plan
   is not effective and requires a major update. Which of the following
   processes will issue a change request for the required update?
      A. Plan Communications Management

      B. Manage Communications

      C. Perform Integrated Change Control

      D. Monitor Communications

5. With a growing awareness of so-called unknowable-unknowns, the
   existence of emergent risk is becoming clear. These are risks that can only
   be recognized after they have occurred. Emergent risks can be tackled
   through developing:

      A. Project resilience

      B. Project charter

      C. Project management plan

      D. Project risk management plan

6. Change control tool selection should be based on the needs of the project
   stakeholders, including organizational and environmental considerations
   and/or constraints. Which of the following is not a key change
   management consideration while selecting an appropriate change control
   tool for a project?

      A. Identifying and selecting a change item

      B. Configuration item verification and audit

      C. Documenting the change into a proper change request

      D. Tracking change requests
7. In general, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is:

      A. Not often completed

      B. Complete and 100 percent accurate

      C. In-depth and thorough

      D. focused on high-priority risks

8. As a project manager, you perform various project performance
   measurements to assess the magnitude of variation. You then attempt to
   determine the cause and decide whether corrective action is necessary.
   This is:

      A. Scope Analysis

      B. Variance Analysis

      C. Performance Reporting

      D. Configuration Management

9. Two efficiency indicators that reflect the cost and schedule performance of
   a project are:

      A. Cost Projection Index (CPI) and Schedule Projection Index (SPI)

      B. Cost Performance Index (CPI) and Schedule Performance Index (SPI)

      C. Actual Cost (AC) and Planned Value (PV)

      D. Cost Pricing Index (CPI) and Schedule Performance Index (SPI)

10. In projects with adaptive life cycles, many of the project management
   processes are repeated in each iteration of the project except:

     A. Develop Project Charter

     B. Collect Requirements

     C. Define Scope

     D. Create WBS

11. If you want to compress a project schedule, what are two of the
    recommended alternatives to consider?

     A. Fast Tracking and Schedule Network Analysis

     B. Crashing and Fast Tracking

     C. Resource Levelling and What-If Scenario Analysis

     D. Crashing and Schedule Network Analysis

12. Large organizations typically manage a wide range of projects; from
    small projects to large initiatives requiring long-term commitments.
    Which of the following factors can be used in scaling such projects:

     A. Team size, geographical distribution, regulatory compliance,
        organizational complexity, technical complexity, and funds availability.

     B. Team size, geographical distribution, regulatory compliance and
        organizational complexity.

     C. Team size, geographical distribution and regulatory compliance.

     D. Team size, geographical distribution, regulatory             compliance,
        organizational complexity and technical complexity.
13. Which of the following is not a part of the data gathering tools used in
    Control Quality process?

      A. Checklists

      B. Control Chart

      C. Check sheets

      D. Statistical sampling

14. Measuring the quality of items in a sample on a pass/fail basis is:

      A. Biased sampling

      B. Variable sampling

      C. Stratified sampling

      D. Attribute sampling

15. George is managing a telecommunication network deployment project.
    Most of the key project stakeholders are happy with the project so far.
    However, George has some potential concerns that might become issues
    in the near future. The next project status update meeting with the key
    stakeholders is the next day. What should George do?

      A. Wait until the concerns become issues

      B. Discuss these concerns with the key stakeholders

      C. Do not report the concerns in the next meeting but try to mitigate these
         concerns

      D. Briefly discuss these concerns in the next meeting but do not make them
         look significant

16. On-demand scheduling is one of the techniques used in agile projects.
    This type of scheduling relies on:

      A. A schedule that was developed previously for the development of the
         project increments.

      B. Discretionary dependencies that cannot be changed by the project team.

      C. Skills of the project manager rather than the skills of the team.

      D. A backlog or intermediate queue of work to be done.

17. Midway through a project, a project manager determined the project was
    running far behind schedule. If the project manager needs to shorten the
    project schedule without changing the project scope, which of the
    following schedule compression techniques could he use?

      A. Crashing

      B. Reserve Analysis

      C. Forecasting

      D. Last Tracking

18. At the end of a project, what will your schedule variance be equal to?

      A. Zero

      B. Equal to the total PV

      C. One
      D. Equal to the total EV

19. How does time-boxing help minimize scope creep in agile projects?

      A. It forces the team to create project WBS using the user stories.

      B. It forces the sponsor to allocate a Scrum master who helps in eliminating
         scope creep.

      C. It forces the team to process essential features first, then other features.

      D. It forces the team to convert the user stories into epics.

20. A good project manager knows the value of effective stakeholder
    management. What is the ultimate goal of effective stakeholder
    management?

      A. Stakeholder engagement

      B. Project success

      C. Stakeholder satisfaction

      D. Meeting project objectives

21. While analyzing a project, the project manager calculated the ratio of the
    Earned Value (EV) to the Actual Costs (AC) and obtained a value of 1.2.
    The project manager decided this was an unfavorable condition for the
    project and decided to take corrective action. What is your view?

      A. The project manager is correct. The ratio of EV to AC is the Cost
         Performance Index and a ratio greater than 1 is unfavorable to the project

      B. The project manager is not correct. The ratio of EV to AC is the Cost
         Variance and a ratio greater than 1 is favorable to the project.
      C. The project manager is not correct. The ratio of EV to AC is the Cost
         Performance Index and a ratio greater than 1 is favorable to the project

      D. The project manager is correct. The ratio of EV to AC is the Cost
         Variance and a ratio greater than 1 is unfavorable to the project.

22. Which of these is not an established Estimate Activity Durations
    technique?

      A. Three Point Estimating

      B. Parametric Estimating

      C. Analogous Estimating

      D. Critical Path Estimation

23. If you are working on a project where there is no definite detailed scope,
    but there are similar projects in the past, what is the correct Estimate
    Activity Durations tool to use?

      A. Analogous Estimating

      B. Parametric Estimating

      C. Critical Path Estimation

      D. Three Point Estimating

24. As project manager, you would like to show the relationship between
    two variables to help your project team understand the quality impact
    better. Which tool should you use?

      A. Scatter Diagram
      B. Run Chart

      C. Fishbone Diagram

      D. Pareto Chart

25. A project manager feels the need of updating one of the project supplier
    contracts to meet the project's current needs. However, before any
    change requests, the project manager must know the right process to
    incorporate a change into this specific contract. What should he do first?

      A. Issue the change request and get it approved through Integrated Change
         Control process

      B. Update the project procurements management plan

      C. Review the change request handling procedure as documented in the
         contract itself

      D. Review alternative dispute resolution (ADR) procedures in the contract

26. The objective of a transformation project is to move an organization
    from one state to another state. The desired result of the change driven
    by the project is described as the:

      A. Good state

      B. Future state

      C. Happy state

      D. Transition state

27. The term Progressive Elaboration incorrectly represents which of the
    following?
     A. Changes to project scope

     B. Rolling wave planning

     C. Detailing out the product requirements developed during the initiation
        process.

     D. Production of fabrication and construction drawings from the design
        drawings for a chemical plant.

28. Which document describes the project's deliverables and the work
    required to create those deliverables?

     A. Project authorization document

     B. Project scope statement

     C. Project scope management plan

     D. Project charter

29. During a presentation to management, you want to display the project
    schedule with only the key deliverables displayed. What is the correct
    tool for this purpose?

     A. Project schedule network diagram

     B. Critical path network

     C. Milestone chart

     D. Critical chain diagram

30. Henry is the project manager for a process improvement project. Henry
    is a recently hired Six Sigma expert. David is the process owner of the
   process Henry must optimize. During the project kick-start meeting with
   the project sponsor, David said he supports all continuous improvement
   efforts. However, David is unaware of the Six Sigma technique and feels
   threatened by the newly hired expert, and as a result, is blocking Henry's
   ideas. What is David's current engagement level with the project?

      A. Unaware

      B. Supportive

      C. Resistant

      D. Neutral

31. Which of these items are important to address when determining each
    person's role in the project team?

      A. Role, authority, responsibility, and competency

      B. Role, responsibility, and competency

      C. Role and responsibility

      D. Role, authority, and competency

32. If you want to reduce the number of quality inspections and reduce the
    cost of quality control for your project, which technique should you use?

      A. Run Chart

      B. Defect Repair Review

      C. Statistical Sampling

      D. Pareto Chart
33. Performance reports are produced during the Control Procurements
    process by evaluating work performance data against the agreement
    requirements. Which of the following is the prime objective of producing
    such reports?

      A. Performance reporting is a good project management practice and must be
         carried out on all projects.

      B. Performance reports are produced so they can be added to lessons-learned
         database, and the future project might benefit.

      C. Performance reports document the analysis of the project manager and
         does not require supplier's participation.

      D. Providing management with information about how effectively the seller
         is achieving the contractual objectives.

34. Project managers need to be aware of Student Syndrome. What does that
    mean?

      A. People go through a learning curve whenever they are engaged in a
         project.

      B. People who consider themselves students of project management tend to
         apply PMBOK principles better.

      C. People start to apply themselves only at the last possible moment before
         the deadline.

      D. People who undertake studies during their professional careers tend to be
         better project managers.

35. A project manager must stress the importance of collecting and
    documenting lessons learned through the project lifecycle. One good
    way to collect this information is during weekly status meetings.
   Usually, weekly status meetings, if not managed properly, end up in fire-
   fighting since most of the time, attention goes to the burning issues. How
   can you ensure that the lessons-learned gathering does not get missed in
   such a situation?

      A. Add a lessons-learned agenda item.

      B. Record the minutes of the meeting.

      C. Do not discuss burning issues in weekly status meetings.

      D. Replace status update meetings with one-on-one meetings with the team
         members.

36. Where would you find a detailed list and description of specific project
    assumptions associated with the project?

      A. Project charter

      B. Project scope statement

      C. Project configuration document

      D. Change management plan

37. A number of teams are developing an enterprise system using the agile
    approach for product development. Which of the following is a major
    risk item for such a complex project being performed in an agile
    environment?

      A. Number of interconnected dependencies between the features developed
         by different teams.

      B. Number and size of teams developing the larger features.
      C. Scope definition and freezing early during the planning phase.

      D. Emphasis on schedule control over risk management.

38. Which of these is not a data analysis technique used during quantitative
    risk analysis?

      A. Tornado diagram

      B. Decision tree

      C. RACI chart

      D. Influence diagrams

39. Which of the following is a tool or technique of the Develop Team
    process?

      A. Organizational charts

      B. Co-location

      C. Acquisition

      D. Influence diagrams

40. A hierarchical structure of project resources organized by category and
    resource type, used in planning, managing and controlling project work,
    is:

      A. Team structure

      B. Resource Pool

      C. Organization Breakdown Structure
      D. Resource Breakdown Structure

41. A project post-mortem is an activity, usually performed at the project's
    conclusion, to determine and analyze a project's outcome which also
    includes a lessons-learned gathering exercise. Project post-mortems help
    to mitigate future risks and are often a key component of, and ongoing
    precursor to, effective risk management. Which of the following is a
    terrible mistake when collecting lessons learned?

      A. Documenting both the success stories and the failed attempts

      B. Calculating project's final statistics

      C. Focusing purely on the negatives and analyzing failures

      D. Conducting a comprehensive performance review

42. What does a Cost Performance Index (CPI) of more than 1.0 indicate?

      A. The project is over budget.

      B. The project is right on budget.

      C. The project is under budget.

      D. The project is ahead of schedule.

43. Which of the following statements is correct?

      A. A collection of unrelated programs can constitute a portfolio.

      B. The scope of a portfolio is typically smaller than that of a program.

      C. A program is a group of unrelated projects.
      D. A program need not consist of projects.

44. A project team member finds that the color scheme of the webpage he is
    designing appears too gaudy and decides to change it to a mellowed-
    down color scheme. The customer approved the original color scheme
    and the color palette. The independent testing team flags this as a defect,
    and a heated discussion ensues between the team member and the testing
    team. What is your view?

      A. The testing team is incorrect in flagging this as a defect. This is an
         example of expert judgment when historical expertise is brought into the
         project.

      B. The testing team is correct. Even though the new color scheme is more
         pleasing than the old one, the appropriate change management process
         was not followed, and the work product is not as per design.

      C. The testing team is not right in flagging this. The color scheme is a simple
         matter, and the new colors are definitely more pleasing than the old ones.

      D. The testing team is correct in flagging this. The team member should have
         sent a note along with the work product indicating he or she made the
         color scheme change.

45. Which of the following items needs to be kept in mind when relying on
    risk identification checklists?

      A. They are biased.

      B. They are not exhaustive.

      C. They are often inaccurate.

      D. They are easy to prepare.
46. As an external vendor, you are managing a complex software project on
    a time-and-materials (T&M) contract. One of your team members reports
    a breakthrough in automating some of the testing activities. This may
    result in cost savings to the project and completion of the project one
    month ahead of schedule. Which of the following actions would you
    take?

      A. This is confidential information within your project team and there is no
         need to share with the customer. The savings will be additional profits on
         the project.

      B. Communicate the current status and inform the customer you will
         incorporate some additional features to use up the savings in cost and time
         since it was budgeted.

      C. Communicate the current status to the customer and indicate the potential
         changes to cost and schedule.

      D. Communicate the savings in cost and time to the customer. At the end of
         the project, notify your billing department that they need to prepare an
         invoice for 50 percent of the cost saved.

47. A company manages SBG contracting bids for government tenders and
    all successful bids as a separate project. The structure of the company is
    mainly projectized for a dedicated project team to manage each project.
    However, to realize economies of scale, there are some central
    departments that serve all projects. Which of the following role is most
    likely to be working in a central department instead of directly working
    with a project team?

      A. Quality control inspector

      B. Construction manager

      C. Project planner
      D. Procurement administrator

48. The Control Procurements process receives a very important input from
    the Direct and Manage Project Work process. Which one is it?

      A. Approved change requests

      B. Work performance data

      C. Procurement documents

      D. Agreements

49. Julia is currently recruiting her project team. She has carried out various
    interviews and has shortlisted potential candidates. Now, according to
    the project communication management plan, she has to submit the
    shortlisted profiles to the project client (customer) for approval. Only
    then, can she formally hire the approved candidates for the project. The
    submission of the profiles to the client will go through which of the
    following processes?

      A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      B. Acquire Resources

      C. Manage Communications

      D. Plan Resource Management

50. Mark is in the middle of a software development project. So far, the
    project has incurred a total cost of $50,000. If it is determined the project
    is no longer required, what would we call the cost incurred to date?

      A. Opportunity cost
     B. Return on investment

     C. Breakeven cost

     D. Sunk cost

51. Upon obtaining the project charter, the Project Manager of a project
    starts acquiring the project team immediately. Is this correct?

     A. Yes. Acquisition of the project team is primarily an Initiating Process
        Group activity.

     B. Yes. The project manager needs to get the team together as soon as the
        project starts.

     C. No. It is the responsibility of the project sponsor to provide the team for
        execution.

     D. No. Acquisition of the project team is primarily an Executing Process
        Group activity.
PMP Lite Mock Exam 2
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - The risk of delaying the lessons learned gathering exercise till the very
   end of the project is that the gathered information might not be complete
   because the project manager will not have the whole team available rather
   than those working on the closing phase. Further, this exercise might seem
   boring and bureaucratic effort. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 100] [Project
   Integration Management]

2. D - Capital planning is the process of budgeting resources for the future of
   an organization's long term plans. Capital planning for a business would
   include budgeting for new and replacement machinery, research and
   development and the production of new products, new plants and other
   major capital projects. Capital projects can only achieve the organizational
   goals when they are aligned with the organization's strategy. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 12] [Project Integration Management]

3. B - Charging higher than market price or delaying the payment will
   damage the relationship in the long-run. Further formal contracts should
   always be in place as it is a good project management practice and it
   mitigates risk for both parties and avoids conflicts. The benefit of good
   supplier relationship is delivery of quality products at competitive prices.
   [PMI best practice; not explicitly stated in PMBOK] [Project Procurement
   Management]

4. D - Change request is an output of the Monitor Communications process.
   The Monitor Communications process will produce the change request,
   the Perform Integrated Change Control process will get that approved, and
   then the Plan Communications Management process will make the
   necessary updates. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 389] [Project
   Communications Management]
5. A - Emergent risks can be tackled through developing project resilience.
   This requires each project to have right level of budget and schedule
   contingencies, flexible project processes, empowered project team and
   frequent review of early warning signs. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 399]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. B - Configuration item verification and audit is related to configuration
   management instead of change management. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages
   118, 119] [Project Integration Management]

7. D - Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is quicker than Perform
   Quantitative Risk Analysis as it focuses on high-priority risks. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 419] [Project Risk Management]

8. B - This is known as Variance Analysis. As project manager, you would
   then attempt to determine the cause of the variance relative to the scope
   baseline, and then decide whether corrective action is required. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 111] [Project Scope Management]

9. B - The Cost Performance Index (CPI) and the Schedule Performance
   Index (SPI) are two efficiency indicators that reflect the cost and schedule
   performance of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 263] [Project Cost
   Management]

10. A - In projects with adaptive life cycles, many of the project
    management processes are repeated in each iteration of the project
    except the Develop Project Charter process; which is typically performed
    only once at the start of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. B - Crashing and fast tracking can compress the project's schedule when
    necessary, but might come at a higher cost and rework potential.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 215] [Project Schedule Management]

12. D - In large organizations, there may be a mixture of small projects and
    large initiatives requiring long-term commitments to manage these
    programs using scaling factors such as team size, geographical
    distribution, regulatory compliance, organizational complexity, and
    technical complexity. Funds availability is a constraint applicable to all
    projects. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 178] [Project Procurement
    Management]

13. B - Control chart is a monitoring tool, while the rest of the choices are
    valid data gathering tools used during Control Quality process. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Pages 302, 303] [Project Quality Management]

14. D - Attribute sampling measures the quality of items in a sample on a
    pass/fail basis; variable sampling measures the quality on a continuous
    scale. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 274] [Project Quality Management]

15. B - Effective stakeholder management requires addressing potential
    concerns that have not yet become issues and anticipating future
    problems that may be raised by stakeholders. Such concerns need to be
    identified and discussed as soon as possible to assess associated project
    risks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 524] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

16. D - On-demand scheduling does not rely on a schedule that was
    developed previously for the development of the product or product
    increments, but rather pulls work from a backlog or intermediate queue
    of work to be done immediately as resources become available.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177] [Project Resource Management]

17. A - Crashing is a technique that can be applied to compress the project
    schedule without changing the project scope. Another option is fast
    tracking. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 215] [Project Schedule
    Management]

18. A - The schedule variance is the earned value minus the planned value.
    At the end of the project, all of the planned values should be earned, and
    the difference should be zero. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 262] [Project
    Cost Management]

19. C - Time-boxed periods are durations during which the team works
    steadily toward completion of a goal. Time-boxing helps to minimize
    scope creep as it forces the teams to process essential features first, then
    other features when time permits. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 182]
    [Project Risk Management]

20. B - All of the statements are correct. However, the question is asking for
    the ultimate goal which is the project's success. Stakeholder
    management is all about engaging stakeholders to meet their
    expectations and achieving stakeholder satisfaction. This is one of the
    key project objectives required to be achieved in order to deliver a
    successful project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 504] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

21. C - The project manager is not correct. Cost Performance Index (CPI) is
    the ratio of EV to AC. A value greater than one represents a favorable
    condition for the project. The project manager has misinterpreted the
    situation. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 263] [Project Cost Management]

22. D - Analogous, parametric, and three-point estimating techniques are all
    accepted practices for determining the correct amount of time required
    for a portion of the project. The Critical Path Analysis techniques
    evaluate the whole project schedule. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 200,
    201] [Project Schedule Management]

23. A - Analogous estimation relies on comparing a project to previous
    projects that were similar in nature. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200]
    [Project Schedule Management]

24. A - A scatter diagram plots several occurrences of two variables (one on
    each axis). Often a relationship between the two variables can then be
    determined, based on how closely they fit a geometric model. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

25. C - The first step should be to gather enough information so that the right
    decision and course of action can be determined. The second step should
    be to issue a change request and follow its approval. The project manager
    must first review the change request handling procedure specific to the
    contract and that can be found in the procurement contract itself.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 489] [Project Procurement Management]

26. B - Before the project begins, the organization is commonly referred to
    as being in the current state. The desired result of the change derived by
    the project is described as the future state. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 6]
    [Project Quality Management]

27. A - The distinction between progressive elaboration and scope creep
    needs to be understood since the two terms are different. The changes to
    scope (especially in an uncontrolled manner) are called scope creep. In
    contrast, progressive elaboration involves building on or elaborating the
    output of a previous phase. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 185] [Project
    Framework]

28. B - The project scope statement is the correct response. This document
    describes the project's deliverables in detail and the work that is required
    to create those deliverables. It also forms the baseline for evaluating
    whether requests for changes are within or outside the project's
    boundaries. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154] [Project Scope
    Management]

29. C - A milestone chart displays only the key deliverables and is simple
    and easy to understand. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 218] [Project
    Schedule Management]

30. C - Although David claims that he is supportive of all improvement
    initiatives, his behavior is not coherent with his claim. Since David is
    blocking Henry's idea, he is in effect, resistant of the project. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 521] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. A - All four of these are important to consider when considering
    someone for a position within the project team: Role, authority,
    responsibility, and competency. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 318, 319]
    [Project Resource Management]

32. C - Statistical sampling will provide sufficient inspection to ensure a
    high likelihood of a quality product while saving money for the project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 303] [Project Quality Management]

33. D - All of the choices are valid but the question is asking for the
    prime/main reason for conducting this exercise. The prime objective of
    this exercise is to provide management with information about how
    effectively the sellers are achieving the contractual objectives and
    obligations. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 499] [Project Procurement
    Management]

34. C - Student Syndrome - or procrastination - refers to the phenomena
    where people start to apply themselves only at the latest possible moment
    before the deadline. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 197] [Project Scope
    Management]

35. A - A good approach is to add a lessons-learned agenda item to the
    meeting. As the meeting progresses to the point where you're ready to
    collect lessons-learned information, ask each team member about his or
    her positive and negative experiences for the week. Don't mention the
    words "lessons learned" to them; just capture what went right and wrong
    from every team member. Do your best to prevent this part of the
    meeting from devolving into a complaint session. [PMI best practice; not
    explicitly stated in PMBOK] [Project Integration Management]

36. B - The Project scope statement lists and describes the specific project
    assumptions associated with project scope and the potential impact of
    those assumptions if they prove to be false. The assumptions listed in the
    detailed project scope statement are typically more numerous and
    detailed than the project assumptions listed in the project charter.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154] [Project Scope Management]

37. A - In adaptive life cycles, when multiple teams are concurrently
    developing a large number of features, the interconnected dependencies
    between the features become a major risk item. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 177] [Project Communications Management]

38. C - RACI chart is not a data analysis technique used during quantitative
    risk analysis. Rest of the choices are valid techniques for data analysis.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 434, 435, 436] [Project Risk Management]

39. B - Colocation is a tool and technique of the Develop Team process. The
    other choices are not valid responses. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 336]
    [Project Resource Management]

40. D - The Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical structure
    of team and physical resources related by category and resource type.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 316] [Project Schedule Management]

41. C - Documenting both the success stories and the failed attempts are
    important as these can be very important inputs for future projects. Only
    focusing on the negatives and analyzing failures will paint half of the
    picture. The best practice is to ask "What went right" when asking "What
    went wrong?". [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 104] [Project Integration
    Management]

42. C - The CPI is calculated as the earned value divided by the actual cost.
    An index of greater than one indicates that you have spent less than you
    forecasted to this point. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 263] [Project Cost
    Management]

43. A - A portfolio refers to a collection of projects or programs that are
    grouped together to facilitate their effective management. The projects or
    programs need not be directly related or interdependent. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 13] [Project Framework]

44. B - The testing team is correct in their findings. Even though the new
    color scheme might be a better choice than the old one, all changes need
    to follow the change management process and go through the appropriate
    change and approval process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 115] [Project
    Scope Management]

45. B - While the risk identification checklist is a useful tool, it should be
    used in combination with the other tools, since it is impossible to cover
    all scenarios in one checklist. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 414] [Project
    Risk Management]

46. C - A project manager should always communicate an accurate statement
    of the project status. There could be subsequent actions to determine how
    the savings could be best put to use, whether there could be any cost
    sharing, etc.--but these would need to be done following the appropriate
    procedure. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility]
    [Project Framework]

47. D - In order to realize economies of scope, many organizations treat
    contract administration as an administrative function separate from the
    project organization. This is usually true if the performing organization is
    also the seller of the project to an external customer. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 494] [Project Procurement Management]

48. B - Work performance data is provided to the Control Procurements
    process by the Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 493] [Project Procurement Management]

49. C - Manage Communications is the process of distributing project
    information in accordance to the communications management plan. The
    interviews and shortlisting was carried out during the Acquire Resources
    and so will be the hiring once the approvals come in. However, the
    profiles submission to the client will be done through the Manage
    Communications process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 379] [Project
    Communications Management]

50. D - Sunk cost is defined as a cost that has already been incurred and
    which cannot be recovered. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 671] [Project
    Integration Management]

51. D - No, the project team is not acquired immediately after signing of the
    project charter. Acquisition of a project team starts with resource
    management planning in the planning process group, followed by the
    acquisition of the resources in the execution phase. The other choices are
    wrong, because the acquisition of the project team is mentioned in the
    wrong phase. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 328] [Project Resource
    Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Integration Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Integration Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project
Integration Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. What is a recommended method for controlling change within a project?

     A. Have only the project manager able to initiate change.

     B. Have each change approved or rejected through a formal change control
        process.

     C. Allow each project member ultimate control of changes within their realm
        of the project without a review process.

     D. Freeze scope and allow absolutely no changes.

2. A project manager calls you in as a consultant to provide input on
   developing the Project Charter. According to the PMBOK, your
  contribution to the project could best be termed as:

      A. Professional Consultant

      B. Expert Judgment

      C. Charter Consultant

      D. Expert Consultancy

3. Which process is concerned with providing forecasts to update current cost
   information?

      A. Monitor and Control Project Work

      B. Project Management Information System

      C. Close Project or Phase

      D. Direct and Manage Project Work

4. Which of the following would not be considered an Enterprise
   Environmental Factor during the Develop Project Charter process?

      A. Scope Statement

      B. Organizational infrastructure

      C. Governmental standards

      D. Marketplace conditions

5. The Close Project or Phase process is not performed when:

      A. Cancelling projects
     B. Closing projects

     C. Closing project phases

     D. Reactivating projects

6. Which of these tools and techniques is common to all seven Project
   Integration Management processes?

     A. Meetings

     B. Data analysis

     C. Data gathering

     D. Expert Judgment

7. You are beginning a new project. When should you use the Perform
   Integrated Change Control process?

     A. Throughout the entire project

     B. Only when closing out the project

     C. Only after the project is completely funded

     D. Only after the project scope is clearly defined

8. The project management team has determined that there are some changes
   to the scope of the project. According to the PMBOK, who is responsible
   for reviewing, evaluating, and approving documented changes to the
   project?

     A. Change Control Board (CCB)
      B. Change Configuration Board (CCB)

      C. Scope Control Board (SCB)

      D. Configuration Control Board (CCB)

9. What is the difference between the Monitor and Control Project Work
   process and the Direct and Manage Project Work process?

      A. The Monitor and Control Project Work and the Direct and Manage
         Project Work processes are the same.

      B. The Monitor and Control Project Work process monitors the project
         performance while the Direct and Manage Project Work process is
         concerned with performing the activities to accomplish project
         requirements.

      C. The Monitor and Control Project Work process is a sub-process of the
         Direct and Manage Project Work process.

      D. There is no such thing as the Monitor and Control Project Work process.

10. You are a consulting project manager and an investment bank has a
    contract with you to run a large information technology project that is
    expected to last 15 months. During the Direct and Manage Project Work
    process, you discover that several regulatory requirements were
    addressed in the project management plan but missed from the scope
    statement. Failure to meet these requirements could result in legal action
    against the company. However, implementing the technology to comply
    with these regulations could exceed the budget and scope of the project
    and result in the cancellation of the project. What should you do?

      A. Do not do anything as these requirements are not a part of the scope
         baseline.
B. Request additional funds to implement these requirements.

C. Submit a change request to incorporate the missed requirements in the
   project's scope.

D. This is a classic example of scope creep and such requirements must be
   ignored.
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Integration Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - The change control procedure varies from project to project. However,
   every change request must be processed through a formal change control
   process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 113] [Project Integration
   Management]

2. B - Expert Judgment is judgment provided, based on expertise in an
   application area, a knowledge area, a discipline, an industry, etc. Expert
   Judgment is available from many sources including consultants. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 79] [Project Integration Management]

3. A - During the Monitor and Control Project Work process, work
   performance data is gathered and passed to the controlling processes. The
   Monitor and Control Project Work process is responsible for keeping track
   of the all project's measures, including cost. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   109] [Project Integration Management]

4. A - The scope statement is clearly not an enterprise environmental factor,
   whereas the other three choices--governmental standards, organizational
   infrastructure, and marketplace conditions--are enterprise environmental
   factors. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 78] [Project Integration Management]

5. D - The Close Project or Phase process allows the project manager to close
   or finish a specific phase of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 121]
   [Project Integration Management]

6. D - All seven processes of Project Integration Management use Expert
   Judgment as a tool and technique. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 71] [Project
   Integration Management]
7. A - Changes can occur in the project at any time. The Perform Integrated
   Change Control process is valuable for managing and tracking those
   changes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 115] [Project Integration
   Management]

8. A - The Change Control Board is a group of formally constituted
   stakeholders responsible for reviewing, evaluating, approving, delaying or
   rejecting changes to the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 115] [Project
   Integration Management]

9. B - The Monitor and Control Project Work process monitors the other
   project processes including the Direct and Manage Project Work process,
   while the Direct and Manage Project Work Process completes the project
   scope. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 70] [Project Integration Management]

10. C - All regulatory requirements must be met. Doing nothing or
    considering this a scope creep are not valid options. You would have to
    request additional funds, but first you need to submit a change request
    for approval. A change request can be submitted as a part of the Direct
    and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 96]
    [Project Integration Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 3
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 3
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. An organization's value chain can be represented by a special type of
   flowchart called SIPOC. SIPOC stands for:

     A. Superior service, inferior service, peak hour service, optimized service,
        and client service

     B. Simple, intellectual, procedural, optimal coding

     C. Sample, information, practice, organization, and control

     D. Suppliers, inputs, process, outputs, and customers

2. Julia is managing a water treatment plant construction project. A new
   government has recently been sworn in. During the election campaign, the
  winning candidate made a number of commitments regarding
  environmental control reforms. Julia is not sure how the new government
  and its future policies might affect her project. This is an example of:

      A. Variability risk

      B. Mitigated risk

      C. Ambiguity risk

      D. Opportunity risk

3. As a project manager, you are responsible for determining and delivering
   the required levels of both grade and quality. Select which of the following
   statements you disagree with.

      A. Grade relates to the product's characteristics.

      B. Grade relates to the customer requirements.

      C. Quality relates to the customer requirements.

      D. Quality and grade of a product must be carefully managed.

4. Which of the following processes produces a work breakdown structure as
   an output?

      A. Create WBS

      B. Define Scope

      C. Develop Project Management Plan

      D. Define Activities
5. How can a project manager ensure continued active support of the project
   supporters and at the same time minimize negative impacts from the
   negative stakeholders?

      A. By ensuring that stakeholders clearly understand the communication
         management plan

      B. By ensuring that stakeholders clearly understand the stakeholder
         management strategy

      C. By ensuring that stakeholders are kept disengaged throughout the project
         lifecycle

      D. By ensuring that stakeholders clearly understand project goals, objectives,
         benefits, and risks

6. Most project management software packages use a method of constructing
   a project schedule network diagram known as:

      A. Waterfall Method

      B. Precedence Diagramming Method

      C. Agile Method

      D. Just-in-time Method

7. The fundamental lesson from the Theory of Constraints by Goldratt is:

      A. The project's critical path is limited by the non-critical activities.

      B. Managers who choose to lead from the front are more successful.

      C. A system's throughput is limited by at least one constraint.
      D. Managers who delegate more are more successful.

8. Martin is the project manager of a project that is in an early phase. He
   needs to estimate costs but finds that he has a limited amount of detailed
   information about the project. Which of the following estimation
   techniques is least suited to his requirements?

      A. Top-down Estimating

      B. Bottom-up Estimating

      C. Analogous Estimating

      D. Budgetary Estimating

9. The performance reports produced during the Control Procurements
   process are then provided to which project management process for further
   processing?

      A. Monitor & Control Project Work in the form of work performance
         information

      B. Direct & Manage Project Work in the form of work performance data

      C. Perform Integrated Change Control in the form of a change request

      D. Performance report is not an output of the Control Procurement process

10. To develop a project stakeholder engagement plan, seek knowledge from
    groups or individuals with specialized training or subject matter insight
    into the relationships within the organization. In PMBOK jargon, what is
    this technique called?

      A. Professional verdict
      B. Consultation

      C. Expert judgment

      D. Sage opinion

11. Three years back, your organization awarded a fixed price contract to a
    reputable local contractor to construct a new airport terminal in the city.
    A few days back, you received a change request from the contractor
    requesting to adjust the contract's price. The contractor is claiming that
    as a result of the recent national recession, the prices of raw materials
    have gone up and he cannot complete the rest of the project at the
    contract price. Is the contactor's request legitimate?

      A. Yes, you cannot penalize the contactor for price escalations due to force
         majeure.

      B. Yes, unless there is no Economic Price Adjustment provision in the
         contract.

      C. No, the price of the contract is fixed and cannot be changed.

      D. No, the price hike due to recession must be adjusted against the
         contractor's profit.

12. Which of the following is an agile prototyping technique showing
    sequence or navigation through a series of images or illustrations:

      A. Nominal group technique

      B. Mind mapping

      C. Decision trees

      D. Storyboarding
13. Which of the following statements is correct:

      A. Project lifecycles and product lifecycles are interdependent.

      B. Project lifecycles are independent of product lifecycles.

      C. A product lifecycle is the same as a project lifecycle.

      D. The last lifecycle for a project is generally the product's retirement.

14. Unless an enterprise-wide ERP is deployed in an organization, disparate
    IT systems perform specialized tasks in a project. Which of the following
    systems typically processes supplier's payments after obtaining all the
    necessary certification of satisfactory work?

      A. Project management information system

      B. Accounts payable system

      C. Change control and tracking system

      D. Supply chain management system

15. It is extremely important for a project manager to determine and map key
    stakeholder engagement levels early in the project. Which of the
    following statements support this claim:

      A. Stakeholder engagement levels change during the lifecycle of the project

      B. Stakeholder engagement throughout the lifecycle of the project is critical
         to project success

      C. Leading stakeholders assume a supportive role during project execution

      D. Development of the stakeholder assessment matrix is a mandatory
         PMBOK requirement

16. A management control point where scope, budget and schedule are
    integrated and compared to earned value for performance measurement
    is a:

      A. Code of accounts

      B. Control packages

      C. Control account

      D. Account Plan

17. Which of the following is an example of a chart, used on agile projects,
    that tracks the work that remains to be completed in the iteration
    backlog?

      A. Histogram

      B. Control chart

      C. Burndown chart

      D. Scatter diagrams

18. Which of the following best describes the Validate Scope process?

      A. Validating that the project quality requirements are met

      B. Controlling changes to the scope of the project

      C. Obtaining the stakeholders' formal acceptance of the project deliverables

      D. Validating that all of the project's objectives are met
19. As a project manager, you are analyzing the costs incurred in a project.
    Which of the following costs cannot be classified under cost of
    nonconformance?

      A. Quality Assurance Costs

      B. Warranty costs

      C. Costs due to loss of reputation

      D. Rework costs

20. Which of the following approaches can assist in managing ambiguity
    risks?

      A. Monte Carlo analysis

      B. Root cause analysis

      C. Seeking expert external input

      D. Conducting sprint retrospectives

21. A project manager estimates the work to be accomplished in the near
    term in detail at a low level of the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).
    He estimates work far in the future as WBS components that are at a
    relatively high level of the WBS. What is this technique called?

      A. Decomposition

      B. Rolling wave planning

      C. Scope Creep

      D. Earned value planning
22. Negative risks can either be ______, transferred, or mitigated as a
    countermeasure.

      A. enhanced

      B. avoided

      C. exploited

      D. ignored

23. The WBS represents all product and project work. The total work at the
    lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out
    and no extra work is performed. This principle is also the:

      A. 100 percent rule

      B. 80/20 rule

      C. Pareto's rule

      D. Ground rule

24. A technical team can begin to edit a large document 15 days after it
    begins writing it. What kind of dependency would this represent?

      A. Start-to-start with a 15-day lead

      B. Finish-to-finish with a 15-day lead

      C. Start-to-start with a 15-day lag

      D. Finish-to-start with a 15-day lag

25. How does the role of a project manager change based on managing
   projects using a predictive development life cycle then managing
   projects in adaptive environments?

     A. The role of the project manager changes to a facilitator in predictive
        environments.

     B. The role of the project manager changes to a facilitator in adaptive
        environments.

     C. The role of the project manager does not change.

     D. The role of the project manager is replaced with a scrum master in
        adaptive environments.

26. The business case documents the business need and the cost benefit
    analysis that justify the project. The summary of how the project has
    achieved the business needs identified in the business case is document
    in the:

     A. Project charter

     B. Project WBS

     C. Project Scope Statement

     D. Project final report

27. Configuration management tool selection should be based on the needs
    of the project stakeholders including organizational and environmental
    considerations and/or constraints. Which of the following is not a key
    configuration management consideration while selecting an appropriate
    configuration management tool for a project?

     A. Identification and selection of configuration items.
      B. Recording and reporting of configuration item status.

      C. Configuration item verification and audit.

      D. Procedures for accepting and rejecting change requests.

28. Nancy is carrying out cost-benefit analysis for a project. If undertaken,
    the project will start in January next year and end by December. The
    project will incur a constant cost of $10,000 each month (payable by the
    end of each month) giving a total cost of $120,000 for the project. The
    revenue from the project is collected on a quarterly basis. The total
    revenue for the project by the end of December will be $200,000. The
    opportunity cost of the project is 12 percent which is the bank interest
    rate Nancy can get if she does not invest in this project. The total present
    value of all cash outflows is $112,551, while the total present value of all
    cash inflow is $185,721. What is the benefit-to-cost ratio for the project?

      A. 1.67

      B. 0.6

      C. 1.65

      D. 0.61

29. A Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) breaks down the project by type
    of resources. The RBS is an example of a:

      A. Linear chart

      B. Matrix chart

      C. Flow chart

      D. Hierarchical chart
30. It is not practical, and usually not necessary, to engage with all
    stakeholders with the same level of intensity at all times. A project
    manager must prioritize stakeholders depending upon on who they are,
    what level of influence they have on the project, and what their interests
    are. Which of the following techniques helps in stakeholder
    prioritization?

      A. Stakeholder engagement matrix

      B. Stakeholder register

      C. Stakeholder classification models

      D. Resource histograms

31. Lucy is managing a high-tech software development project. She has
    luckily acquired the organization's best performing employees.
    However, the project team is not communicating effectively, causing
    delays. The project communications plan is in place, but it seems as if
    the employees are not following it. The communications plan lays out
    the communications requirements but does not explicitly assign
    responsibilities. What should Lucy do first? (Assume that all the
    following actions need to be taken at some stage.)

      A. Persuade the team to follow the plan

      B. Motivate the team to effectively communicate

      C. Set and manage expectations

      D. Resolve conflicts to prevent disruptive behavior

32. Analogous Estimating is an estimation technique that uses the values of
    parameters such as scope, cost, budget, and duration from a previous
    similar activity as the basis of activity. It is frequently used for
    estimation when there is a limited amount of information about the
    project. This is a form of:

      A. Gross value estimation

      B. Function point estimation

      C. Fixed point estimation

      D. Precision Estimation

33. Which of the following approaches encourages plan definition but also
    acknowledges that once work starts, the priorities may change and the
    plan needs to be updated to reflect this change?

      A. Waterfall approach

      B. Adaptive planning

      C. Predictive life cycle

      D. Upfront planning

34. Once the project charter is authorized, it is the project manager's duty to
    distribute the charter to all key stakeholders and ensure common
    understanding of the key deliverables, milestones, and their roles and
    responsibilities. During which of the following processes is the project
    charter distributed to the project stakeholders?

      A. Direct and Manage Project Work

      B. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      C. Develop Project Charter
      D. Manage Communications

35. Adam has just taken over a construction project. The project is currently
    in the planning phase of the project lifecycle. Adam's next deliverable is
    to produce an effective stakeholder engagement strategy. Which of the
    following is the most important component of an effective stakeholder
    engagement plan?

      A. Management style

      B. Risk tolerance

      C. Construction know-how

      D. Communications

36. The banks in the Ukraine have raised the annual interest rates sharply to
    30 percent. You have the option to invest your money either in Ukrainian
    banks or to build a small factory for a client. The total cost of building
    the factory will be $12 million but it will spread evenly over one year ($1
    million payable by the end of each month for the next 12 months). The
    client will make a payment of $3.9 million at the end of each quarter
    from the start of the project. Which of the following is the best option (if
    you are only considering the return on investment)?

      A. Build the factory for the client

      B. Invest the money in the bank for a year

      C. Both options offer the same payoff

      D. Information given is insufficient to determine the best option

37. Which of the following are short, textual descriptions of required
    functionality often developed during a requirements gathering workshop:
     A. Fishbone diagrams

     B. User stories

     C. Histograms

     D. Decision trees

38. Which of the following is an example of rolling wave planning in a
    project following an adaptive life cycle?

     A. Iterative scheduling with a just-in-time log

     B. Predictive scheduling with no backlog

     C. Inflexible scheduling without leads and lags

     D. Iterative scheduling with a backlog

39. A project manager first creates an assumption log during the Develop
    Project Charter process and records all project assumptions and
    constraints. During which of the following processes is the assumptions
    log updated and/or new assumptions and constraints added during the
    project execution?

     A. Monitor and Control Project Work

     B. Close Project or Phase

     C. Direct and Manage Project Work

     D. Collect Requirements

40. A project was estimated to cost $200,000 with a timeline of 10 months.
    Due to a shipment delay, the schedule was slightly delayed. However,
   this was made up by shipping the first batch of materials for the project
   by air. The net result was that there was some additional cost in the
   project. At the end of the second month, the Project Manager reviews the
   project and finds that the project is 20% complete and Actual Costs are
   $50,000. The Estimate to Complete (ETC) for the project would now be:

     A. $160,000

     B. $210,000

     C. $250,000

     D. $200,000

41. You have a team of engineers working on your project. Two of the
    engineers have frequent disagreements. You ask them to resolve their
    differences through a discussion. However, that does not yield any
    results. Subsequently, you intervene, and based on your analysis of the
    situation, you suggest some changes in the way they work with each
    other. This still does not yield results, and you find that the project
    schedule is beginning to suffer. What is your next course of action?

     A. Take disciplinary action, if required, since the needs of the project are not
        being met.

     B. Don't do anything. Differences of opinion among the team members are a
        healthy situation.

     C. Speak to the two team members and ask them to resolve their conflict
        amicably.

     D. Ensure that they work in different shifts so that they don't clash with each
        other.

42. Nate is the project manager for a research and development project.
   According to the project communication management plan, Nate has to
   call in weekly project progress update meetings. The last few meetings
   were a disaster since more time was spent in arguments and less on
   decisions. Which of the following techniques does Nate need to quickly
   acquire?

      A. Presentation techniques

      B. Listening techniques

      C. Writing style

      D. Meeting management techniques

43. While developing the project schedule, you find that the completion of a
    successor activity depends on the completion of its predecessor activity.
    What is this dependency called?

      A. Start-to-Finish

      B. Start-to-Start

      C. Finish-to-Start

      D. Finish-to-Finish

44. Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Collect
    Requirements process?

      A. Mind mapping

      B. Interviews

      C. Questionnaires
      D. Traceability matrix

45. One key characteristic of adaptive lifecycles, such as the agile approach
    for product development, is that product features are developed using:

      A. Sandwiched periods of effort

      B. Squeezed periods of zero-error sprints

      C. Reverse engineered products

      D. Time-boxed periods of work

46. A project manager wishes to illustrate the connections between the work
    that needs to be done and the project team members. According to the
    PMBOK, the resulting document is a:

      A. Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM)

      B. Resource Planning Chart (RPC)

      C. Task Assignment Model (TAM)

      D. Resource Assignment Chart (RAC)

47. Many project managers have seen a graph that shows "Influence of
    Stakeholders" starting out high and declining as the project progresses.
    In contrast, it also shows the "Cost of Changes" starting out low and
    increasing as the project progresses. What is the key insight a project
    manager should gain from this graph?

      A. Stakeholder influence is not important at the end of the project.

      B. Make changes as early in the project as possible.
      C. Set aside money for expected changes at the end of the project.

      D. Place the project on hold until all changes are made.

48. Which of the following techniques can help a project manager review a
    supplier's internal work processes to ensure compliance to standards
    during the production of the deliverables? (Assume that all of the given
    choices are available to the project manager.)

      A. Audits

      B. Performance reporting

      C. Contract change control

      D. Inspections

49. The best practice to gather and document lessons learned is during
    weekly progress meetings. The agenda can have a lessons-learned
    brainstorming item at the end of these meetings. You can ask team
    members to put forward their recommendations, but it is always better to
    adopt a more structured way to gather lessons learned. Which of the
    following approaches will ensure you capture important lessons learned
    on your project?

      A. Planning risk responses

      B. Determining estimate to complete

      C. Review of project variances

      D. Signing off on the minutes of the meeting

50. Work Performance Data is an important input to the Control
    Procurements process. Which of the following is not a component of
Work Performance Data?

 A. Data regarding supplier's conformance to quality standards

 B. Data on completed deliverables

 C. Data regarding incurred or committed costs on each supplier contract

 D. Data on supplier invoices and respective payments
PMP Lite Mock Exam 3
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - SIPOC stands for Suppliers, inputs, process, outputs, and customers.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 284] [Project Stakeholder Management]

2. C - Ambiguity risks relate to areas of the project where imperfect
   knowledge might affect the project's ability to achieve its objectives.
   Examples include: elements of the requirement or technical solution,
   future developments in regulatory frameworks, or inherent systemic
   complexity in the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 398] [Project
   Quality Management]

3. B - The grade of a product relates to the technical characteristics of the
   product. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 274] [Project Quality Management]

4. A - The Create WBS process produces the work breakdown structure of
   the project as an output. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161] [Project Scope
   Management]

5. D - Managing stakeholder engagement helps to increase the probability of
   project success by ensuring that stakeholders clearly understand the
   project goals, objectives, benefits, and risks. This enables them to be
   active supporters of the project and to help guide activities and project
   decisions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 524] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

6. B - PDM uses Nodes to represent Activities and connects the activities
   with Arrows to show dependencies. The rest of the choices are not valid
   schedule network diagraming techniques. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 189]
   [Project Schedule Management]

7. C - According to the theory of constraints, a system's throughput is limited
  by at least one constraint. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 310] [Project Risk
  Management]

8. B - Bottom-up estimating is a technique that can be applied only when
   there is a sufficient amount of detail available to the project manager.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 244] [Project Cost Management]

9. A - Although, PMBOK does not explicitly mentions performance reports
   as an output of the Control Procurements process, these reports are
   produced during this process. The performance reports are then provided
   to the Monitor & Control Project Work in the form of work performance
   information. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 493] [Project Procurement
   Management]

10. C - The technique can be called anything but according to the PMBOK
    jargon, this technique is called Expert Judgement. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 520] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. B - Unless there is no provision for economic price adjustment due to
    inflation, a fixed price contract's value cannot be changed. Usually fixed
    price contracts spanning over one year in duration have this provision
    built into the contract. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 471] [Project
    Procurement Management]

12. D - Storyboarding is an agile prototyping technique that shows sequence
    or navigation through a series of images or illustrations. The rest of the
    choices are graphical techniques designed to achieve other objectives.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 147] [Project Quality Management]

13. B - Project life cycles are independent of product life cycles, which may
    be produced by a project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 19] [Project
    Framework]

14. B - Payments to the seller are typically processed by the accounts
    payable system of the buyer after certification of satisfactory work by an
    authorized person on the project team. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 497]
    [Project Procurement Management]

15. B - No project management practice, tool or technique is a mandatory
    requirement in PMBOK. Rather, PMBOK allows project managers to
    tailor the PMBOK processes to suit the needs of a project. Although the
    rest of the three statements are true, the question is asking for the
    `reason' of stakeholder engagement mapping exercise since the reason
    will support the claim. The correct answer is that the stakeholder
    engagement throughout the life cycle of the project is critical to project
    success. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 551] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

16. C - This is a control account. Control accounts are placed at selected
    management points of the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). Each
    control account may include one or more work packages, but each of the
    work packages must be associated with only one control account.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161] [Project Scope Management]

17. C - An iteration burndown chart tracks the work that remains to be
    completed in the iteration backlog. The rest of the choices quality
    management tools. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 226] [Project Schedule
    Management]

18. C - Scope Validation involves obtaining the stakeholders' formal
    acceptance of project deliverables. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 163]
    [Project Scope Management]

19. A - The Quality Assurance Costs are part of the cost of conformance.
    The cost of non-conformance includes the failure costs. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 282] [Project Quality Management]

20. C - Ambiguity risks are managed by defining those areas where there is a
    deficit of knowledge or understanding, then filling the gap by obtaining
    expert external input or benchmarking against best practices. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 399] [Project Procurement Management]

21. B - In Rolling Wave Planning, the work to be accomplished in the near
    term is estimated in detail at a low level of the Work Breakdown
    Structure (WBS), while the work far in the future is estimated as WBS
    components that are at a relatively high level of the WBS. The work to
    be performed within another one or two reporting periods in the near
    future is planned in detail during the current period. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 185] [Project Schedule Management]

22. B - You can avoid a risk by revising the project plan to eliminate the risk
    entirely. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 397] [Project Risk Management]

23. A - The WBS represents all product and project work. The total work at
    the lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is
    omitted and no extra work is performed. This principle is also called the
    100% rule. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161] [Project Scope
    Management]

24. C - The relationship between the two tasks would be represented as a
    start-to-start with a lag of 15 days. A lag directs a delay in the successor
    activity. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190] [Project Schedule
    Management]

25. C - The role of the project manager does not change bases on managing
    project using a predictive development life cycle or managing project in
    adaptive environments. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 178] [Project
    Procurement Management]

26. D - The summary of how the project has achieved the business needs
    identified in the business case is included in a project's final report. The
    other choices are either project initiating or planning documents.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 128] [Project Procurement Management]

27. D - Procedures for accepting and rejecting change requests are related to
    change management rather than configuration management. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Pages 118, 119] [Project Framework]

28. C - Benefit-to-cost ratio (BCR) = PV of inflows / PV of outflows = 1.65
    The gross BCR can also be calculated as Total Revenue / Total Cost.
    However, since the total present value of both the inflow and outflow is
    given, this must be used for a more accurate calculation. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 34] [Project Integration Management]

29. D - The Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical chart. It
    is used to break down the project by type of resources. For example, an
    RBS can depict all of the welders and welding equipment used in
    different areas of a ship, even though these resources may be scattered
    among different branches of the Organizational Breakdown Structure
    and RBS. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 316] [Project Resource
    Management]

30. C - Stakeholder classification models are used during stakeholder
    analysis to rank stakeholders based on their power, influence, interest,
    and impact. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 512] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

31. C - Assuming that none of the given actions have been undertaken in the
    past, the first thing to do is to set expectations. Once the expectations are
    set, the behavior need to be managed. Persuasion, motivation and
    conflict resolution should follow this. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 319,
    320] [Project Communications Management]

32. A - Analogous estimating is a gross value estimating technique. It is
    most reliable when the previous activities are similar in fact and not just
    in appearance, and the project team members preparing the estimates
    have the needed expertise. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200] [Project
    Schedule Management]

33. B - Adaptive planning defines a plan but acknowledges that once work
    starts, the priorities may change and the plan might need to be updated.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177] [Project Resource Management]

34. C - Although the Manage Communications and Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement are processes involving stakeholder communication, these
    processes are from the executing process group. Project charter is
    developed during the project initiating and must be communicated to all
    key stakeholders as soon as it is authorized. The Develop Project Charter
    process produces the project charter and this output must be shared with
    the stakeholders at the end of this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    75] [Project Integration Management]

35. D - An effective stakeholder engagement plan recognizes the diverse
    information needs of the project's stakeholders. Stakeholder engagement
    relies on continuous communication with stakeholders to understand
    their needs and expectations, addressing issues as they occur, managing
    conflicts and fostering stakeholder engagement. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 518] [Project Stakeholder Management]

36. B - In this scenario you are considering investing your money in the
    bank or building a factory. Since all transactions are not happening at the
    same point in time, we need to discount the cash flows and then
    determine the return on investment. Since the bank is offering a 30%
    annual interest rate (the opportunity cost if you decide to build the
    factory), you need to discount all the cash flows for the factory project
    by 2.5% (30% / 12) on a monthly basis. The discount formula is: Present
    Value (PV) = Future Value / (1 + interest rate)^period. Let's use this
    formula to determine the net present value of all cash outflows: Month 1:
    PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^1 = 975,610 Month 2: PV =
    1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^2 = 951,814 Month 3: PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^3
    = 928,599 Month 4: PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^4 = 905,951 Month 5:
    PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^5 = 883,854 Month 6: PV =
    1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^6 = 862,297 Month 7: PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^7
    = 841,265 Month 8: PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^8 = 820,747 Month 9:
    PV = 1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^9 = 800,728 Month 10: PV =
    1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^10     =     781,198      Month     11:      PV     =
    1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^11     =     762,145      Month     12:      PV     =
    1,000,000/(1+2.5%)^12 = 743,556 Adding these up we get the total PV
    of outflows = 10,257,765 Now let's calculate the PV of all inflows using
    the same formula: Quarter 1: PV = 3,900,000/(1+2.5%)^3 = 3,621,538
    Quarter 2: PV = 3,900,000/(1+2.5%)^6 = 3,362,958 Quarter 3: PV =
    3,900,000/(1+2.5%)^9     =     3,122,841      Quarter    4:     PV     =
    3,900,000/(1+2.5%)^12 = 2,899,868 Adding these up we get the total PV
    of inflows = 13,007,204 The return on investment (today) = (13,007,204
    - 10,257,765)*100 / 10,257,765 = 27% Since the bank is offering an
    annual 30% return on investment, it is advisable not to undertake the
    project and leave the money in the bank account. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 34, https://www.mathsisfun.com/money/net-present-value.html]

37. B - User stories are short, textual descriptions of required functionality
    often developed during a requirements gathering workshop. The rest of
    the choices are graphical formats. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 145]
    [Project Framework]

38. D - Iterative scheduling with a backlog is a form of rolling wave
    planning based on adaptive life cycles. The rest of choices are made up
    responses. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177] [Project Scope Management]

39. C - During the Direct and Manage Project Work process, new
    assumptions and constraints are added to the assumption log, and the
    status of existing assumptions and constraints may be updated and closed
    out. The other process do not directly update the assumptions log as an
    output of the process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 81, 97] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

40. A - The budget at completion (BAC) = $200,000 (given). The Actual
    Cost (AC) = $50,000 (given). The Earned value (EV) = (2/10) * 200,000
    since 20% of the project is complete; i.e., 2 months out of 10. Hence,
    Earned Value (EV) = $40,000. This is an instance of an atypical situation
    in the project. Late arrival of materials does not mean that all subsequent
   material will arrive late. Hence, the calculation used for EAC is EAC =
   AC + BAC - EV = 50,000 + 200,000 - 40,000 = $210,000. Since ETC =
   EAC - AC = 210,000 - 50,000 = $160,000. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   267] [Project Cost Management]

41. A - After the project manager has tried intervening, it is time to employ
    more formal conflict resolution mechanisms, such as disciplinary action.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 348] [Project Resource Management]

42. D - Nate needs to acquire meeting management skills that includes
    preparing agenda, timekeeping, dealing with conflicts, and recording and
    distributing minutes etc. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 386] [Project
    Communications Management]

43. D - In a Finish-to-Finish dependency, the completion of the successor
    activity depends upon the completion of its predecessor activity.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190] [Project Schedule Management]

44. D - The requirements traceability matrix is an output of the Collect
    Requirements process and not one of its tools and techniques. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 138] [Project Scope Management]

45. D - In adaptive life cycles, the requirements are documented in user
    stories that are then prioritized and refined. The product features are
    developed using time-boxed periods of work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    177] [Project Communications Management]

46. A - The correct response is Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM).
    This illustrates the connections between the work that needs to be done
    and the various team members. On larger projects, RAMs can be
    developed at various levels. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317] [Project
    Resource Management]

47. B - Changes should be made as early as possible in the project to avoid
    additional cost and delays. The influence of stakeholders is high at the
    start of the project and low towards the end. In contrast, the cost of
    making changes in a project is low at the start of a project and high
    towards the end. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 549] [Project Framework]

48. D - Inspections required by the buyer and supported by the supplier, if
    specified in the procurement contract, can be conducted during execution
    of the project to verify compliance in the seller's work processes or
    deliverables. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498] [Project Procurement
    Management]

49. C - Signing off minutes of the meeting is a good meeting management
    technique specially in highly bureaucratic environments. However, this
    doesn't help at all in gathering lessons learned. Planning risk responses
    and determining estimates to complete are forward look-ahead of the
    project. Lessons learned can be captured through the review of project
    variances. You review the variances again and focus on how to avoid
    them in the future. You also identify other tasks or people who are likely
    to encounter the same issue so it can be avoided. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 108] [Project Integration Management]

50. B - Data on status of deliverables progress is part of Work Performance
    Information and not Work Performance Data. The subtle difference
    between Work Performance Data and Work Performance Information
    confuses many people, however it is very important to clearly distinguish
    between these two concepts. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 496, 499]
    [Project Procurement Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Scope Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Scope Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project Scope
Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. George is managing a construction project and currently sequencing the
   project activities and defining their logical relationships. Two activities
   have both the SS and FF relationships. How should George schedule these
   activities?

      A. Apply both the relationships.

      B. Select the relationship with the highest impact.

      C. Select the SS relationship as this is more logical than the FF relationship.

      D. Select the FF relationship as this can help meet the project deadlines.

2. As part of tracking a project, a project manager is validating the
  completion of project scope. He or she would measure this against:

      A. Requirements traceability matrix

      B. The Project Management Plan

      C. The Project Charter

      D. The Requirements Management Plan

3. Which of the following processes is not a part of the Project Scope
   Management?

      A. Create WBS

      B. Control Quality

      C. Control Scope

      D. Collect Requirements

4. Establishing control accounts for the work packages and a unique
   identifier from a code of accounts finalizes the WBS. This provides a
   structure for hierarchical summation of:

      A. Schedule and requirements information

      B. Cost and requirements information

      C. Cost and resource information

      D. Scope, budget and schedule information

5. Uncontrolled project scope changes are often referred to as ________ .
      A. Scope creep

      B. Scope verification

      C. Value Added Scope

      D. Scope control

6. While managing a project, you have included the product acceptance
   criteria in the Quality Management Plan. While reviewing your plan, a
   senior manager asks you to reconsider this. You then realize that what you
   did is incorrect. Where should you place the product acceptance criteria?

      A. Project Charter

      B. Change control process

      C. Project Scope Statement

      D. Scope Verification Plan

7. The Project Scope Management Knowledge Area is primarily concerned
   with:

      A. Defining the scope of work that included in the project

      B. Ensuring that the project includes all the work required, and only the work
         required, to complete the project

      C. The scope of work required during the initiation phase

      D. Defining the specifications and functionality of the work product

8. A project manager approaches you to understand the Work Breakdown
   Structure (WBS) in better detail. You tell her that:
     A. The WBS is a detailed project plan and includes the effort, resources, and
        dates on which the tasks for the project are complete.

     B. The WBS is a task-oriented decomposition of work that identifies each
        task and the resource required to accomplish the task.

     C. The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work
        the project team must accomplish to meet project objectives.

     D. The WBS is a Gantt chart that contains details about the project
        deliverables the project team must do.

9. Why must the Validate Scope process be completed in a project?

     A. To obtain scope documents from recent similar projects for benchmarking

     B. To determine whether the scope is at the correct complexity level

     C. To obtain formal acceptance of deliverables by the customer or sponsor

     D. To ensure the project team is all aware of the scope

10. A project manager wants to use a group decision-making technique to
    generate, classify and prioritize requirements. Which of these is not a
    valid group decision-making technique?

     A. Plurality

     B. Singularity

     C. Majority

     D. Unanimity
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Scope Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Multiple relationships between the same activities are not
   recommended, so a decision has to be made to select the relationship with
   the highest impact. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190] [Project Scope
   Management]

2. B - Completion of project scope is measured against the scope baseline
   which is a part of the project management plan. In contrast, the product
   scope is measured against the product requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 161] [Project Scope Management]

3. B - Control Quality is not a part of the Project Scope management.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 129] [Project Scope Management]

4. D - The WBS is finalized by establishing control accounts for the work
   packages and a unique identifier from a code of accounts. This provides a
   management control point for integrated scope, schedule and cost
   information.[PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161] [Project Scope Management]

5. A - Uncontrolled project scope changes are often referred to as scope
   creep. Scope creep is often viewed negatively, but can be managed using a
   change control process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 168] [Project Scope
   Management]

6. C - The project scope statement documents and addresses the
   characteristics and boundaries of the project and its associated products
   and services, as well as product acceptance criteria and scope control.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154] [Project Scope Management]

7. B - Project Scope Management includes the processes required to ensure
  that the project includes all the work required and only the work required
  to complete the project successfully. It is primarily concerned with
  defining and controlling what is included and what is not included in the
  project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 129] [Project Scope Management]

8. C - The WBS is a deliverable oriented hierarchical decomposition of the
   work to be accomplished by the project team to accomplish project
   objectives. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 157] [Project Scope Management]

9. C - Validate Scope is the process of formalizing acceptance of the
   completed project deliverables by the customer or sponsor of the project.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 163] [Project Scope Management]

10. B - Singularity is not a valid method to reach a group decision. The other
    choices are valid methods to reach a group decision. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 144] [Project Scope Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 4
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 4
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. Adaptive project lifecycles, in comparison with predictive project
   lifecycles, are developed with the intent of:

     A. Eliminating cost of changes throughout the project's lifecycle

     B. Providing agility in responding to change

     C. Maximizing cost of changes throughout the project's lifecycle

     D. Minimizing cost of changes throughout the project's lifecycle

2. You are building a dam for a state government. Your organization is
   considered a specialist in dam design and overall management of
   construction activities. However, your organization lacks resources to
  execute the earth-works involved. You have subcontracted all the project's
  earth-works to a local subcontractor. The quality of the subcontractor's
  work is acceptable, but the subcontractor is not conforming to your
  organization's health and safety standards. You escalated this to the
  subcontractor's project manager, but he turned down your request. The
  subcontractor's project manager is of the view that the request is out of the
  contract's scope and none of the contract provisions require him to
  conform to your organization's standards. You are agitated since you
  believe health and safety standards are globally accepted, and the contract
  does not have to explicitly state them. Further, according to the state law,
  you cannot terminate the contract since the subcontractor has not vio

      A. Go for judicial arbitration as stated in the contact's ADR provisions

      B. Terminate the contract immediately since you will not compromise health
         and safety standards

      C. Withhold the subcontractor's payments to force compliance

      D. Negotiate a contact amendment with the subcontractor requiring
         compliance to the standards

3. Which of the following is an output of the Define Activities process?

      A. Milestone list

      B. Project schedule activity diagrams

      C. Resource calendar

      D. Activity duration estimates

4. A control chart is used to determine whether a process is stable or has
   predictable performance. When a process is within acceptable limits, the
   process does not need adjustment. How are these upper and lower control
  limits determined?

      A. Statistical calculations

      B. Variance analysis

      C. Pareto chart

      D. ROM estimate

5. Julia is currently assessing her project stakeholders' engagement levels.
   During this exercise, she finds she also needs to document an escalation
   process, which will come in handy in the future. Where does she need to
   document the project's escalation process?

      A. Communications management plan

      B. Stakeholder engagement plan

      C. Either the stakeholder engagement plan or the communications
         management plan

      D. Both the stakeholder engagement plan and the communications
         management plan

6. As part of a new project you just started on as project manager, you are
   assembling your team and discovering that one of the critical pieces of
   work requires a specialist from one of the functional departments.
   However, you are aware the functional manager may be reluctant to assign
   that resource to your project since your project is not a high-profile one.
   Which of the following techniques will you need to apply?

      A. Acquisition

      B. Coercion
      C. Politics

      D. Negotiation

7. The Cost Management Plan is an output of the Plan Cost Management
   process. This plan is then integrated with other project plans in which of
   these processes?

      A. Develop Project Management Plan

      B. Monitor and Control Project Work

      C. Perform Integrated Change Control

      D. Direct and Manage Project Work

8. You are building a mile-long bridge on a T&M contract. During the
   excavation activity, you learned some telephone cables are crossing the
   alignment where you have to construct the bridge. You need to relocate
   these telephone cables, but there is no provision of such an activity in the
   contract. Further, the relocation of the cables is a costly task, and you need
   to do a lot of government paperwork, as well. You requested an
   amendment in the contract, but the buyer rejected it. Despite many efforts,
   you both could not resolve this issue. What should you do next?

      A. Terminate the contract following the termination procedures mentioned in
         the contract.

      B. File a judicial petition in accordance with the state's law.

      C. Seek arbitration following the ADR procedures in the contract.

      D. Relocate the cables at your own expense since the contract does not cover
         this activity.
9. The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle as the basis for quality
   improvement is usually attributed to:

      A. Deming

      B. Crosby

      C. Juran

      D. Pareto

10. In regards to WBS, which of the following is the correct way to
    decompose the project scope?

      A. Total scope -> planning package -> control account -> work package

      B. Total scope -> control account -> work package -> planning package

      C. Total scope -> control account -> planning package -> work package

      D. Total scope -> Work package -> control account -> planning package

11. A ______ is a collection of projects or programs grouped together for
    strategic business needs.

      A. Portfolio

      B. Management System

      C. Enterprise

      D. Array

12. In a Finish-to-Start relationship between predecessor and successor
    activities, a project manager decides to schedule a successor activity five
   days before its predecessor is complete. This is accomplished by
   providing five days of:

      A. Lag

      B. Load

      C. Fast-tracking

      D. Lead

13. You are carrying out a project for an external customer. Most of the
    project's scope of work is outsourced and distributed among many
    subcontractors. What would be the role of the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process in this scenario?

      A. Inspect and verify the adequacy of the seller's product

      B. Authorize the seller's work at the appropriate time

      C. Assure that the changes are properly approved and communicated

      D. The Direct and Manage Project Work process will become redundant in
         this case

14. Which of the following inaccurately describes a prototype?

      A. A prototype is tangible and allows stakeholders to fine-tune their
         expectations.

      B. Requirements from a prototype are usually insufficient to move to the
         design phase.

      C. Prototypes support the concept of progressive elaboration.
     D. A prototype is a working model of the expected product.

15. Key project stakeholders can significantly influence a project in many
    ways. During which stage of the project do these stakeholders have the
    maximum ability to influence a project?

     A. Planning

     B. Initiating

     C. Executing

     D. Monitoring & Controlling

16. Mary has just assigned Thomas as project manager of an upcoming
    railway construction project. She hands an approved project charter to
    Thomas. Once Thomas thoroughly reviews the project charter, what
    should he do next?

     A. Review the charter once again since one thorough review is never enough

     B. Kick-start the Develop Project Management Plan process

     C. Add the project charter to the organizational lessons-learned archive

     D. Distribute the charter to all key project stakeholders and ensure common
        understanding

17. Which of these is not a data gathering technique used in the Identify
    Risks process?

     A. Interviewing

     B. Checklists
      C. Brainstorming

      D. Delta technique

18. The organization's strategy provides a strategic direction and
    performance parameters for identifying, selecting, and delivering the
    right mix of projects. If it is determined that some of the CEO's favorite
    projects do not fully align with the business objective, the PMO manager
    must:

      A. Recommendation a realignment of the strategy

      B. Terminate the project

      C. Recommend a realignment of the project objectives

      D. Honor the CEO's desires and execute the project

19. Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Acquire
    Resources process?

      A. Negotiation

      B. Multi-criteria decision analysis

      C. Pre-assignment

      D. Conflict management

20. All requested changes to a contract go through Contract Change Control
    Systems of both parties. The Contract Change Control system documents
    all requested changes for future reference. However, requested but
    unresolved changes might not make it up to either party's Change
    Control Systems. If you are contesting a dispute, where can you find a
    record of such requested changes?
      A. Procurement management plan

      B. Project management plan

      C. Project correspondence

      D. Approved change requests log

21. While the five process groups are usually completed in order, they often
    overlap with each other throughout the project. Which two process
    groups usually do not overlap during the course of the project?

      A. Initiating and Closing

      B. Initiating and Executing

      C. Initiating and Monitoring and Control

      D. Planning and Closing

22. Which of the following is the correct logical sequence of the five process
    groups?

      A. Planning, Monitoring and Controlling, Initiating, Executing, Closing

      B. Planning, Initiating, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, Closing

      C. Initiating, Monitoring and Controlling, Planning, Executing, Closing

      D. Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, Closing

23. You are currently managing an urban development project for a
    municipal authority. You and your team are managing the project and
    have outsourced most of the project work to specialist contractors. All
    the contracts awarded were FFP contracts. The project is almost 50
   percent complete, and most of the contractors have requested
   amendments to their contacts. Work specifications were not clear at the
   time of contract awards, and as a result, new work requirements have
   come up. What is your lesson learned?

     A. Never award FFP contracts in the future since they usually result in
        disputes and contests

     B. Cost-plus contracts are ideal types of contracts for construction projects

     C. Do not award FFP contracts unless the scope of work and specifications
        are precisely articulated.

     D. Good and credible contractors were not selected for the project at the time
        of award

24. You have met with your project sponsor who told you that you must
    complete the project by the end of the year, no exceptions. This should
    be included in the project scope statement as a:

     A. Project Constraint

     B. Project Boundary

     C. Project Acceptance Criteria

     D. Project Assumption

25. Along with the project communications management plan, work
    performance reports are vital inputs to the Manage Communications
    process. Where do these work performance reports come from?

     A. Project integration management process

     B. All monitoring and controlling processes
      C. Plan Communications Management processes

      D. Organizational process assets

26. On-demand scheduling is one of the techniques used in agile
    environments. This type of scheduling ______ work from a backlog as
    resources become available.

      A. Extrapolates

      B. Predicts

      C. Pulls

      D. Pushes

27. Lee is the project manager of a project, and he is planning responses to a
    set of risks. As a direct result of implementing these risk responses, he
    anticipates certain other risks to arise. These are:

      A. Secondary risks

      B. Primary risks

      C. Planned risks

      D. Workaround

28. Linda is currently drafting her project stakeholder management plan.
    Since she is a new hire, she is not aware of the company's policies and
    procedures. If she wants to know more about the company's general
    issues management procedures, where must she look?

      A. Project charter
      B. Scope statement

      C. Organizational process assets

      D. Issue register

29. A tool that provides a visual representation of human resource allocation
    to a project, number of working hours, and availability on the project is
    a:

      A. Resource Histogram

      B. Staff release plan

      C. Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS)

      D. Organization Breakdown Structure (OBS)

30. In projects following adaptive lifecycles, what are the two critical
    components of iterative scheduling with a product backlog?

      A. User epics and time-bound accepted deliverables

      B. User stories and time-boxed periods of work

      C. Work packages and critical path

      D. Scope management plan and a detailed WBS

31. Three strategies that typically deal with negative risks or threats are:

      A. Enhance, Share, and Accept

      B. Transfer, Exploit, and Accept
      C. Avoid, Transfer, and Exploit

      D. Avoid, Transfer, and Mitigate

32. Which of the following is least likely to be a project?

      A. Regular updates of the company website

      B. Responding to a contract solicitation

      C. Running a campaign for a political office

      D. An endeavor that lasts for 10 years

33. Which of the Project Schedule Management processes involves
    identifying and documenting dependencies among schedule activities?

      A. Sequence Activities

      B. Define Activities

      C. Develop Schedule

      D. Control Schedule

34. What does it mean if the Earned Value is equal to Actual Cost?

      A. Schedule Variance Index is 1

      B. Project is on budget and on schedule

      C. There is no cost variance

      D. There is no schedule variance
35. Although it is highly recommended that lessons learned are captured and
    documented throughout the project lifecycle, lessons learned are
    finalized during project closure. At this stage, responses to high-level
    questions may be gathered and documented. Which of the following is
    not an appropriate question to ask at this stage?

      A. What were the top significant project successes?

      B. How relevant the historic lessons learned were to this project during
         execution?

      C. What obstacles or unanticipated circumstances made it difficult to
         complete the project?

      D. What should have been done differently in this project?

36. Robert is managing a construction project. The project's client is
    responsible for the design, while Robert's organization is responsible for
    the construction. There has been a 45-day delay on a couple of major
    structure designs. This delay can only be recovered through crashing and
    will cost $2 million in addition to the approved budget. Robert prepares a
    detailed report and emails it to the client. In this scenario, Robert's email
    to the client is an example of:

      A. Informal unofficial communication

      B. Formal unofficial communication

      C. Informal official communication

      D. Formal official communication

37. You are the project manager managing a project to design a print head
    for dot matrix printers. In order to determine ideal settings for print
    quality, the quality manager of the company suggests trying out various
    scenarios for printing by varying certain parameters on the print head.
    Identifying such variables which influence the product or process under
    development is called:

      A. Benchmarking

      B. Design of Experiments

      C. Statistical Sampling

      D. Brainstorming

38. Although the business value is unique to each organization, each
    organization strives to attain business value for its activities. Which of
    the following does NOT create value for an organization?

      A. Escalation of commitment on projects involving significant sunk cost

      B. Effective management of ongoing operations

      C. Strategic alignment of project objectives

      D. Successful management of nonprofit business-related activities

39. You are managing a complex submarine causeway construction project.
    When you started the project, the scope of work was not clear and was
    based on a rather high-level estimate. Now that you are in the middle of
    the project, more information has become available. As a result, you now
    need to change some of the key subcontracts on the project. Which of the
    following will guide you through the change process?

      A. Change control terms of the individual subcontracts

      B. Project management plan's change control procedures
     C. Organizational process assets

     D. Supplier's contract administrator

40. Cause-and-Effect diagrams are used to illustrate how various factors
    might link to potential problems or effects. They are also called:

     A. Taguchi diagrams

     B. Pareto diagrams

     C. Ishikawa diagrams

     D. Process diagrams

41. The purpose of lessons learned is to bring together any insights gained
    during a project that can be usefully applied on future projects. When
    should a project manager ideally commence this activity?

     A. At the start of project planning

     B. At the start of project execution

     C. During the project closure

     D. From project kickoff meeting

42. Which of the following analytical techniques evaluates investment
    potential considering time-value of money?

     A. Pareto analysis

     B. Discounted cash flow

     C. Earned value management
      D. Monte Carlo technique

43. Which of the following is not true about the WBS?

      A. The project team must be involved in developing the WBS.

      B. The WBS must represent all product and project work.

      C. WBS should focus on activities rather than deliverables.

      D. WBS is usually represented in a hierarchical fashion.

44. Which of the following is accurate regarding the Estimate Activity
    Resources process?

      A. It produces project resource calendars as the output.

      B. It determines dependencies that may require a lead or lag to define the
         relationship.

      C. This process is coordinated independent of the Estimate Cost process.

      D. It involves determining what and how many resources to use.

45. In a project, Activity A has a duration of four days and begins on the
    morning of Monday the fourth. The successor Activity, B, has a Finish-
    to-Start (FS) relationship with A. The Finish-to-Start relationship has
    two days of lag, and Activity B has a duration of three days. If Saturday
    and Sunday are non-working days, which of the following statements is
    true?

      A. Total elapsed days (completing both activities) is seven days

      B. Activity B will be completed by the end of the day on Thursday, the 14th
      C. Activity B will be completed by the end of the day on Friday, the 15th.

      D. Activity B will be completed by the end of the day on Tuesday, the 12th

46. Analogous Cost Estimating is which of the following?

      A. Uses statistical relationship between historical data and other variables

      B. Generally less accurate

      C. Bottom-up estimating

      D. Generally accurate

47. What is the best way to make an accurate forecast of ETC?

      A. EAC - AC

      B. BAC - EV

      C. Manual forecasting of cost of the remaining work.

      D. (BAC - EV)/CPI

48. Which of the following is not a valid instance of risk transference?

      A. Use of a Cost Reimbursable contract

      B. Warranties

      C. Fixed Price contracts

      D. Performance bonds

49. Under which of the following scenarios would you not use a decision
   tree?

     A. When some future scenarios are unknown

     B. When you need to look at the implications of not choosing certain
        alternatives

     C. When the future scenarios are known

     D. When the outcomes of some of the actions are uncertain

50. You have been assigned as a project manager of a new project to be
    executed out of New York. However, you determine the project requires
    a Global Positioning Systems expert who is not available within the
    company in New York. After doing a little checking, you determine that
    the company has an expert based in London who is suitable for the
    project. However, the London-based employee is not willing to relocate
    to New York for the project. In such a case:

     A. Write to the manager of the London-based employee and inform him that
        the employee needs to be convinced to relocate to New York due to
        project requirements.

     B. You look at the option of moving ahead with the project by using a virtual
        team.

     C. Manage the project without the key resource and flag this as a risk.

     D. Co-location of resources is a key factor for the success of projects. As per
        PMI guidelines, you cannot proceed with the project since the resources
        are not available in New York.
PMP Lite Mock Exam 4
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Adaptive project life cycles, in comparison with predictive project life
   cycles, are developed with the intent of providing agility in responding to
   change. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 74] [Project Stakeholder Management]

2. D - Your actions should be legal and legitimate. Termination and
   withholding payments are illegal options. Further amicable solution is
   always preferred over arbitration. The best way to deal with this situation
   to offer a price for compliance to the required standards and amend the
   contract accordingly. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 492] [Project
   Procurement Management]

3. A - A milestone list is a valid output of the Define Activities process.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 183] [Project Schedule Management]

4. A - The upper / lower control limits are statistically calculated (normally
   set at + / - 3 sigma). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 304] [Project Quality
   Management]

5. A - Although there is a lot of overlap of information between the project
   communication management and stakeholder engagement plans, the
   project escalation process is only documented in the communications
   management plan. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 377] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

6. D - The correct response is Negotiation. This is done on many projects.
   The project management team may need to negotiate with functional
   managers to ensure that the team receives appropriately competent staff in
   the required time frame. The project management team may also need to
   negotiate with other project management teams. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 332] [Project Resource Management]
7. A - The cost management plan is a component of the project management
   plan. Once the cost management plan is developed, it is integrated with the
   project management plan during the Develop Project Management Plan
   process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 82] [Project Cost Management]

8. C - In this scenario there has been an increase in the scope of works. Since
   the contract doesn't accommodate this, the contractor rightfully requested
   for an amendment. However, since both parties cannot settle this
   amicably, the next step is to seek arbitration. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   498] [Project Procurement Management]

9. A - The plan-do-check-act (PDCA) cycle was defined by Shewhart and
   later modified by Deming. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 275] [Project
   Quality Management]

10. C - A planning package is a work breakdown structure component below
    the control account and above the work package with known work
    content but without detailed schedule activities. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 161] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. A - A portfolio is a collection of projects or programs. It helps facilitate
    efficient management. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 11] [Project
    Framework]

12. D - A lead allows an early start of the successor activity. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 192] [Project Schedule Management]

13. B - The role of the Direct and Manage Project Work will be to authorize
    the seller's work at the appropriate time. Inspection and verification of
    the seller's work will be handled by the Control Quality process and the
    change management will be handled by the Perform Integrated Change
    Control process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 90] [Project Procurement
    Management]

14. B - Prototypes usually go through multiple feedback cycles after which
    the requirements obtained from the prototype are sufficiently complete to
    move to a design or build phase. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 147]
    [Project Scope Management]

15. B - The stakeholder influence is highest at the start of the project and
    decreases as the project progresses towards completion. This is due to
    the fact that risk and uncertainty are greatest at the start of the project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 549] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. D - Upon the receipt of the approved project charter, it is the project
    manager's responsibility to inform all key stakeholders of the approved
    project charter and to ensure common understanding of the key
    deliverables, milestones, and their roles and responsibilities. This is also
    mentioned in the PMP examination content outline as one of the project
    manager's task during project initiation. [PMI best practice; not
    explicitly stated in PMBOK] [Project Integration Management]

17. D - Delta technique is not a valid type of data gathering technique.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 409] [Project Risk Management]

18. C - Honoring the CEO's desires and executing the project is against the
    PMI's Code of Ethics since the project manager knows that some of the
    projects are not fully aligned with the strategy. Terminating the project is
    an extreme and should not be the first consideration. The project
    manager must make a recommendation to realign the project objectives
    with the organizational strategy since value to the business can only be
    delivered when projects remain aligned with the strategic direction of the
    organization. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 14] [Project Integration
    Management]

19. D - Conflict management is not a tool and technique of the Acquire
    Resources process. The other choices are valid tools and techniques of
    this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 328] [Project Resource
    Management]

20. C - If a contract change request is rejected early in the process, it might
   not make it up to either party's change control system and hence might
   not get documented as a rejected change request. You can obtain a record
   of such requested changes in your project's correspondence with the
   customer in this case. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 496, 499] [Project
   Procurement Management]

21. A - Throughout the project, the different process groups are often
    conducted at the same time except for the initiating and closing groups,
    which are separated by the other three groups. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 23, 555] [Project Framework]

22. D - The logical sequence of the five process groups is: Initiating,
    Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 23] [Project Framework]

23. C - FFP contracts should not be awarded unless the scope of work and
    specifications are precisely articulated and documented. In such cases
    cost-plus or T&M contracts may be used. If work specifications are not
    precisely documented in a FFP contract, this will usually result in
    disputes and future claims. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 471] [Project
    Procurement Management]

24. A - An imposed deadline or milestone is an example of a constraint.
    Such project constraints are documented in the scope statement.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154] [Project Scope Management]

25. A - The Monitor and Control Project Work, a process form the project
    integration management knowledge area, produces work performance
    reports. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 380] [Project Communications
    Management]

26. C - On-demand scheduling is one of the techniques used in agile
    projects. This type of scheduling "pulls" work from a backlog as
    resources become available. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177] [Project
    Integration Management]
27. A - Secondary risks are those that arise as a direct result of implementing
    a risk response. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 439] [Project Risk
    Management]

28. C - Linda is looking for company's policies and procedures. These are
    part of the organizational process assets. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 39]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

29. A - The correct response is Resource Histogram. This bar chart
    illustrates the number of hours that a project, department or project team
    will be working each week or month over the course of the project. The
    chart can include a horizontal line that represents the maximum number
    of hours available for a particular resource. Bars that extend beyond the
    maximum available hours indicate the need for a resource leveling
    strategy. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 220, 719] [Project Resource
    Management]

30. B - In adaptive life cycles, the requirements are documented in user
    stories that are then prioritized and refined. The product features are
    developed using time-boxed periods of work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    177] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. D - Five negative risk management strategies are: Escalate, Avoid,
    Transfer, Mitigate, and Accept. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 442, 443]
    [Project Risk Management]

32. A - Regular updates of the company website constitute an operational
    activity and are clearly not a project. Responding to a contract
    solicitation and running a campaign are clearly projects. The endeavor
    lasting for ten years cannot be ruled out as a project just because of its
    duration. Projects can last from a few weeks to many years. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 4] [Project Framework]

33. A - Sequence Activities is the process of identifying and documenting
    dependencies among schedule activities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    187] [Project Schedule Management]
34. C - CV = EV - AC. If the EV is equal to the AC, then there is no cost
    variance on the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 262] [Project Cost
    Management]

35. B - Lessons learned are extremely useful as they can save a lot of rework
    and mitigate a number of risks on future projects. However, validating
    the relevance to historic lessons learned to the project being closed do
    not add any value. [PMI best practice; not explicitly stated in PMBOK]
    [Project Integration Management]

36. A - According to the PMBOK guide, all email correspondence is
    informal. Although the communication was between two officials, it
    cannot be considered official unless the information is transmitted
    formally. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 361] [Project Communications
    Management]

37. B - The correct response is Design of Experiments. DOE aims at
    predicting the outcome by introducing a change of the
    inputs/preconditions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 290] [Project Quality
    Management]

38. A - Effective management of ongoing operations, strategic alignment of
    project objectives, and, successful management of nonprofit business-
    related activities can all create value for an organization. However,
    escalation of commitment on projects involving significant sunk cost
    does not create any value for an organization. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    7] {The term `escalation of commitment' refers to the phenomenon
    where managers justify increased investment in a decision, based on the
    cumulative prior investment, despite new evidence suggesting that the
    cost of continuing the decision outweighs the expected benefit}. [Project
    Integration Management]

39. A - Your project's change control procedures are internal to your project,
    that is, the scope of work directly under your project's control. Specific
    contract change control procedures can be found in the individual
    subcontracts that can be different for each subcontract. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 489] [Project Procurement Management]

40. C - Cause and Effect diagrams are also called Ishikawa diagrams.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

41. D - Manage Project Knowledge is the process of using existing
    knowledge and creating new knowledge to achieve the project's
    objectives and contribute to organizational learning. This process is
    performed throughout the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 98]
    [Project Integration Management]

42. B - Discounted cash flow analysis uses future free cash flow projections
    and discounts them to arrive at a present value estimate, which is used to
    evaluate the potential for investment. Rest of the choices are incorrect
    because Pareto analysis is carried out to identify the most significant
    factors out of many; earned value management is carried out to monitor
    and control cost of an ongoing project; while the Monte Carlo is a
    simulation technique used to analyze project risks. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 473] [Project Integration Management]

43. C - The WBS puts a greater focus on deliverables than on actual
    activities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 156] [Project Scope Management]

44. D - The Estimate Activity Resources process determines what and how
    many resources will be used. This process is closely coordinated with the
    Estimate Costs process. Activity leads and lags are not determined
    during this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 320] [Project Schedule
    Management]

45. B - Activity A has a duration of 4 days and completes by end of the day
    on Thursday, 7th. There is a 2-day lag, and since Saturday and Sunday
    are non-working, Activity B can begin only on Tuesday, 12th. Activity B
    has a duration of 3 days and completes by end of the day on Thursday,
    14th. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 192] [Project Schedule Management]
46. B - Analogous cost estimating is usually deemed less accurate than other
    methods of estimation. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200] [Project Cost
    Management]

47. C - Manual forecasting of costs of remaining work is the most common
    forecasting approach. It is generally considered the best means of
    generating an accurate forecast of ETC. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 264]
    {For any project, the estimate to complete (ETC) is the money required
    to finish the project. The most accurate way to figure this value out is to
    do a bottom-up estimate for the remaining project work under the light of
    current project conditions. However, this approach is time-consuming
    and cannot be carried out frequently during the project. This technique is
    only used when we think that either significant scope of work has been
    changed, or there has been significant changes in the project conditions,
    and hence, we cannot accurately predict the future based on project
    performance to date. If such extreme conditions are not present, usually
    we try to predict ETC quickly using formulas based on current
    performance. All ETC/EAC formulas are rooted in current project
    perform

48. A - A cost-reimbursable contract does not transfer risk to the seller;
    rather, the risk is with the buyer. Risk transference involves shifting the
    negative impact of a risk, along with the ownership of the response, to a
    third party. Risk transference nearly always involves payment of a
    premium to the party taking on the risk. Examples include performance
    bonds, warranties, and fixed price contracts. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    443] [Project Risk Management]

49. C - You would use a decision tree when uncertainty and unknowns exist
    regarding future scenarios and their outcomes, not when future scenarios
    are known. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 435] [Project Risk Management]

50. B - The use of virtual teams has created possibilities of having teams in
    different global locations who are working towards a common goal. The
    availability of email and videoconferencing has made such teams
    possible. Virtual teams do present additional challenges, but these can be
managed in most cases. The other choices are not valid. [PMBOK 6th
edition, Page 311] [Project Resource Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Time Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Time Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project Time
Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. While planning the schedule for your project, you frequently refer to the
   project calendar. The project calendar is:

      A. A calendar containing the days on which various meetings are scheduled
         with the project team.

      B. A calendar of working days or shifts that establishes those dates on which
         schedule activities are worked.

      C. A calendar containing the list of days on which the project team members
         will be on leave or take an "off."

      D. A calendar that establishes the dates on which project deliverables go to
         the customer.
2. As a project manager, you are in the process of preparing the project
   schedule for the project. Which of the following accurately depicts the
   sequence of your activities before you began to prepare the project
   schedule?

      A. Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Durations, Develop Schedule

      B. Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Durations, Define Activities

      C. Estimate Activity Durations, Sequence Activities, Develop Schedule

      D. Define Activities, Estimate Activity Durations, Sequence Activities

3. After one year of construction, an office building is scheduled for
   completion on 30 January. The landscaping work needs to start 15 days
   prior to the building's completion. Which of the following relationships
   most likely represents the relationship of the start of landscaping work to
   the completion of the office building?

      A. Finish-to-start with a 15-day lead

      B. Start-to-finish with a 15-day lead

      C. Finish-to-start with a 15-day lag

      D. Start-to-finish with a 15-day lag

4. You are the project manager of a project. As part of the planning process,
   you use a planning technique to subdivide the project scope and
   deliverables into smaller, more manageable components. What is this
   technique called?

      A. Unit task analysis

      B. Decomposition
      C. Rolling wave planning

      D. Arrow Diagramming Method

5. The accuracy of Activity Duration estimates can be improved by
   considering the amount of risk in the original estimate. The three types of
   estimates on which three-point estimates are based are:

      A. Budgetary, ballpark, and Order of Magnitude

      B. Best case scenario, expected scenario, and current scenario

      C. Most likely, likely, and unlikely

      D. Most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic

6. You have decided to apply Resource Leveling to a project because of a
   critically required resource being available only at certain times. Which of
   the following will likely be true?

      A. Resource Leveling can often cause the original critical path to change.

      B. Resource Leveling will over-allocate resources to schedule the project
         before the deadline.

      C. Resource Leveling will require additional resources to complete the
         project.

      D. Resource Leveling will never alter the original critical path.

7. For projects where a business analyst collaborates with the project
   managers in managing the project scope, which of the following task is
   most likely to be performed by the business analyst?

      A. Acquire project resources
      B. Monitor the change control process

      C. Elicit, document, and manage stakeholder requirements

      D. Control project costs

8. A technique that iterates the project schedule many times to calculate a
   distribution of possible project completion dates is:

      A. Monte Carlo Analysis

      B. Montford analysis

      C. Pareto Cost chart

      D. Deming Analysis

9. The critical path method (CPM) calculates the theoretical early start and
   finish dates and late start and finish dates. The difference between the late
   and early start of a task is a:

      A. Free float

      B. Feeding buffer

      C. Danger zone

      D. Total float

10. You are managing a project that involves work on a film shoot. The
    editing activity can happen only after the film is shot. The best
    description of the logical relationship between the editing and shooting
    of the film is:

      A. Finish-to-Finish (FF)
B. Start-to-Start (SS)

C. Start-to-Finish (SF)

D. Finish-to-Start (FS)
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Time Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - A project calendar is a calendar of working days or shifts that
   establishes those dates on which schedule activities are worked. It also
   establishes non-working days that determine dates on which schedule
   activities are idle, such as holidays, weekends and non-shift hours.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 220] [Project Schedule Management]

2. A - The correct sequence of processes in the Schedule Management
   Knowledge Area is: Plan Schedule Management, Define Activities,
   Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Durations, Develop Schedule, and
   Control Schedule. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 173] [Project Schedule
   Management]

3. A - The landscaping work needs to start before completion of the office
   building, so it is a finish-to-start relationship. Since it needs to start 15
   days before completion of the building, it requires a lead of 15 days.
   Hence, the answer is finish-to-start with a 15-day lead. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 192] [Project Schedule Management]

4. B - Decomposition is the process of subdividing the project scope and
   deliverables into smaller, more manageable components. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 158] [Project Schedule Management]

5. D - The accuracy of Activity Duration estimates can be improved by
   considering the amount of risk in the original estimate. The three types of
   estimates on which three-point estimates are based are: Most likely,
   Optimistic, and Pessimistic. An Activity Duration can be estimated using
   values derived from these three estimated durations. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 201] [Project Schedule Management]
6. A - Resource levelling can often cause the original critical path to change.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 211] [Project Schedule Management]

7. C - Eliciting, documenting and managing stakeholder requirements is a
   responsibility of a business analyst in projects where business analysts
   collaborate with project managers to manage the project scope. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 132] [Project Schedule Management]

8. A - Monte Carlo Analysis is a technique that computes or iterates the
   project cost or the project schedule many times, using input values
   selected at random from probability distributions of possible costs or
   durations. In this way, one can calculate a distribution of possible total
   project costs or completion dates. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 213] [Project
   Schedule Management]

9. D - The difference between the early and late finish of a task is called the
   total float for that task. Total float is the amount of time that a scheduled
   activity can be delayed from its early start date without delaying the
   project finish date. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 210] [Project Schedule
   Management]

10. D - This is a situation where the editing activity can happen only after
    the film shooting has been completed. Hence, the logical relationship
    between the two tasks is Finish-to-Start (FS). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    190] [Project Schedule Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 5
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 5
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. Andy has just become the project manager of a multi-million-dollar
   construction project. Andy also has an approved project charter that
   authorizes him to apply organizational resources to the project. Now,
   Andy wants to take all key stakeholders onboard with the project charter.
   Where can Andy find a preliminary list of all key stakeholders?

      A. Project charter

      B. Stakeholder register

      C. Project management plan

      D. Risk register
2. When writing the roles and responsibilities for team members, you should
   document the role, authority, responsibility, and competency for each team
   member. Where must you document this information?

      A. Resource management plan

      B. RACI chart

      C. Resource calendar

      D. Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS)

3. A project's financial management reserves are determined in which
   process:

      A. Estimate Costs

      B. Determine Budget

      C. Control Costs

      D. Estimate Activity Resources

4. Which of these is not a component of the scope baseline that is contained
   in the project management plan?

      A. Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)

      B. Requirements documentation

      C. WBS Dictionary

      D. Project Scope Statement

5. The agile technique of on-demand scheduling is not suitable when:
      A. Product deliverables can be incrementally developed.

      B. Project requirements can be decomposed into smaller chunks that are
         relatively similar in size and scope.

      C. Project tasks can be bundled by size and scope.

      D. The use of a predictive lifecycle is mandated by the customer.

6. Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations who are actively
   involved in the project or who have an interest in it. Which of the
   following is not an internal stakeholder?

      A. Program Manager

      B. Project Sponsor

      C. Competitor

      D. Project Manager

7. Caitlin's project is behind schedule. She is planning to crash the project by
   allowing overtime to the project team. This approach can bring additional
   risks to the project. Which of the following is not a valid risk in this
   scenario:

      A. The profit margin might decrease.

      B. Risk of employee attrition might increase.

      C. Risk of errors and/or rework might increase.

      D. The project's acceptance criteria might get updated.

8. Sandra is managing a complex ERP design and implementation project.
  The project team has recently been hired. It is an enterprise-wide project
  affecting many stakeholders. It is very important for each team member to
  properly understand and follow the project communication requirements in
  order to keep the stakeholders engaged and informed. Which of the
  following tools and techniques can Sandra use to ensure that team
  members properly understand the project's communications requirements?

      A. Ground rules

      B. Training

      C. Co-location

      D. Recognition and rewards

9. You are managing a construction project. Your company does not
   specialize in construction design so you outsourced the construction
   design to a third party. You are conducting regular procurement
   performance reviews and are dissatisfied. You want to carry out a detailed
   audit of the design supplier's work processes to determine the root cause.
   Can you do that?

      A. Yes, it is a good project management technique advocated by the
         PMBOK guide.

      B. Yes, if there is a provision in the contract allowing work process audits.

      C. No, you are only authorized to perform quality audits on the delivered
         products and not the supplier's internal work processes.

      D. No, a detailed procurement audit cannot be performed until you terminate
         the contract.

10. Mary is currently drafting a stakeholder engagement plan for her new
    website development project. Her organization has strict communication
   guidelines. Mary wants to ensure that her stakeholder engagement
   strategy aligns with the organizational communications guidelines.
   Where can she find these guidelines?

     A. Corporate knowledge base

     B. Stakeholder register

     C. Project contract

     D. Lessons learned library

11. As an experienced PMP, you have found that running a WBS meeting is
    tricky because you need to find a balance between insufficient
    decomposition and excessive decomposition. When items are
    excessively decomposed, it leads to all the following except:

     A. Breaking the 100 percent rule

     B. Inefficient use of resources

     C. Nonproductive management effort

     D. Decreased efficiency when performing work

12. Which of the following can NOT be used to measure business value?

     A. Customer satisfaction

     B. Revenue growth

     C. Market share

     D. Expected monetary value
13. John, a project manager for Code Crashers, Inc., has a project with a
    group of inexperienced programmers that will develop a software
    package that creates Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for a chemical
    company. This situation strongly resembles a project his colleague,
    Peter, worked on in 2006. If John needs to come up with a rough order of
    magnitude estimate, what tool or technique should he use?

      A. Parametric Estimating

      B. Bottom Up Estimating

      C. Three-point estimate

      D. Analogous Estimating

14. Andy is currently working for ABC Contractors as a quality control
    manager for a railway track construction project. National Railways
    awarded this cost-plus construction contract to ABC Contractors a few
    months ago. As a contractual requirement, ABC Contractors has to
    submit each completed deliverable for client acceptance. Reviewing
    project data, Andy found that the current submission rejection rate is 22
    percent. He conducts a root cause analysis and submits his findings along
    with construction process improvement recommendations to the project
    director. In this scenario, Andy's report is an example of:

      A. Work performance data

      B. Raw observations

      C. Work performance information

      D. Work control report

15. Nancy has recently become the project manager for a project already in
    execution. Nancy has learned the previous project manager did a good
   job so far and religiously followed the PMBOK guiding principles.
   However, some of the project communications don't make sense to her.
   Which of the project artifacts should Nancy refer to in order to determine
   reasons for distribution of some reports?

     A. Stakeholder engagement plan and the scope management plan

     B. Stakeholder engagement plan and the communications management plan

     C. Scope management plan and the communications management plan

     D. Scope management plan and the risk management plan

16. Which of the following is NOT a knowledge management tools and
    technique?

     A. Networking

     B. Change requests

     C. Knowledge fairs and cafes

     D. Storytelling

17. Which of the following statements correctly define the 100 percent rule
    for WBS?

     A. The project is only considered complete once all requirements defined in
        the original scope statements have been completed.

     B. The project is only considered complete once all requirements in the last
        approved scope baseline have been completed.

     C. The final deliverables should fully conform to product requirements;
        nothing less, nothing more.
      D. The total of the work at the work package level should roll up to the
         higher levels so that nothing is left out and no extra work is performed.

18. As part of your resource management plan, you have created a chart
    indicating the number of hours (Y-axis) that a senior programmer will be
    working over the months (X-axis) of the project. This is an example of a:

      A. Pareto Chart

      B. Ishikawa Diagram

      C. Resource Histogram

      D. Staff Acquisition Chart

19. Which of the following is NOT a valid project schedule presentation
    format:

      A. Activity list

      B. Activity attributes

      C. Bar chart

      D. Network diagram

20. Which of the following is a set of technical guidelines that may be
    applied during the design of a product for the optimization of a specific
    aspect of the design?

      A. Scope creeping

      B. Rolling-wave planning

      C. Design for X
      D. Scrum master

21. You are managing a railway track construction project. The construction
    contract awarded to your company is fixed price and is based on some
    pre-determined quantities of work to be executed. During the project
    execution you find out that the actual quantities of work that need to be
    executed are 20% greater than what has been stated in the contract. What
    should you do?

      A. Bill the buyer the additional scope of work separately without amending
         the contract

      B. Collect necessary evidence and request the buyer to amend the contract
         with new quantities

      C. Engage a third-party arbitrator to help resolve the issue

      D. Sue the buyer for stating wrong quantities in the contract

22. Some project managers take communication lightly while managing a
    project. However, a good project manager must take communication
    very seriously and must be an effective and efficient communicator.
    Which of the following is not a fundamental attribute of effective
    communication?

      A. Clarity on the purpose

      B. Understanding receiver's communications requirements

      C. Relying on verbal communications

      D. Monitoring communications

23. Who is primarily responsible for the dissemination of the approved
    project charter and for ensuring that all key stakeholders have a common
    understanding of the project's key deliverables and milestones?

      A. Project sponsor

      B. Project team

      C. Project manager

      D. Project client

24. You manage the construction of a new airport in your home country.
    Since your organization does not have experience deploying the
    sophisticated air-traffic control system, you outsourced this to a
    specialist organization. PMBOK's Procurement Management knowledge
    will help you successfully administer this deal; however, for the supplier
    of the system, all the PMBOK processes will apply since this will be a
    complete project for the supplying organization. Which of the following
    will be a common denominator between your project and the supplier
    projects?

      A. Project management plan

      B. Supply agreement

      C. Project's scope of work

      D. Budget for the air-traffic control system

25. At which stage in a project should the project manager begin to develop
    effective stakeholder engagement strategies throughout the project
    lifecycle?

      A. Initiating

      B. Executing
      C. Planning

      D. Monitoring and Controlling

26. An organization wishes to ensure that the opportunity arising from a risk
    with positive impact is realized. This organization should:

      A. Exploit the risk

      B. Mitigate the risk

      C. Accept the risk

      D. Avoid the risk

27. Your vice president asked you what the Estimate at Completion (EAC)
    will be for a small project you are working on. You were given a budget
    of $30,000, and to date you have spent $20,000 but only completed
    $10,000 worth of work. You are sure the future work will be
    accomplished at the planned rate. What is the EAC?

      A. $40,000

      B. $30,000

      C. $60,000

      D. $10,000

28. You just sat through an exhausting change control meeting discussing a
    change in scope to the project you have worked on for the past seven
    months. After lengthy discussion, the change in scope was approved. As
    the Project Manager, you should now update all the following
    documentation, except:
     A. Scope Baseline

     B. Requirements documentation

     C. WBS Dictionary

     D. Project charter

29. You work at a software company that authors Material Safety Data
    Sheets (MSDS) for chemical companies. Prior to releasing the MSDS to
    the company, you have created a list of items for review to ensure they
    appear in the document. These items include chemical name, CAS#,
    protection required, what to do in an emergency, etc. This list is an
    example of what type of tool?

     A. Checklist

     B. Process Improvement Plan

     C. Quality Management Plan

     D. Quality Metrics

30. Agile release planning provides a high-level summary timeline of the
    release schedule based on the project roadmap. Agile release planning
    also determines the number of iterations required for the product
    development. These iterations are also known as:

     A. Epics

     B. Kanbans

     C. Sprints

     D. Phases
31. You manage an airport construction project. Since sophisticated
    technology and systems are involved, your project procurements require
    significant lead times. Your procurement specialist has recently proposed
    a new procurements management process that will significantly reduce
    these lead times and result in cost savings for the project. Besides
    implementing this new process, what else should you do?

      A. Resell your current inventory at the purchase price

      B. Shut down the project warehouse

      C. Update the lessons-learned database

      D. Do not include the over-processing costs

32. Sandra is managing an ERP system deployment project. Due to the
    complexity of the project and the number of project stakeholders
    involved, she decides to use a multi-criteria decision analysis for
    reviewing all change requests. What should be her first step in
    establishing this?

      A. Develop a decision matrix

      B. Develop a decision tree

      C. Develop a fishbone diagram

      D. Develop a control chart

33. Which of the following processes produces a Risk Register?

      A. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

      B. Plan Risk Management
      C. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

      D. Identify Risks

34. The Risk Register contains details of all identified risks and their current
    status. It is a document containing the results of:

      A. Plan Risk Responses

      B. Identify Risks

      C. Monitor Risks

      D. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis,
         and Plan Risk Responses

35. Ben is the project manager for a mobile application development project.
    Due to a recent technological development, a significant change in the
    product design is required. This change would require a 25 percent
    increase in the project budget. Ben prepares a detailed report and emails
    it to the project sponsor, and the sponsor acknowledges the receipt of the
    report. What should Ben do next?

      A. Update the cost management plan

      B. Update the project budget

      C. Update the project schedule

      D. Wait for the formal approval of the new budget

36. You are the project manager responsible for building a 100,000-square-
    foot data center. One of the scheduled activities in your plan is to install
    the Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units. However, before
    beginning the installation of the units, a raised floor must be installed for
   the units to bolt to. This is an example of what type of dependency?

      A. External

      B. Optional

      C. Discretionary

      D. Mandatory

37. Robert wants to assign a risk owner for every project risk for which a
    risk response action is planned. Where must he update this information?

      A. Resource management plan

      B. Risk register

      C. Stakeholder register

      D. Project charter

38. You are analyzing the risk in a project. You decide to do a sensitivity
    analysis to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the
    project. You consider using a tool to help compare the relative
    importance of variables that have a high degree of uncertainty with those
    variables that are more stable. One such tool is:

      A. Beta Distribution

      B. S-Curve

      C. Control Chart

      D. Tornado Diagram
39. Which of these is accurate regarding the Develop Schedule process?

     A. Schedules are optimized such that all noncritical activities have a zero
        total float.

     B. The critical path method is a schedule network analysis technique that is
        performed using the schedule model.

     C. Schedule compression shortens the project schedule while changing the
        project scope.

     D. Schedule network analysis is a technique carried out once the schedule is
        approved.

40. You are working as the project manager on a mega-construction project.
    You need to prepare a quarterly report for the project investors. You
    need to collect work performance data and convert that into work
    performance information. Which of the following processes produces
    work performance data?

     A. Direct and Manage Project Work

     B. Control Schedule

     C. Control Costs

     D. Manage Communications

41. When a project is executed under contract, the contractual provisions
    will generally be considered as _____________ for the project.

     A. Constraints

     B. Exclusions
      C. Deliverables

      D. Provisions

42. You are the project manager responsible for building a 100,000-square-
    foot data center. One of the scheduled activities in your plan is to install
    the Computer Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units. However, a raised
    floor must be installed in the data center before installation of the units
    can begin. This is an example of what type of precedence relationship?

      A. Finish to Finish

      B. Start to Finish

      C. Start to Start

      D. Finish to Start

43. The Manage Team process is part of what process group?

      A. Planning

      B. Executing

      C. Monitoring and Controlling

      D. Closing

44. You have a project in which you are responsible for building a condo
    complex in a resort town. The project is expected to take two years to
    complete. During your work breakdown structure meeting, you have
    decomposed many deliverables into work packages and schedule
    activities. However, there are some work packages that will occur a year
    from now, so you have elected not to decompose those deliverables and
    work packages at this time. This is an example of what tool or
   technique?

      A. Scope Creep

      B. Poor Planning

      C. Rolling Wave Planning

      D. Time-delayed Decomposition

45. Lucy has recently been assigned as the project manager for a new
    shopping mall construction project. Since the project will span well over
    five years, Lucy is a bit hesitant to use the current market rates for
    estimating construction materials cost. The prices have been steadily
    increasing and the current market rates might not remain valid in the
    future. Which of the following techniques can Lucy apply to determine
    her project budget?

      A. Conduct a trend analysis on the cost of materials and use that to
         extrapolate the cost of materials in the future.

      B. Determine the cost of the project using current market rates and increase
         the total budget by some factor.

      C. Compute the Net Present Value of the cost of materials and use that to
         determine the project budget.

      D. Use Rolling Wave Planning to determine the budget as the project
         progresses.

46. You are attempting to estimate the resources required to assemble the
    server racks in the new data center you are building. It has occurred to
    you that you may be able to compress the schedule if you use power
    tools instead of hand tools to build the racks and if you employ
    individuals who have worked on this brand of rack in the past.
    According to PMBOK, considering multiple options for estimating is an
    example of what type of resource estimating technique?

      A. Top Down Estimating

      B. Bottom Up Estimating

      C. Alternative Analysis

      D. Robust estimating

47. You have just received an invoice from your supplier that contains some
    uncertified items. Payments to the supplier are processed through your
    corporate accounts payable system only after certification of satisfactory
    work by the project quality control specialist. What should you do?

      A. Process the supplier's invoice since this is your liability

      B. Call the supplier and obtain more information

      C. Ask the supplier to stop all deliveries until the matter has a resolution

      D. Seek judicial arbitration

48. You have recently joined an organization as the procurements manager.
    You have just received an invoice from a contractor. Some of the items
    from the invoice are as follows: EV of work completed to date: $50,000.
    AC of work completed to date: $40,000. Total costs reimbursed by the
    buyer to date: $35,000. If the contract between the buyer and the
    contractor is a CPIF contract, what is the total value payable to this
    contractor? (Assume that the contract allows for a 10 percent fee over net
    payable whenever CPI > 1).

      A. $500
     B. $5,500

     C. $44,000

     D. $55,000

49. Kate has been asked to conduct the feasibility of a new CRM system. So
    far, the business has been relying on its traditional manual customer
    relationship management processes, but now it is struggling to keep up
    with the competition. In this scenario, the business' requirement of
    acquiring a state-of-the-art CRM system to boost its customer relations
    management capabilities is an example of:

     A. Business requirements

     B. Functional requirements

     C. Non-functional requirements

     D. Project requirements

50. During a work breakdown structure meeting, you have decomposed the
    deliverables into work packages and created your WBS dictionary.
    However, you now want to decompose the work packages to assist you
    in estimating, executing, and controlling the project. These decomposed
    work packages are:

     A. Work packages can't be decomposed into smaller units

     B. Activities

     C. Milestones

     D. Control Accounts
PMP Lite Mock Exam 5
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - The project has just been approved and all Andy has at the moment is
   the project charter itself. The project charter has a preliminary list of
   project stakeholders. Andy can use this list as a starting point. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 81] [Project Integration Management]

2. A - Information regarding team roles, responsibilities, authorities and
   competencies is documented in the Resource Management Plan. [PMBOK
   6th Edition, Pages 318, 319] [Project Resource Management]

3. B - The Management Contingency Reserve is identified in the Determine
   Budget process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 254] [Project Cost
   Management]

4. B - Project requirements documentation is used as an input to define the
   project's scope baseline. However, the requirements documentation is not
   a part of the scope baseline. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161] [Project
   Scope Management]

5. D - If the use of a predictive lifecycle is mandated by the customer, no
   other project life cycles can be selected. Hence most of the agile
   techniques will be inapplicable in those scenarios. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 177] [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. C - The competitors are affected by the project but are not actively
   involved in the project. Competitors are external project stakeholders.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 550] [Project Framework]

7. D - Meeting customer requirements by overworking the project team may
   result in decreased profits, increased levels of overall project risks,
   employee attrition, errors, or rework. The project's acceptance criteria
  should not get updated as a result of crashing. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
  273] [Project Quality Management]

8. B - All of the choices look correct at the first glance. However, the
   question is specifically asking for a technique that will raise the awareness
   of the communication requirements. Training is the ideal tool for
   increasing the awareness of the team members. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   342] [Project Communications Management]

9. B - Inspections and audits required by the buyer and supported by the
   supplier, if specified in the procurement contract, can be conducted during
   execution of the project to verify compliance in the seller's work processes
   or deliverables. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498] [Project Procurement
   Management]

10. A - Mary is looking for the organizational policy on project
    communications. This is a part of the organizational process assets which
    are stored in corporate knowledge bases. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    520] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. A - Excessive decomposition can lead to inefficient use of resources,
    decreased efficiency and non-productive management efforts. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Pages 160, 161] [Project Scope Management]

12. D - An increase or decline in Business Value that an action produces is
    traditionally measured in terms of Customer Satisfaction, Revenue
    Growth, Profitability, Market Share, Wallet Share, Cross-Sell Ratio,
    Marketing Campaign Response Rates, or Relationship Duration.
    Expected monetary value is the product of an event's probability of
    occurrence and the gain or loss that will result. EMV is used for
    managing risks and not measuring business value. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Pages 7, 435] [Project Integration Management]

13. D - Analogous estimating is the correct choice. This technique relies on
    parameters from a similar previous project and is a gross value
    estimating approach. It is also generally less accurate. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 200] [Project Cost Management]

14. C - The data on rejections is the project performance data. Andy
    analyzed it and converted it into work performance information, i.e.
    reasons for rejections and recommendations. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    26] [Project Quality Management]

15. B - The reason for information distribution are documented both in
    stakeholder engagement plan and communications management plan.
    Nancy should refer to both of these plans. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages
    377, 522] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. B - Change request is a change management tool and not a knowledge
    management tool. The other choices are valid examples of knowledge
    management tools. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 103] [Project Framework]

17. D - The WBS represents all product and project work, including the
    project management work. The total of the work at the lowest levels
    should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out and no extra
    work is performed. This is called the 100 percent rule. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 161] [Project Integration Management]

18. C - Resource histogram is a bar chart showing the amount of time that a
    resource is scheduled to work over a series of time periods. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Pages 719] [Project Resource Management]

19. B - Activity attribute is not a valid project schedule presentation format
    while the rest of the choices are. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 176]
    [Project Quality Management]

20. C - Design for X is a set of technical guidelines that may be applied
    during the design of a product for the optimization of a specific aspect of
    the design. Other choices are either invalid or do not relate to product
    design. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 295] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

21. B - In this scenario the scope of works has increased for the contractor.
    As a first step, the contractor needs to collect necessary evidence and
    request for the amendment in the contract. If both parties cannot settle
    this amicably, ADR procedures need to be followed. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 492] [Project Procurement Management]

22. C - The fundamental attributes of effective communication include
    clarity on the purpose, understanding communication needs and
    requirements, and monitoring communications. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 363] [Project Communications Management]

23. C - The project manager is responsible for the dissemination of the
    approved project charter. Although, during the development of the
    project charter, the participation of the project manager is recommended,
    once the project charter is approved, it is the project manager's
    responsibility to distribute it to the key stakeholders and ensure common
    understanding. This is also mentioned in the PMP examination content
    outline as one of the project manager's task during project initiation.
    [PMI best practice; not explicitly stated in PMBOK] [Project Integration
    Management]

24. B - The common denominator should be a document that is common
    between the buyer and the supplier, that is the supply agreement. The
    rest of the choices are the project artifacts what will be different for each
    party since supplier's scope of work is limited in comparison to the
    buyer's scope of work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 489] [Project
    Procurement Management]

25. C - The project manager starts developing effective stakeholder
    engagement strategies early during the project's planning phase. This
    effort is carried out during the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process and
    the strategies are then documented in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 516] [Project Stakeholder Management]
26. A - Five strategies to deal with risks with potentially positive impacts on
    project objectives are to escalate, exploit, share, enhance, or accept the
    risk. An exploit strategy ensures that the opportunity is realized.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 444] [Project Risk Management]

27. A - If the future work will be accomplished at the planned rate, then the
    Estimate at Completion (EAC) will be AC+BAC-EV. Budget at
    Completion (BAC) is $30,000, Earned Value (EV) is $10,000, and
    Actual Cost (AC) is $20,000. Hence, the EAC is $40,000. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 267] [Project Cost Management]

28. D - It is the project scope statement and not the project charter that
    should be updated. The project charter contains only the high-level
    requirements and high-level project description. All of the other
    documents listed in the other choices should also be updated. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 81] [Project Scope Management]

29. A - The scenario describes a checklist that someone would use to review
    the document prior to its release. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 292]
    [Project Quality Management]

30. C - Agile release planning determines the number of iterations required
    for the product development known as sprints. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 216] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. C - Sharing lessons learned information on mistakes, innovations and
    outcomes from projects can have a positive impact on your next project.
    The procurement specialist came up with a cost- and time-saving
    technique and this will prove to be valuable for future projects. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 484] [Project Integration Management]

32. A - The Multi-criteria decision analysis uses a decision matrix to provide
    a systematic analytical approach to evaluate the requested change
    according to a set of predefined criteria. The other choices are either
    quality or risk management tools. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 119]
    [Project Quality Management]

33. D - The risk register is an output of the Identify Risks process. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 409] [Project Risk Management]

34. D - The Risk Register contains the results of the Perform Qualitative
    Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, and Plan Risk
    Responses processes. It details all identified risks, including description,
    category, cause, probability of occurring, impact(s) on objectives,
    proposed responses, owners, and current status. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Pages 419, 428, 449] [Project Risk Management]

35. D - Acknowledgement of a message does not necessarily mean
    agreement with or comprehension of the message. Ben should wait for a
    formal approval of the budget before taking any action. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 113] [Project Communications Management]

36. D - This is an example of a mandatory dependency, since the units will
    be bolted to the raised floor. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 191] [Project
    Schedule Management]

37. B - The assigned risk owners are documented in the risk register.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 413] [Project Risk Management]

38. D - A tornado diagram is useful for comparing the relative importance of
    variables that have a high degree of uncertainty with those that are more
    stable. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 434] [Project Risk Management]

39. B - The accurate statement regarding the Develop Schedule process is
    that the critical path method is a schedule network analysis technique
    that is performed using the schedule model. The other statements are not
    accurate. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 209] [Project Schedule
    Management]

40. A - Although the scenario of the question is broad, the question
    specifically asks about the process which produces work performance
    data. In other words, what is being asked is "work performance data" is
    output of which of the given processes. The correct answer is Direct &
    Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 90] [Project
    Integration Management]

41. A - When a project is performed under contract, the contractual
    provisions are generally considered as constraints for the project as they
    are the limiting factors. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 42] [Project Scope
    Management]

42. D - The successor activity, in this case the installation of the CRAC
    units, cannot begin until the raised floor in the data center is completed
    (because the units need to sit on the raised floor). Therefore, this is an
    example of a finish-to-start relationship. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190]
    [Project Schedule Management]

43. B - The Manage Team process is part of the Executing process group.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25] [Project Resource Management]

44. C - The correct answer is rolling wave planning. Rolling wave planning
    is a form of progressive elaboration and is used when the project
    management team does not have enough information for a phase or
    deliverable that will occur far into the future. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    160] [Project Scope Management]

45. A - Conduct a trend analysis on the cost of materials and using that to
    extrapolate the cost of materials in the future is the best response. Trend
    analysis is used to forecast future based on past results. This is most
    probably the only choice available to Lucy if she is required to determine
    the project budget today. Other choices are incorrect as they can't
    produce better results. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 111]

46. C - In this scenario, you are looking for alternative ways to compress the
    schedule by using experienced resources and power tools instead of hand
    tools. This is an example of alternative analysis. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 699] [Project Schedule Management]

47. B - The supplier could have sent the invoice by mistake or some other
    reason. The first step is to clarify the matter with the supplier. You must
    call the supplier and obtain more information before you take any other
    step. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498] [Project Procurement
    Management]

48. B - Since this is a CPIF (Cost plus incentive fee) contract, the fee is
    calculated as a percentage of the actual cost provided that the CPI is
    greater than 1. In this case CPI is greater than one (i.e. CPI = 1.25) and
    hence 10% fee is applicable on the total cost reimbursable. AC is $40k
    out of which $35k has already been reimbursed. Hence total cost
    reimbursable is $5k. The total payable in this case is $5k x 1.1 = $5,500.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 472] [Project Procurement Management]

49. A - Business requirements describe the higher-level needs of the
    organization as a whole, such as the business issues or opportunities.
    Other choices are much lower level requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 148] [Project Framework]

50. B - Activities represent the effort needed to complete a work package
    and are an output of the Define Activities process. During this process,
    the work packages are further decomposed into project activities.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 185] [Project Schedule Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 6
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 6
Total Questions: 51
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 36 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. Which of the following graphical techniques visually depict the product
   scope by showing a business system and how other systems interact with
   it?

     A. Ishikawa diagram

     B. Histogram

     C. Influence diagram

     D. Context diagram

2. You have recently become the project manager for a construction project.
   You are a new hire in your company and are unaware of the organizational
  project management standards. Which of the following can help you get a
  head start on your project?

      A. Communicate with other project managers in your organization

      B. Review the PMBOK guide thoroughly

      C. Develop the project charter and get it approved

      D. Consult the lessons learned from your previous similar projects

3. Which of the following statements is not accurate about the initial phase of
   a project?

      A. The highest uncertainty is at this stage of the project.

      B. The cost associated at the beginning of the project is highest.

      C. Stakeholders have maximum influence during this phase.

      D. Staffing levels are the lowest at this stage.

4. Chris is managing a construction project. The project team is currently
   developing the "as built" construction drawings to be supplied to the client
   as required by the contract. Which of the following phases is Chris'
   project most likely in?

      A. Initiating

      B. Planning

      C. Closing

      D. Executing
5. In predictive projects, the scope baseline for the project is used to analyze
   a project's scope performance. On the other hand, projects with adaptive
   lifecycles use:

      A. WBS

      B. WBS dictionary

      C. Scope statement

      D. Backlogs

6. Which process group corresponds to the "do" part of the plan-do-check-act
   cycle?

      A. Closing

      B. Monitoring and Controlling

      C. Planning

      D. Executing

7. You have recently taken over a project as the project manager. The project
   is midway through execution, and most of the project work has been
   subcontracted. You have just found out that one of the subcontractors, who
   was responsible for all demolitions, has been paid 50 percent of the
   subcontracted value, but he has delivered only 25 percent of the required
   works. Upon investigation, you learned that all the payments are in line
   with the signed contract between the two parties and the subcontractor's
   work is compliant with the contract specifications. You are annoyed
   because this does not give you enough control over the subcontracted
   works. Which of the following is not an appropriate thing to do at this
   stage?
      A. Document the story as a lesson learned

      B. Continue with the arrangement

      C. Discuss your concerns with appropriate stakeholders so that this mistake
         is not repeated

      D. Terminate the contract unless there is a violation of the contract

8. Your company is considering buying a building worth $1 million. If the
   company buys this building and rents it out for the next five years, it will
   get $100,000 per year as rent (receivable by the end of each year). At the
   end of the fifth year, the company will resell the building at $1.1 million.
   What is the NPV of this investment at 10 percent per annum discount rate?

      A. 62092

      B. 600000

      C. 1600000

      D. 2200000

9. Andrew is a project management guru hired by a retail giant in your
   country. Andrew finds out there is a wide array of projects that need to be
   managed from a central PMO; from a number of small projects to large
   initiatives requiring long-term roadmaps to manage the development of
   these programs. What project management approach should be
   recommended for such projects?

      A. A predictive approach, adaptive approach, or a hybrid of both, may need
         to be adopted.

      B. A predictive approach may need to be adopted.
      C. An adaptive approach may need to be adopted.

      D. Setting up PMOs for such a wide range of projects is not recommended.

10. Organizational process assets are fundamental inputs to most of the
    project management processes. However, only some of the process assets
    are relevant to any given process. Which of the following organizational
    process assets is the least important consideration during the Manage
    Stakeholder Engagement process?

      A. Issue management procedures

      B. Project plan templates

      C. Change control procedures

      D. Historical information about previous projects

11. The paint on the exotic cars that are manufactured in your plant is
    bubbling about a year after application. What would be the best tool for
    your team to use to find potential causes of the peeling paint?

      A. Scatter diagram

      B. Ishikawa Diagram

      C. Control Chart

      D. Inspection

12. Early in the project, you are meeting with your team and would like to
    address all the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats the
    project is facing. What tool should be used?

      A. SWOT Analysis
      B. Interviewing

      C. Delphi Technique

      D. Brainstorming

13. You recently took over a project as the project manager. This is your first
    project management assignment. The project sponsor is very supportive
    and is helping you out in successfully managing the project. Recently,
    some bad quality deliverables were received on the project, and the
    project sponsor suggested that you to periodically review the vendor's
    progress to deliver project scope and quality, within cost and on
    schedule, as compared to the contract. Which of the following statements
    is true in this context?

      A. The sponsor has asked you to carry out regular trend analysis.

      B. The sponsor has asked you something that is not a good project
         management practice.

      C. The sponsor has asked you to carry out regular procurement performance
         reviews.

      D. The sponsor is giving you a bigger workload so that you can perform
         better on the next assignment.

14. You are in charge of constructing the Ferris wheel in each town a
    carnival visits. However, this is something you have never done before,
    and you are getting different opinions from others on how long it takes.
    Joe is new and has given you what you believe to be an optimistic
    estimate of three hours; Bill says it will take 10 hours, which seems too
    long to you and quite pessimistic. Last, Margie, who is the most
    experienced at this task, is telling you it will take eight hours. You are
    not sure whom to believe, so you decide to do three-point estimation
    (based on beta distribution). Based on this, how many hours will it take
   you to assemble the Ferris wheel?

     A. 7.5 hours

     B. 8 hours

     C. 21 hours

     D. 7 hours

15. PMBOK offers a number of tools and techniques for all the project
    management processes. These tools and techniques must be carefully
    applied in order to meet the objectives of any process. Which of the
    following is not a tool or technique of the Plan Stakeholder Engagement
    process?

     A. Expert judgment

     B. Meetings

     C. Decision-making

     D. Interpersonal skills

16. Business value is also defined as the aggregate of all tangible and
    intangible elements of the business. Which of the following is NOT an
    example of a tangible business element?

     A. Monetary assets

     B. Goodwill

     C. Fixtures

     D. Stockholder equity
17. You have just returned from the weekly change control board meeting at
    which you presented the requested changes to the employee move
    project. You had five change requests approved and one request rejected.
    These are outputs of what process?

      A. Control Quality

      B. Control Scope

      C. Monitor Risks

      D. Perform Integrated Change Control

18. There are two activities on your schedule: 1) Install server in lab, and 2)
    Move server into the data center. However, the second task cannot start
    until the server has run in the lab for five days without failure. This is an
    example of what?

      A. Fast Track

      B. Lead

      C. Crashing

      D. Lag

19. Your construction project is in execution, and you require a major
    change to one of your supplier agreements. Can you directly make this
    change with mutual consent of the supplier during the Control
    Procurements process, or do you have to visit the Perform Integrated
    Change Control process, as well?

      A. The change request needs to be approved through the Control
         Procurements process prior to making the change through the Integrated
         Change Control process.
      B. The change request can be directly processed through the Control
         Procurements process since the change requests only affects a particular
         supplier agreement.

      C. The Control Procurements process is about identifying variances. The
         supplier contract can directly be altered through the Perform Integrated
         Change Control process.

      D. The change request needs to be approved through the Perform Integrated
         Change Control process prior to making the change through the Control
         Procurements process.

20. A change log is an important input to the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process. Which process provides this input?

      A. Plan Communications Management

      B. Manage Communications

      C. Perform Integrated Change Control

      D. Monitor Communications

21. In your weekly status reports, you report the earned value for the project.
    This information is essential for you and the stakeholders to gauge the
    progress of the project. What process group is the cost and schedule
    control part of?

      A. Closing

      B. Planning

      C. Executing

      D. Monitoring and Controlling
22. You are having your project team members record the time they spend
    on different activities during the day, such as programming, electrical,
    HVAC, etc. This is an example of a tool and technique in what process?

      A. Manage Communications

      B. Direct and Manage Project Work

      C. Monitor and Control Project Work

      D. Manage Team

23. You are working with your team and are looking at the cost risks in the
    project. You and your team are currently creating a tornado diagram for
    the project risks. You do this as a part of which of the following
    processes?

      A. Qualitative Risk Analysis

      B. Risk Response Planning

      C. Quantitative Risk Analysis

      D. Monitor Risks

24. Stakeholder notifications must be archived for future reference.
    Whenever the Manage Communications process produces a stakeholder
    notification, the notification must be:

      A. Updated to the organizational process assets

      B. Updated to the project management plan

      C. Updated to the project communications management plan
      D. Updated to the stakeholder register

25. Communication noise refers to influences on effective communication
    that influence the interpretation of conversations. Noise affects which
    components of communication?

      A. Encoding and decoding

      B. Decoding and feedback

      C. Transmission and decoding

      D. Encoding and feedback

26. You are in the execution stage of your project, and you are informed that
    "corporate" will send in a team of consultants to review whether your
    project activities comply with your company's and PMI's policies,
    standards, and procedures. This is an example of:

      A. Quality Audit

      B. Organizational Process Assets

      C. Process Analysis

      D. Recommended Corrective Actions

27. You are in the initiation phase of your project, and you believe the
    project can be completed for $100,000. However, you are an experienced
    project manager and know that many things can happen between the
    initiation phase and the closure of the project. In the project charter, you
    have provided an estimate of $75,000 to $175,000. This is an example
    of:

      A. Narrow Estimate
      B. Absolute Estimate

      C. Rough Order of Magnitude Estimate

      D. True Estimate

28. PMBOK recognizes five process groups typical of nearly all projects.
    Which of the following is not one of them?

      A. Executing

      B. Monitoring and Controlling

      C. Planning

      D. Pre-Inception

29. A technique that calculates multiple project durations with different sets
    of activity assumptions and variables is:

      A. Process Analysis

      B. Theoretical Analysis

      C. Simulation

      D. Effect Analysis

30. Project stakeholder management is an integral part of project
    management. The effectiveness of stakeholder analysis carried out early
    in a project can decide its fate. Which of the following is the least
    important consideration during stakeholder analysis, especially when
    analyzing stakeholders who are also decision-makers?

      A. Prior experience
      B. Expectations

      C. Interests

      D. Influence

31. A process that states how formal validation and acceptance of the
    completed project deliverables will be achieved is documented in the:

      A. Scope Management plan

      B. Procurement Management plan

      C. Risk Management plan

      D. Communications Management plan

32. The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the
    work the project team must execute to accomplish the project objectives.
    This is created as part of:

      A. Project Integration Management

      B. Project Scope Management

      C. Project Procurement Management

      D. Project Schedule Management

33. Which of the following Manage Quality techniques examines problems,
    constraints, and non-value-added activities that occur during project
    work?

      A. Sensitivity Analysis
     B. Expected monetary value analysis

     C. Earned Value Analysis

     D. Process Analysis

34. On any project, the configuration control should be focused on the
    specification of:

     A. Deliverables and processes

     B. Scope and cost

     C. Risk and resources

     D. Schedule and quality

35. Complex projects usually demand preparation and distribution of
    periodic project performance reports. The contents of performance
    reports are usually determined early and documented in the project
    communications management plan. Which of the following is least likely
    to be a section on a work performance report?

     A. Analysis of project forecasts

     B. Current status of risks and issues

     C. Stakeholder engagement strategy

     D. Reserve burn down charts

36. Andy's project stakeholders are not happy as the project is lagging
    behind schedule. During the executive committee meeting, Andy
    requests all stakeholders to keep their calm as most of the project
    deliverables have been completed and only quality inspections of these
    deliverables is pending. He assures the stakeholders that he is planning to
    crash the project to meet the completion deadline. What should be the
    stakeholders' biggest concern now?

      A. Crashing at this stage might result in an exponential cost increase and
         more time will be required to recover that cost.

      B. Crashing at this stage might result in undetected errors, decreased profits,
         and increased post-implementation risks.

      C. Why Andy hasn't chosen to fast-track the project instead of crashing the
         project.

      D. Stakeholders do not know the PMBOK jargon; crashing is a valid
         schedule compression technique.

37. A change request that is issued to bring the performance of the project
    back in line with the project management plan is related to:

      A. Corrective action

      B. Defect repair

      C. Proactive action

      D. Preventive action

38. Which of the following tools give a visual representation of an
    organization's data, described in business language that is independent of
    any specific technology?

      A. Matrix diagrams

      B. Mind maps
      C. Flowcharts

      D. Logical data model

39. You are running one week behind on a project due to a late delivery by a
    vendor. You are forced to compress your project schedule due to a
    government-mandated end date that constrains your project. After
    meeting with your team, the decision is to work several tasks in parallel
    that were scheduled to be run consecutively. This is an example of:

      A. Risk Acceptance

      B. Crashing

      C. Resource Leveling

      D. Fast Tracking

40. While developing your project schedule, you have asked everyone to
    provide a list of planned vacations over the next three months, and you
    have applied this information to the tasks that each person is responsible
    for. What also needs updating?

      A. Resource Calendars

      B. Leads

      C. Schedule Variances

      D. Lags

41. A project has gone out of control, and the project manager is trying to
    bring it back under control. There have been a number of changes to the
    project scope. Some of these changes resulted in further changes, causing
    project cost to spiral upward and causing the project to go out of
   schedule. This is known as:

      A. Scope creep

      B. Scope jump

      C. Project creep

      D. Scope control

42. Mary is managing an organizational transformation project. The nature
    of the project would require responding to high levels of change and
    would also require continuous stakeholder engagement. Which of the
    project lifecycles should be chosen for this project?

      A. Predictive life cycle

      B. Plan-driven life cycle

      C. Waterfall life cycle

      D. Adaptive life cycle

43. Crashing is an effective schedule compression technique at times when a
    project is struggling behind schedule. However, increasing the number of
    resources to twice the original number of the resources does not always
    cut the time by half. This is due to:

      A. Fast tracking the project

      B. Risk mitigation due to crashing the project

      C. The law of diminishing returns

      D. Critical path analysis
44. Which of the following statements is incorrect?

      A. Developing a project team is the responsibility of the project manager.

      B. A project manager must not acquire resources needed to develop effective
         project teams.

      C. High team performance can be achieved using open and effective
         communications.

      D. Teamwork is a critical success factor for a project.

45. You are an experienced project manager and have managed several data
    center migration projects. You are currently conducting training on the
    databases, spreadsheets, and management plans you will use during the
    lifecycle of the project. This training is a tool and technique in what
    process?

      A. Manage Team

      B. Acquire Resources

      C. Develop Team

      D. Control Quality

46. You are managing an oil-drilling project. With oil at $143 per barrel, this
    could be a highly lucrative project. However, there is a chance that the
    price of oil will drop below $105 per barrel, which would eliminate the
    profit in the project. This is an example of:

      A. Requirement

      B. Assumption
      C. Risk

      D. Constraint

47. During the weekly change control board meeting, you invited the
    facilities manager to speak about the change request to increase the
    BTUs of the air conditioning system in the new data center. This is an
    example of what type of tool and technique in the Perform Integrated
    Change Control process?

      A. Variance Analysis

      B. Expert Judgment

      C. Project Management Methodology

      D. Project Management Information System

48. You are managing a project that has a task to translate several pages of a
    document into Spanish. This is similar to a project done last year when a
    document was translated into German. You are not sure how long it will
    take to translate into Spanish, so you look at the project plan from the
    German translation and use that activity duration for your current project.
    What type of estimating is this an example of?

      A. Hypothesis

      B. Parametric Estimating

      C. Analogous Estimating

      D. What-if Scenario Analysis

49. To control the schedule, a project manager is reanalyzing the project to
    predict project duration. This is done by analyzing the sequence of
   activities with the least amount of flexibility. What technique is being
   used?

      A. Leads and lags

      B. Work Breakdown Structure

      C. Flowchart

      D. Critical Path Method

50. A project manager creates a component-specific tool to verify that a set
    of required steps has been performed. This tool is called a:

      A. Risk Register

      B. Assumptions log

      C. Checklist

      D. Plan-Do-Act-Check

51. The complexity of the information flow in any project depends upon the
    complexity of the project itself. Information flows through various
    channels in complex projects. The project management team is
    responsible for gathering, compiling, analyzing, and reporting this
    information. Which of the following processes finally releases the
    project information to the project stakeholders?

      A. Plan Communications Management

      B. Monitor Communications

      C. Manage Communications
D. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
PMP Lite Mock Exam 6
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - A context diagram is a graphical technique that visually depicts the
   product scope by showing a business system and how other systems
   interact with it. The other choices are graphical techniques designed to
   achieve other objectives. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 146] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]

2. A - Reviewing the PMBOK guide or developing the charter will not help
   you come on board with your organization's work standards. Further,
   reviewing the lessons learned from you past similar projects won't help
   since you are a new hire in the company and your past projects are not
   with this organization. The best way is to talk to other project managers in
   the company and get their expert opinion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 58]
   [Project Integration Management]

3. B - At the initial stage of a project, cost is typically not at its highest.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 549] [Project Framework]

4. C - "As built" drawings suggest that the construction has been completed.
   It is most likely that the project is in the closing phase and the project
   manager is preparing the final procurement documentation to be supplied
   to the client as required by the contract. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 125]
   [Project Scope Management]

5. D - In projects with adaptive life cycles, the overall scope of the project
   will be decomposed into a set of requirements and work to be performed,
   referred to as a product backlog. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]

6. D - The Executing process group corresponds with the "do" portion of the
   PDCA cycle. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 275] [Project Quality
  Management]

7. D - According to the scenario the subcontractor is conforming to the
   contract's requirements. However, the project manager is not happy since
   the contractual terms and conditions do not give him enough control over
   the subcontracted work. The contract should not be terminated unless there
   is any violation of the contract, but appropriate steps need to be taken to
   avoid such mistakes in the future. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 492]
   [Project Procurement Management]

8. A - NPV = discounted inflows - discounted outflows Since the full
   investment, i.e. $1 million, needs to be made now, we don't have to
   discount the outflows. However, we need to discount all the inflows by
   10% per annum. The discount formula is: Present Value (PV) = Future
   Value / (1 + discount rate)^period For year 1: PV1 = 100,000 / 1.1^1 =
   90,909 For year 2: PV1 = 100,000 / 1.1^2 = 82,645 For year 3: PV1 =
   100,000 / 1.1^3 = 75,131 For year 4: PV1 = 100,000 / 1.1^4 = 68,301 For
   year 5: PV1 = 1,200,000 / 1.1^5 = 745,106 Hence the total PV of the
   inflows = 1,062,092 NPV = 1,062,092 - 1,000,000 = $62,092 [PMBOK
   5th edition, Pages 34, 473] [Project Integration Management]

9. A - In large organizations, there may be a mixture of small projects and
   large initiatives requiring long-term commitments to manage these
   programs using scaling factors (e.g. team size, geographical distribution,
   regulatory compliance, organizational complexity, and technical
   complexity). To address the full delivery life cycle, a range of techniques
   utilizing a predictive approach, adaptive approach, or a hybrid of both,
   may need to be adopted. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 178] [Project
   Integration Management]

10. B - Project plan templates are considering during the planning processes.
    These would be of least importance during the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process. The rest of the choices are the organizational
    process assets relevant to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 526] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11. B - All the choices are tools and techniques in quality control; however,
    the best choice would be the Ishikawa or cause-and-effect diagram.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

12. A - A SWOT Analysis chart would be the best choice. SWOT is an
    acronym for strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 415] [Project Risk Management]

13. C - The sponsor is not giving you more workload. He is asking you to
    carry out regular procurement performance reviews, which is a good
    project management practice. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498] [Project
    Procurement Management]

14. A - The formula for three-point estimate (based on beta distribution) is
    Estimate = (Optimistic + (Most Likely *4) + Pessimistic)/6. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 245] [Project Schedule Management]

15. D - `Interpersonal skills' is not a tool or technique of the Plan
    Stakeholder Engagement process. The rest of the choice are valid tools
    or techniques. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 516] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

16. B - Good will is an intangible element, while the rest are considered
    tangible elements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 7] [Project Integration
    Management]

17. D - Approved and rejected change requests are outputs of the Perform
    Integrated Change Control process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 113]
    [Project Integration Management]

18. D - A Lag is a modification of a logical relationship that directs a delay
    in a successor activity. In this case, there is a 5-day delay before the
    server can be moved into the data center. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    192] [Project Schedule Management]
19. D - The change request needs to be approved through the Perform
    Integrated Change Control process prior to making the change through
    the Control Procurements process. Approved change requests from the
    Perform Integrated Change control process are inputs of the Control
    Procurements process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 493] [Project
    Procurement Management]

20. C - Project change logs are an output of the Perform Integrated Change
    Control process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 113] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

21. D - The Control Schedule and the Control Costs processes belong to the
    Monitoring and Controlling process group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    25] [Project Scope Management]

22. C - The Monitor and Control Project Work process tracks and reviews
    the project's progress. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 105] [Project
    Integration Management]

23. C - A tornado diagram is a sensitivity analysis tool. This technique is
    used during the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 434] [Project Risk Management]

24. A - Stakeholder notifications must be archived for future reference.
    Whenever the Manage Communications process produces a stakeholder
    notification, the notification must be updated to the organizational
    process assets. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 388] [Project
    Communications Management]

25. C - Noise is anything that compromises the original meaning of a
    message. It gets either introduced during the transmission itself or during
    decoding (when the receiver of the message doesn't fully comprehend).
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 371] [Project Communications Management]

26. A - Any activity that is a structured and independent review to examine
    the project is an example of a Quality Audit. A quality audit is a quality
    management tool. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 294] [Project Quality
    Management]

27. C - A ROM estimate is supplied in the beginning of a project and is
    defined as -25% to +75% of the estimated cost. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 241] [Project Cost Management]

28. D - Pre-Inception is not a PMBOK process group. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 23] [Project Framework]

29. C - This technique is known as simulation. Project simulations use
    computer models and estimates of risk (usually expressed as a
    probability distribution of possible costs or durations at a detailed work
    level) and are typically performed using Monte Carlo analysis. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 213] [Project Schedule Management]

30. A - Stakeholder expectations, interests and influence are the key factors
    that are considered during stakeholder analysis. Stakeholder prior
    experience might be a consideration but that is not as important as the
    rest of the choices given for this question. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    512] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. A - The correct response is the Scope Management Plan. This plan
    provides guidance on how project scope will be defined, documented,
    validated, managed and controlled by the project management team.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 137] [Project Scope Management]

32. B - Creating the WBS is an important process in a project, and it is done
    as a part of Project Scope Management. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 129]
    [Project Scope Management]

33. D - Process Analysis examines problems, constraints, and non-value-
    added activities that occur during project work. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 292] [Project Quality Management]
34. A - The focus of configuration control is on specification of both the
    deliverables and the processes. The rest of the choices are incorrect.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 118] [Project Quality Management]

35. C - Stakeholder engagement strategy is a component of the stakeholder
    engagement plan and is usually considered confidential. Due to this
    reason, this section is least likely to be included in a work performance
    report. Other choices are more likely to be components of a work
    performance report. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 112] [Project
    Communications Management]

36. B - Meeting project schedule objectives by rushing planned quality
    inspections may result in undetected errors, decreased profits, and
    increased post-implementation risks. The other choices are incorrect.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 273] [Project Procurement Management]

37. A - A change request that is issued to bring the performance of a project
    back in line with the project management plan relates to a required
    corrective action. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration
    Management]

38. D - Logical data models give a visual representation of an organization's
    data, described in business language and independent of any specific
    technology. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 284] [Project Resource
    Management]

39. D - The example provided is the definition of fast tracking. An example
    of crashing the schedule is doubling the amount of resources so the
    task(s) can be done in half the originally scheduled time. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 215] [Project Schedule Management]

40. A - Resource calendars indicate when resources can work on the project.
    This project document must be updated to reflect the working and non-
    working time of the project resources. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 323]
    [Project Schedule Management]
41. A - Scope creep is the term used to refer to uncontrolled changes in a
    project's scope. Scope creep can be a project manager's nightmare if not
    properly managed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 168] [Project Scope
    Management]

42. D - Projects with adaptive life cycles are intended to respond to high
    levels of change and require ongoing stakeholder engagement. All other
    choices are predictive life cycles which are designed to be plan driven
    rather than being change driven. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131]
    [Project Risk Management]

43. C - When one factor used to determine the effort required to produce a
    unit of work is increased while all other factors remain fixed, a point will
    eventually be reached at which additions of that one factor start to yield
    progressively decreased productivity. This is commonly known as the
    law of diminishing returns. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 197] [Project
    Procurement Management]

44. B - Although project team development is the responsibility of the
    project manager, the project manager may acquire experts needed to
    develop effective project teams. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 328] [Project
    Resource Management]

45. C - Any type of training that is conducted--formal, on the job,
    computer-based, etc.--is a tool and technique in the Develop Team
    process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 336] [Project Resource
    Management]

46. C - The uncertainty of the oil price is a project risk, which can positively
    or negatively affect the project. The rest of the choices are incorrect.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 397] [Project Risk Management]

47. B - The facilities manager would be considered an expert on the A/C
    system; thus, this is an example of Expert Judgment. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 118] [Project Integration Management]
48. C - This is an example of analogous estimating, because you went back
    to an old schedule of a similar project to get the estimate. Parametric
    estimating would be correct if you used the number of words translated
    (e.g., translating 1000 words takes 1 hour). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    200] [Project Schedule Management]

49. D - The critical path of a project is the series of activities that have the
    least amount of float - usually zero (flexibility). [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]

50. C - Checklists are structured tools used to verify that a set of required
    steps has been performed. Checklists can be either simple or complex.
    Many organizations have standardized checklists to ensure consistency
    in frequently performed tasks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 292] [Project
    Quality Management]

51. C - Manage communications is the process of ensuring timely and
    appropriate collection, creation, distribution, storage, retrieval and
    management of project information. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 359]
    [Project Communications Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Cost Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Cost Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project Cost
Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. The Cost Performance Baseline is a time-phased budget and is used as a
   basis to measure, monitor, and control overall cost performance of the
   project. It is usually displayed in the form of:

      A. An S-curve

      B. An inverted S-curve.

      C. Pie-chart

      D. A Z curve

2. Contingency Reserves are estimated costs to be used at the discretion of
   the project manager to deal with:
      A. Scope creep

      B. Anticipated but not certain events

      C. Unanticipated events

      D. Anticipated and certain events

3. A project is estimated to cost $50,000 with a timeline of 50 days. After 25
   days, the project manager finds that 50 percent of the project is complete
   and actual costs are $50,000. What is the Cost Performance Index (CPI)?

      A. The CPI is 1

      B. The CPI is 1.5

      C. The CPI is 2

      D. The CPI is 0.5

4. Your project is midway through a delivery schedule. As the project
   manager, you want to determine how much work remains. Which is the
   most accurate way to determine the remaining work the project team must
   carry out?

      A. Rolling wave method

      B. Earned Value Technique

      C. A Manual forecast

      D. Future analysis

5. An estimating technique that uses a statistical relationship between
   historical data and other variables (such as square footage in construction
  or lines of code in software development) is known as:

      A. Parametric Estimating

      B. Analogous Estimating

      C. Bottom-up Estimating

      D. Historical Analysis

6. Lucy is currently preparing a high-level cost estimate for her project in the
   initiation phase. With the limited detail available to her, what would you
   expect the range of her estimate to be, and what would you call such an
   estimate?

      A. -25 to +25%, Absolute Cost

      B. -5 to +10%, Narrow

      C. -1 to +1%, Definitive

      D. -25 to +75%, Rough Order of Magnitude

7. Funding requirements for a project are usually in incremental amounts that
   are not continuous. These increments appear as a step function in the
   graph depicting Cash flow, Cost baseline and Funding. Any gap at the end
   of the project between the funds allocated and the cost baseline represents:

      A. Management reserves

      B. Contingency reserves

      C. Cost variance

      D. Charting error
8. You are aware that cost and schedule risks are prevalent in your project.
   You want to compare the planned project performance with its actual
   performance during the Monitor Risks process. What should you perform
   to provide this information?

      A. Reserve analysis

      B. Risk audit

      C. Risk reassessment

      D. Technical Performance Analysis

9. You are a senior project manager working for RETAMART, a retail
   shopping network that sells various consumer products. As part of the
   expansion plan approved by the board of directors, you are a project
   manager for a new plant. Due to transportation problems, the project has
   experienced delays; the Schedule Performance Index (SPI) is at 0.6 and
   the Cost Performance Index (CPI) is at 0.7. However, you expect some
   improvements over the next few weeks, which may increase the SPI to 1.1
   and the CPI to 0.9. Which of the following statements is true if your
   anticipated changes materialize?

      A. The project is overspent and behind schedule

      B. The project is overspent but ahead of schedule

      C. The project is on schedule and under budget

      D. The project is under budget but behind schedule

10. Which of these are not inputs to the Determine Budget process?

      A. Cost baseline, requirements traceability matrix

      B. Scope baseline, agreements
C. Basis of estimates, cost estimates

D. Risk register, resource management plan
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Cost Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - The correct response is an S-curve (or S curve). The Cost Performance
   Baseline is a time-phased budget and is used as a basis to measure,
   monitor, and control overall cost performance of the project. It is usually
   displayed in the form of an S-curve and is developed by summing
   estimated costs by period. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 254] [Project Cost
   Management]

2. B - Contingency Reserves are estimated costs to be used at the discretion
   of the project manager to deal with anticipated but not certain events.
   These events are also called "Known unknowns." [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 245 [Project Cost Management]

3. D - The correct answer is 0.5. The Cost performance Index (CPI) is given
   by the formula CPI = EV/AC where EV is the Earned Value and AC is the
   Actual Cost. Since 50% of the project is complete, Earned Value = 50% of
   $50,000 = $25,000. Hence CPI = 25,000/50,000 = 0.5. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 263] [Project Cost Management]

4. C - Although the Earned Value technique of determining the balance work
   in the project is quick and straightforward, it is not as valuable or accurate
   as the manual forecasting of the remaining work by the project team.
   However, manual forecasting is more time-consuming. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 264] [Project Cost Management]

5. A - This technique is known as Parametric Estimating. It can produce
   higher levels of accuracy, depending on the sophistication as well as on
   the underlying resource quantity and cost data built into the model.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200] [Project Cost Management]
6. D - During the initial stages of the project, the amount of information
   available will be limited. Therefore, a Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM)
   estimate is usually prepared, and it should have an accuracy range of -25%
   to +75%. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 241] [Project Cost Management]

7. A - Management reserves are included in the project's total funds, but they
   are not included in the project's cost performance baseline. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 252] [Project Cost Management]

8. D - Technical performance analysis, a tool and technique of the Monitor
   Risks process, is used to evaluate the differentials between planned and
   actual costs, schedules, and performance criteria. Several statistical
   techniques, such as Earned Value (EV) technique, are used to analyze
   these variances. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 456] [Project Cost
   Management]

9. B - The cost performance index below 1 indicates that the project is over
   budget, and the schedule performance index above 1 indicates that the
   project is ahead of schedule. If all of your anticipated changes happen to
   be true, the project will be overspent but ahead of schedule because the
   schedule performance index will be greater than 1. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 263] [Project Cost Management]

10. A - The cost baseline and the requirements traceability matrix are not
    inputs to the Determine Budget process. The other choices are valid
    inputs. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 248] [Project Cost Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 7
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 7
Total Questions: 51
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 36 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. David's project is currently in difficult times, and the project stakeholders
   are not happy with the project updates they receive. In a meeting with the
   project sponsor, David said the stakeholders' attitude is irrational since he
   personally ensures that all project communications are accurate and
   timely. Mary, the project sponsor, advises David that he needs to go the
   extra mile in managing the stakeholders rather than just managing the
   project communications. What does Mary mean?

      A. David needs to pay attention to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
         process.

      B. The project's communications management plan is not comprehensive.

      C. David is not performing the Monitor Communications process.
      D. David needs to issue a change request.

2. In adaptive lifecycles, such as the agile approach for product development,
   requirements are documented as user stories that are then __________ just
   prior to construction.

      A. Analyzed and curtailed

      B. Benchmarked and standardized

      C. Prioritized and refined

      D. Examined and outsourced

3. A construction project requires that government environmental hearings be
   held prior to site preparation. What kind of dependency is this?

      A. Optional dependency

      B. Discretionary dependency

      C. Soft logic

      D. External dependency

4. A manager asked to see a list of milestones in the project. This would be
   available as an output from the:

      A. Sequence Activities process

      B. Define Scope process

      C. Estimate Activity Durations process

      D. Define Activities process
5. A planning package is a work breakdown structure component below the
   control account and above the work package with known work content but
   without:

      A. Work packages

      B. User stories

      C. Schedule activities

      D. Requirements

6. Different stakeholders might require dissimilar outcomes from a project.
   An integral component of stakeholder management is managing these
   competing expectations throughout the project from initiation to closure.
   Which of the following management techniques can help in this situation?

      A. Stakeholder engagement analysis

      B. Facilitation

      C. Questionnaires

      D. Expert judgment

7. There are a number of risks that have been identified in your project. The
   team has decided not to change the project plan to deal with the risks, but
   they have established a contingency reserve of money in the event
   something triggers these risks. This is an example of what type of risk
   mitigation technique?

      A. Contingent Response Strategy

      B. Active acceptance
      C. Passive acceptance

      D. Avoidance

8. Large variations in the periodic expenditure of funds are undesirable for
   organizational operations. Therefore, the expenditure of funds is
   frequently reconciled with the disbursement of funds for the project.
   According to the PMBOK, this is known as:

      A. Disbursement Reconciliation

      B. Expenditure Reconciliation

      C. Budget Reconciliation

      D. Funding Limit Reconciliation

9. The Earned Value Management methodology can be used to:

      A. Forecast future performance based on current performance

      B. Calculate the number of days left in the project

      C. Calculate the value provided to the customer

      D. Calculate the profitability of the project

10. Sam's project has successfully been initiated, and all the major
    roadblocks are removed. The senior stakeholders have now switched
    from a leading role to a supportive role. What is Sam's next step once the
    first version of the project stakeholder register is developed?

      A. Execute the stakeholder engagement strategy as laid out in the stakeholder
         register

      B. Start the stakeholder identification process
     C. Finalize the project management plan before developing the stakeholder
        engagement strategy

     D. Start the development of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan

11. A Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) dictionary supports the WBS and
    is a companion document to the WBS. Which of the following is not
    included in the WBS dictionary?

     A. List of schedule milestones

     B. Resource assigned

     C. Agreement Information

     D. Code of Account Identifier

12. The State of New York has contracted with your company to provide a
    claims payment system for Medicaid benefits. In the contract, a clause
    states that the State of New York can review your work processes and
    deliverables. This is an example of:

     A. Performance Report

     B. Record Management System

     C. Deliverables Checklist

     D. Inspections and Audits

13. Control Schedule is part of which Project Management process group?

     A. Monitoring and controlling

     B. Planning
      C. Executing

      D. Initiating

14. Mandatory dependencies are those that are inherent in the nature of the
    work being done. They often involve physical limitations, such as on a
    construction project when it is impossible to erect the superstructure until
    the foundation is built. According to the PMBOK, a mandatory
    dependency is also:

      A. Soft logic

      B. Unilateral dependency

      C. Fixed logic

      D. Hard logic

15. Sandra is managing a software development project. The project has
    many stakeholders having a negative attitude toward the project. Sandra
    knows she can't keep everybody happy but still can try her best to
    manage them. Which of the following can help Sandra manage these
    negative stakeholders better?

      A. Ignore them

      B. Send them project updates

      C. Engage them in project decisions

      D. Send inaccurate project reports

16. The termination clause and alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
    mechanism for each procurement in a project is in the:
      A. Scope Statement

      B. Agreement

      C. Resource Calendars

      D. Source Selection Criteria

17. Jack is the project manager of a project that is halfway through its
    execution. He is currently looking at the work schedule. He adjusts a few
    of the schedule milestones and imposes date constraints for some of the
    work packages. This relates to which of the following processes?

      A. Control Quality

      B. Develop Schedule

      C. Control Scope

      D. Control Schedule

18. As a project manager, you are concerned with both prevention and
    inspection of errors in a work product. The difference between
    prevention and inspection is:

      A. Inspection is work the Quality Control (QC) team does; the Quality
         Assurance (QA) team does Prevention.

      B. Inspection refers to keeping errors out of the process; prevention refers to
         keeping errors out of the customer's hands.

      C. Prevention refers to keeping errors out of the process; inspection refers to
         keeping errors out of the customer's hands.

      D. Inspection and prevention refer to the same activity depending on what
         stage of the project the activity is done.
19. Which of these statements is true?

      A. The cost of correcting mistakes through an inspection is much less than
         the cost of preventing them.

      B. The cost of preventing mistakes is generally much less than the cost of
         correcting them as revealed by inspection.

      C. It does not matter where a defect is captured as long as the finished work
         product does not have a defect.

      D. The cost of correcting mistakes through an inspection is more or less the
         same as the cost of preventing them since the same effort goes into both
         activities.

20. A storm has damaged the manufacturing facility that is under
    construction as part of your project. You have just discovered that
    although the project risk management plan mandated that the facility
    have insurance against damage and loss, this policy was never acquired,
    and the project budget must cover the losses. Who is at fault?

      A. The risk manager

      B. The project manager

      C. The facilities manager

      D. The construction crew

21. You have a schedule activity that can be delayed without delaying the
    early start date of any subsequent activities. This is an example of:

      A. Free Float

      B. Lead Float
      C. Total Float

      D. Lag Float

22. As the project manager of a project, you had estimated certain activity
    durations before acquiring all project team members. On acquisition, you
    find that their actual competency levels are much lower than what you
    anticipated. In such a case, you will:

      A. Make no changes to the schedule

      B. Ask the project team members to meet the original schedule by putting in
         overtime, if required

      C. Make changes to activity duration and schedule incorporating the changed
         competency levels

      D. Inform the customer that the project is behind schedule

23. The Executive VP of Finance has informed you that you will be the
    project manager for an energy audit the company is performing in order
    to save expenses. He has assigned you to identify the stakeholders and to
    start documenting the high-level assumptions and constraints. Your
    project is in what stage?

      A. Initiating

      B. Planning

      C. Monitoring and Controlling

      D. Executing

24. The objective of a transformation project is to move an organization
    from one state to another state. Before the project begins, the
   organization is commonly referred to as being in the:

     A. Hot State

     B. Ready State

     C. Historic State

     D. Current State

25. A software vendor on your project is hoping to be awarded a contract
    providing software for another project at your company. You are not the
    manager of the other project. However, the vendor offers you tickets to
    an upcoming professional sports event if you will "put in a good word"
    for his company to the vendor selection team of the other project. What
    do you do?

     A. Fire the vendor

     B. Decline the tickets but provide a recommendation for the vendor

     C. Decline the tickets and notify appropriate management of the situation

     D. Accept the tickets if company policy allows it and provide a
        recommendation for that vendor to the other project team

26. Which of the following predictive project management techniques
    resembles an agile approach:

     A. Developing the WBS

     B. Developing the project management plan

     C. Earned value analysis

     D. Rolling wave planning
27. A project manager is managing a project in which there are teams
    located in remote locations in order to obtain cost savings. This is in
    accordance with organizational guidelines that require that at least 25
    percent of the work should be done from a remote location. This is an
    example of:

      A. A constraint

      B. A necessity

      C. A choice

      D. An assumption

28. The project manager controls the interfacing and overlapping areas of the
    organization's procurement processes, along with the project schedule,
    with processes from this area:

      A. Project Resource Management

      B. Project Scope Management

      C. Project Risk Management

      D. Project Integration Management

29. The methods used to transfer information among project stakeholders
    may vary significantly. A project team may apply different techniques
    and communication technologies to ensure effective and efficient
    communications. Which of the following must not be a factor to consider
    while choosing a communication technology?

      A. Urgency of the need for information

      B. Cheapest available technology
      C. Availability of technology

      D. Ease of use of technology

30. Once a project's business case has been approved, what should be done
    next?

      A. Identify and analyze project stakeholders and associated risks

      B. Create the project charter

      C. Identify market demand

      D. Conduct and cost-benefit analysis

31. You are managing a complex software development project for an
    external customer. You are using the waterfall approach to manage the
    project in line with the contractual requirements. However, you are not
    comfortable with this approach. You believe that customers don't really
    know what they want upfront; rather, what they want emerges out of
    repeated two-way interactions over the course of the project. In your
    current situation, the waterfall approach has its emphasis on upfront
    requirements capture and design, followed by product development and
    finally the system testing. The customer will only be involved during the
    requirements gathering and system testing stages and will be completely
    out of touch during the development activities. Which of the following
    can help you mitigate the risk created by the waterfall approach:

      A. Adopt an iterative life cycle.

      B. Divide the project into multiple phases and organize phase gates.

      C. Adopt an incremental life cycle.

      D. Adopt a hybrid life cycle.
32. You have completed a milestone in your software development project,
    and you are now verifying that the product meets the specifications
    outlined in the project management plan. In which process group is this
    process?

     A. Closing

     B. Monitor and Controlling

     C. Executing

     D. Planning

33. Which of the following may help in ensuring that certain bidders in the
    procurement process do not receive preferential treatment and that all
    prospective sellers have a clear and common understanding of the
    procurement?

     A. Use of weighted criteria

     B. Use of screening techniques

     C. Use of bidder conferences

     D. Use of expert judgment

34. The X in the DfX can be:

     A. Competing project constraints

     B. Different aspects of product development

     C. Design assumptions

     D. Discretionary dependencies
35. Which of the following statements regarding Resource Leveling and
    Resource Smoothing is correct:

      A. Resource Smoothing can cause the original critical path to change, while
         Resource Leveling doesn't alter the project's critical path.

      B. Both Resource Leveling and Resource Smoothing can alter the project's
         critical path.

      C. Neither Resource Leveling nor Resource Smoothing alters the project's
         critical path.

      D. Resource Leveling can cause the projects' critical path to change, while
         Resource Smoothing doesn't alter the project's critical path.

36. In an agile approach to project management, requirements classified as
    "epics" are decomposed into:

      A. User stories

      B. Work packages

      C. WBS elements

      D. WBS dictionary

37. Megawatt is estimating the expected cost of a new ERP system
    deployment project using the actual costs of an earlier similar ERP
    system deployment project as the basis for the cost. This is what type of
    estimating?

      A. Analogous

      B. Bottom-up
      C. Expert Judgment

      D. Parametric

38. Costs incurred in one area of a project can offset costs in another area of
    the same project. However, it is not enough to consider only the costs of
    project execution when making project decisions. What other costs
    external to the project must also be considered?

      A. Costs of conformance

      B. Planning costs

      C. Operating costs

      D. Initiating costs

39. Your company is way behind schedule in the deployment of a
    government-mandated change to a health care processing system that
    must be in production by the end of the year. To meet the due date, you
    and your team have met and decided to hire an additional 50
    programmers to work with the existing staff. This is an example of what?

      A. Resource Leveling

      B. Fast Tracking

      C. Crashing

      D. Risk Transference

40. The key difference between Validate Scope and Control Quality is:

      A. Validate Scope is concerned with meeting the quality standards specified.

      B. Validate Scope is concerned with the acceptance of deliverables.
      C. Validate Scope does not apply in projects that have been cancelled.

      D. Validate Scope can never be performed in parallel with Control Quality.

41. You are managing a fund-raising golf tournament that has a hole-in-one
    contest. However, your company cannot afford to pay the $1,000,000
    award if someone does get a hole in one, so it has elected to take out an
    insurance policy in the event someone does get lucky. This is an example
    of:

      A. Sharing

      B. Mitigation

      C. Transference

      D. Avoidance

42. The Make-or-Buy analysis is a technique used as part of the Plan
    Procurement Management process. It can determine whether the project
    team can produce a particular product or service, or if it should be
    purchased. The analysis to arrive at a decision should include:

      A. Indirect costs only

      B. Direct as well as Indirect costs

      C. Direct costs only

      D. Staffing costs only

43. What is the logical sequence of the Project Scope Management
    processes?

      A. Create WBS, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Validate Scope, and
        Control Scope

     B. Define Scope, Collect Requirements, Create WBS, Validate Scope, and
        Control Scope

     C. Plan Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create
        WBS, Validate Scope, and Control Scope

     D. Plan Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Validate
        Scope, Create WBS, and Control Scope

44. Breaking down project activities into smaller components in order to
    obtain a more accurate cost estimate and then aggregating the estimates
    of the lower-level components is:

     A. Work breakdown structure

     B. Analogous estimating

     C. Decomposition

     D. Bottom-up estimating

45. Daniel is managing the development of an e-commerce website for his
    organization. Daniel enjoys coercive powers. He has assigned Julie, a
    project team member, to facilitate the team meetings. During any team
    meeting, Julie must:

     A. Influence team members to support the project manager's decisions

     B. Support the team members to challenge the project manager's decisions

     C. Negotiate with team members to achieve the project objectives

     D. Remain neutral and conduct the meetings
46. Projects are often started as a result of an external factor such as market
    demand for a new product, a new legislative or regulatory mandate, or a
    change in technology. This results in the creation of ______ by an entity
    or organization external to the project.

      A. The project charter

      B. The WBS

      C. The project budget

      D. The RACI chart

47. Bottom-up Cost estimating is typically motivated by the size and
    complexity of:

      A. The project management software

      B. The statistical relationship between historical data and other variables

      C. The project budget

      D. The individual schedule activity or work package

48. The Quality Policy is the intended direction of a performing organization
    with regard to quality. However, as a project manager in a performing
    organization, you find the organization lacks a formal quality policy.
    What should you do in such a case?

      A. The project management team does not need to develop a quality policy
         since the performing organization does not have one.

      B. The project management team needs to obtain the quality policy from the
         customer.

      C. A quality policy is nice to have but is not required for every project.
      D. The project management team will need to develop a quality policy for
         the project.

49. Lucy is managing a website development project in an agile
    environment. She wants to create a burndown chart to present the
    project's progress to the stakeholders. She adds a diagonal line
    representing the ideal burndown and a line for daily actual remaining
    work. She now needs to show the likely variance at the iteration
    completion. What should she do?

      A. Add a forecast trend line to the ideal burndown line

      B. Add a correlation line between the daily actual remaining work and the
         ideal burndown

      C. Add a forecast trend line to the daily actual remaining work

      D. Add a median line between the daily actual remaining work and the ideal
         burndown

50. The cost estimates for a project are in the range of +/- 5 %. What phase
    is the project likely to be in?

      A. A. Closing phase

      B. B. Preliminary phase

      C. C. Initial phase

      D. D. Intermediate phase

51. You are setting up your project team, and you are looking at a chart that
    shows that Systems Development will perform programming,
    Infrastructure Systems will implement the infrastructure, and the Call
    Center will handle the customer communication. This is an example of
what type of chart?

  A. RACI

  B. Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS)

  C. Work Breakdown Structure

  D. Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS)
PMP Lite Mock Exam 7
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - Manage Stakeholder Engagement is the process of communicating and
   working with stakeholder to meet their needs/expectations, address issues
   as they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement in project
   activities throughout the project life cycle. Mary has advised David to pay
   attention to stakeholder management rather than just relying on
   communications management processes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 523]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

2. C - In adaptive life cycles such as agile approach for product development,
   requirements are documented as user stories that are then prioritized and
   refined just prior to construction. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177] [Project
   Procurement Management]

3. D - This is called an external dependency. It involves a relationship
   between project and non-project activities (for example, government
   environmental hearings). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 192] [Project
   Schedule Management]

4. D - The milestone list is available as an output from the Define Activities
   process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 183] [Project Schedule Management]

5. C - A planning package is a work breakdown structure component below
   the control account and above the work package with known work content
   but without detailed schedule activities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. B - The project manager must use facilitation skills to arrive at a
   consensus toward project objectives. Scheduling regular stakeholder
   update meetings and engaging them throughout the project lifecycle is the
   ideal way to manage stakeholders' varying expectations. [PMBOK 6th
  edition, Pages 80] [Project Stakeholder Management]

7. B - Recognizing the risk and not changing the plan but making some
   contingencies in the event the risk is triggered is an example of active
   acceptance. Passive acceptance would recognize the risk but not put
   contingencies in place, and avoidance would be correct if the project plan
   were modified. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 443] [Project Risk
   Management]

8. D - This is known as funding limit reconciliation. This will necessitate the
   scheduling of work to be adjusted to smooth or regulate those
   expenditures. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 253] [Project Cost Management]

9. A - The Earned Value Management methodology can be used to forecast
   future performance based on current performance. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 261 - 265] [Project Cost Management]

10. D - The project management plan cannot be finalized until all the other
    subsidiary plans, including the stakeholder engagement plan, are
    finalized. Since the first version of stakeholder register has been
    developed, this implies that the first run of the Identity Stakeholders
    process has been completed and the project manager is now all set to
    kick start the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 516] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. B - Resource requirements are part of WBS dictionary but resource
    assignments are not. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 162] [Project Scope
    Management]

12. D - A contractually authorized review by the buyer of work and
    deliverables is an example of an inspection and audit. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 498] [Project Procurement Management]

13. A - Control Schedule is part of the monitoring and controlling process
    group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25] [Project Framework]
14. D - Mandatory dependencies are also referred to as hard logic. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 191] [Project Schedule Management]

15. C - Regardless how bad the situation is, send inaccurate project reports is
    never an option. Further ignoring the negative stakeholders is not
    recommended. Sending periodic project updates will help but the best
    way to reduce the negative bias towards the project is to involve the
    negative stakeholders in project decisions so they get a sense of
    ownership. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 504-506] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

16. B - The termination clause and alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
    mechanism for each procurement in a project are documented in the
    respective procurement agreement. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498]
    [Project Procurement Management]

17. D - The project is halfway through the execution. Since the project
    manager is adjusting the project plans, this needs to be a process from
    the monitoring and controlling process group. Jack is currently
    performing the Control Schedule process as he is adjusting the project
    schedule. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 222] [Project Schedule
    Management]

18. C - Prevention refers to keeping errors out of the process, while
    inspection refers to keeping errors out of the hands of the customer.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 274] [Project Quality Management]

19. B - This is one of the basic tenets of project and quality management.
    The cost of preventing mistakes is generally much less than the cost of
    correcting them as revealed by inspection. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    274] [Project Quality Management]

20. B - The project manager is at fault. It is the project manager's
    responsibility to ensure that all project work, policies, and processes are
    conducted properly. PMI requires that the project manager take
    ownership for his or her actions or inactions and the consequences that
    arise from them. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

21. A - The question given is the definition of free float. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]

22. C - The appropriate action is to make changes to the project schedule and
    activity durations depending on the actual competency of the team.
    Asking the project team members to work overtime or informing the
    customer that the project is late are too drastic in nature given the stage
    of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 222] [Project Schedule
    Management]

23. A - Identifying stakeholders, high-level assumptions and constraints are
    part of developing the project charter, which is a part of the Initiating
    Process Group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25] [Project Integration
    Management]

24. D - Before the project begins, the organization is commonly referred to
    as being in the current state. The desired result of the change derived by
    the project is described as the future state. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 6]
    [Project Quality Management]

25. C - Do not accept the tickets that are offered and notify the appropriate
    management of the situation. By offering an incentive to you to help the
    vendor win more business from your company, the vendor has
    effectively offered a bribe. PMI's Code of Ethics prohibits project
    managers from accepting bribes, and further requires project managers to
    notify the appropriate management of any unethical conduct. [PMI Code
    of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. D - Rolling wave planning resembles agile approaches since it allows the
    project management team to wait until the deliverables or
    subcomponents are agreed on, so the details of the WBS can be
    developed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 160] [Project Framework]

27. A - This is an example of a constraint. Constraints are factors that can
    limit the project management team's options. An organizational mandate
    requiring that a certain part of the team operate from a different location
    to obtain cost savings is a constraint that the project management team
    needs to incorporate into their planning. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 701]
    [Project Resource Management]

28. D - Project Integration Management includes the processes and activities
    needed to identify, define, combine, unify, and coordinate the various
    processes and project management activities within the project
    management process groups. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 69] [Project
    Integration Management]

29. B - While cost is always a consideration for any project decision, merely
    considering the cheapest available technology can compromise the
    purpose of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 370] [Project
    Communications Management]

30. B - Once a project's business case is approved, the project can be
    initiated. The Develop Project Charter process launches the project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 77] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. B - In a predictive life cycle, the project planning is completed in the
    early phases of the project. Although the use of the waterfall life cycle is
    mandated by the client, the project manager can still customize the
    approach to obtain benefits offered by the adaptive approaches. In this
    case, dividing the project into multiple phases and organizing phase gates
    with the customer can help achieve this. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 19,
    21] [Project Framework]

32. B - Verifying that a product meets specifications relates to the Validate
    Scope process, which belongs to the monitoring and controlling process
    group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 163] [Project Scope Management]
33. C - Bidder conferences allow prospective sellers and buyers to meet prior
    to submission of a bid. This ensures that all prospective sellers have a
    clear and common understanding of the procurement. This usually
    prevents any bidders from receiving preferential treatment. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 487] [Project Procurement Management]

34. B - The X in DfX can be different aspect of product development, such
    as reliability, deployment, assembly, manufacturing, cost, service,
    usability, safety, and quality. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 295] [Project
    Risk Management]

35. D - Resource Leveling can cause the projects' critical path to change,
    while Resource Smoothing doesn't alter the project's critical path.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 211] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. A - In an agile approach, epics are decomposed into smaller components
    called user stories. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 160] [Project Framework]

37. A - Analogous cost estimating involves using the actual cost of previous
    similar projects as the basis for estimating the cost of the current project.
    Analogous cost estimating is frequently used to estimate costs when
    there is a limited amount of detailed information about the project (e.g.,
    in the early phases). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 244] [Project Cost
    Management]

38. C - Project Cost Management is primarily concerned with the cost of the
    resources needed to complete schedule activities. However, Project Cost
    Management should also consider the effect of project decisions on the
    costs of using, maintaining, and supporting the product, service, or result
    of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 233] [Project Cost
    Management]

39. C - Crashing is a specific type of project schedule compression technique
    performed by taking action to decrease the total project schedule
    duration. Typical approaches to crashing a schedule include reducing
    activity durations and increasing the assignment of resources. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 215] [Project Schedule Management]

40. B - Validate Scope differs from Control Quality in that Validate Scope is
    primarily concerned with the acceptance of the deliverables, whereas
    Control Quality is primarily concerned with meeting the quality
    requirements specified for the deliverables. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    131] [Project Scope Management]

41. C - The use of insurance to shift the negative impact of a risk--in this
    case, the payment of $1,000,000--is an example of risk transference.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

42. B - The analysis should include both indirect as well as direct costs.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 473] [Project Procurement Management]

43. C - The logical sequence of the six scope management processes is: Plan
    Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create WBS,
    Validate Scope and Control Scope. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 129]
    [Project Scope Management]

44. D - This is an example of bottom-up estimating. When an activity is
    complex and cannot be accurately estimated, it is broken down into
    smaller components for estimation. These individual component
    estimates are then summed up to obtain the cost estimate of the activity.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 202] [Project Cost Management]

45. D - Since the project manager enjoys coercive powers, it seems likely
    that he has assigned a neutral facilitator to facilitate the team meetings.
    Facilitation is a management skill. A good facilitator should always
    remain neutral in a meeting and help facilitate consensus when required.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 80] [Project Stakeholder Management]

46. A - A project initiator or sponsor external to the project, at a level that is
    appropriate to funding the project, issues the project charter in response
    to some sort of stimulus. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 77] [Project
    Integration Management]

47. D - Bottom-up estimating involves estimating the cost of individual work
    packages or individual schedule activities at the lowest level of detail.
    Activities with smaller associated effort usually increase the accuracy of
    the schedule activity cost estimates. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 202]
    [Project Cost Management]

48. D - The project management team will need to develop a quality policy
    for the project if the performing organization does not have a formal
    policy. It is also the responsibility of the project management team to
    ensure that the project stakeholders are fully aware of the policy.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 271] [Project Quality Management]

49. C - A trend line should be added to the daily actual remaining work to
    forecast the completion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 226] [Project Risk
    Management]

50. A - The project is likely to be in a closing phase since the range of
    estimates is quite narrow. Early in the project, there is less cost
    information available and the range of estimates is much higher. As the
    project progresses, the degree of accuracy improves. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 241] [Project Cost Management]

51. B - A hierarchically organized depiction of the project organization
    arranged to relate the work packages to performing organizational units
    is an example of Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS). [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 316] [Project Resource Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 8
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 8
Total Questions: 51
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 36 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You have overheard two functional managers arguing about the impacts
   that your project will have on their departments. What is your best
   response?

     A. Do nothing

     B. Analyze and report to each manager the impact your project will have on
        their departments in terms of time and resources required and the relative
        enterprise priority of your project

     C. Inform the managers that the project sponsors already considered this
        impact when they decided to implement the project

     D. Put in advance requests for resources from each department
2. A large construction project for a logistics company will require the
   expenditure of a large amount of capital. The finance group works with the
   project manager to project set limits when expenses will be incurred in a
   given project and to determine whether there are ways to smooth out or
   level the spending to avoid a single large expenditure in one quarter and
   none in the next. This is an example of:

      A. Levelized Billing

      B. Funding Limit Reconciliation

      C. A financial review

      D. Rescheduling

3. Calculation of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted
   portion of the project is called ____________.

      A. Schedule compression

      B. An arrow diagram

      C. A backward pass

      D. A forward pass

4. Which of the following PMBOK processes is about using existing
   knowledge and creating new knowledge to achieve the project's objectives
   and contribute to organizational learning?

      A. Use Project Knowledge

      B. Create Project Knowledge

      C. Contribute Project Knowledge
      D. Manage Project Knowledge

5. The on-demand scheduling approach used in agile environments is based
   on the theory-of-constraints and pull-based scheduling concepts from lean
   manufacturing to limit a team's work in progress. This is also called:

      A. 5S

      B. Kanban

      C. Andon

      D. Gemba

6. While rating a proposal, one of the requirements was: "The proposed
   project manager needs to be a certified Project Management Professional,
   PMP(R)" This is an example of:

      A. Constraints

      B. Source Selection Criteria

      C. Assumptions

      D. Good practice

7. Which of the following is Deming's method for continuous improvement?

      A. Plan-Act-Check-Do

      B. Plan-Do-Check-Act

      C. Check-Plan-Do-Act

      D. Plan-Check-Do-Act
8. A decision tree is a Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis technique. A
   decision tree is represented by a Decision Tree Diagram. The decision tree
   describes a situation under consideration, the implications of each of the
   available choices, and the possible scenarios. A Decision Tree Diagram
   shows how to make a decision among alternative capital strategies known
   as:

      A. Alternative nodes

      B. Question points

      C. Decision nodes

      D. Checkpoints

9. While applying the logical relationships to the project activities, a project
   manager must be careful not to:

      A. Have closed loops relationships between activities

      B. Have FF relationships for the critical activities

      C. Have FS relationships for the non-critical activities

      D. Select the relationship with the highest impact

10. The enterprise environmental factors play an important role during the
    development of the project stakeholder engagement plan. The following
    list gives the most significant enterprise environmental factors
    considered during the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process except one.
    Which one is it?

      A. Organizational culture

      B. Organizational communication requirements
      C. Organizational structure

      D. Political climate

11. There are numerous ways to share information among project
    stakeholders. Which of the following is the most efficient
    communication method?

      A. Push communication

      B. Interactive communication

      C. Pull communication

      D. Manual communication

12. A summary milestone schedule would normally be part of which
    document?

      A. Project sign-off document

      B. Project charter

      C. Project requirements document

      D. Project scope statement

13. Which of the following processes deals with maintaining the integrity of
    baselines by releasing only approved changes for incorporation into the
    project management plan?

      A. Perform Integrated Change Control

      B. Direct and Manage Project Work
      C. Develop Project Management Plan

      D. Monitor and Control Project Work

14. For complex and high value projects, activities of business analysis get
    started well before the project is initiated. Typically in such cases, the
    requirements management process starts with:

      A. Plan Scope Management

      B. Collect Requirements

      C. Define Scope

      D. Needs Assessment

15. The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process is a very important project
    management process. An ineffective effort in this process can sabotage
    the whole project. Which of the following is the key benefit of this
    process?

      A. It makes the Manage Communications process redundant.

      B. It produces the stakeholder engagement plan.

      C. It increases support and minimizes resistance from stakeholders.

      D. Lessons learned are documented during this process.

16. When possible, the detailed project schedule _________ throughout the
    project to adjust for knowledge gained, increased understanding of the
    risk, and value-added activities.

      A. Should stand firm

      B. Should remain flexible
      C. Must be avoided

      D. Must be inflated

17. The formula for Cost Variance is:

      A. CV=EV-AC

      B. CV=AC-EV

      C. CV=BAC-(AC-EV)

      D. CV=SV-BC

18. Which of the following should be avoided while applying logical
    relationships to project activities:

      A. Applying the SS relationship with a lead

      B. Applying the SS relationship with a lag

      C. Applying the SF relationship

      D. Applying multiple relationships between the same activities

19. A detailed milestone list is created as an output of what process?

      A. Sequence Activities

      B. Define Activities

      C. Develop Project Charter

      D. Develop Schedule
20. In projects where there is a gap between the real business requirements
    and the stated business requirements, agile methods are extremely
    helpful. Agile methods provide a solution to this problem by:

     A. Completing the project quickly so that gap is significantly reduced.

     B. Replacing the project manager with a Scrum master in order to expedite
        the project.

     C. Purposefully building and reviewing prototypes and release versions to
        refine requirements.

     D. Eliminating the documentation altogether from the project management
        approach.

21. To ensure effective communications throughout a project lifecycle, a
    project manager should develop a communications plan early in the
    project. When developing a communications plan, a project manager
    must consider a number of factors. Which of the following is the least
    important consideration among the list while developing a
    communications plan?

     A. What kind of communication is required?

     B. Which PMBOK processes are required on the project?

     C. Where should the information be stored?

     D. What time zones and language barriers are involved?

22. Tim is the project manager for a shopping mall construction project
    which is in its fourth month of execution. According to the project
    contract, Tim can only issue project invoices when the project is 25%,
    50%, 75% and 100% complete in terms of the approved project schedule.
    Recently the 25% milestone has been reached and Tim is ready to issue
    his first invoice. According to the contract, the project must be
   completed in 12 months. What is the project's SPI?

      A. 0.25

      B. 0.75

      C. 0.33

      D. 1.33

23. You find out that a project team member has stolen some material from
    the workplace. The team member regrets the theft and promises not to
    repeat it again. You must:

      A. Get a statement in writing from the project team member saying he will
         not repeat such an activity

      B. Document the matter for your archives

      C. Inform your HR department about the matter

      D. Keep quiet until it repeats for a second time

24. As part of the Develop Team process, the project manager has planned
    for some Team Building activities. Team Building Activities should take
    place throughout the project lifecycle but will have greater benefit when
    conducted:

      A. On a need basis

      B. At the end of the project lifecycle

      C. Early in the project lifecycle

      D. In the middle of the project lifecycle
25. Due to the scarce nature of organizational resources, several trends have
    become popular in the past several years. Which of the following is NOT
    a resource management method:

      A. Kaizen

      B. Critical path method

      C. Total productive maintenance

      D. Theory of constraints

26. Collect Requirements, Develop Schedule, and Perform Qualitative Risk
    Analysis are all part of what process group?

      A. Planning

      B. Scope Planning

      C. Monitor and Controlling

      D. Executing

27. You have assembled a group of subject matter experts (SMEs) to define
    risk probability and impact levels. You and your team are still in what
    process group?

      A. Risk

      B. Monitor and Controlling

      C. Quantitative Analysis

      D. Planning

28. Which of the following is a tool or technique of the Manage Stakeholder
   Engagement process?

     A. Communication technology

     B. Communication models

     C. Communication standard

     D. Communication skills

29. Which of the following is not an input to the Develop Project Charter
    process?

     A. Agreements

     B. Business Case

     C. Benefits management plan

     D. Stakeholder register

30. The Plan Stakeholder Engagement process has many inputs. Which of
    the following is an input to the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process
    that comes from the Conduct Procurements process?

     A. Project management plan

     B. Project charter

     C. Historic stakeholder engagement plans

     D. Agreements

31. You have the project management responsibility of a virtual team
    comprising team members from the same company who live in
    widespread geographic areas, employees who work from home offices
   and employees with mobility impairments. Virtual teams are formed as a
   result of which of the following processes?

     A. Acquire Resources

     B. Plan Resource Management

     C. Estimate Activity Resources

     D. Develop Schedule

32. The term ________ indicates the degree to which a particular product or
    service meets requirements, while _____________ indicates a category
    or rank used to distinguish that item from other similar items.

     A. Quality, grade

     B. Grade, standard

     C. Grade, quality

     D. Quality, standard

33. Visiting a construction site to ensure the completed work is the same
    work specified in the requirements is:

     A. Milestone

     B. Scope validation

     C. Variance Analysis

     D. Requirements traceability

34. A Responsibility Assignment Matrix illustrates the connections between
    the work that needs to be done and the project team members. A RACI
   chart is a type of Responsibility Assignment matrix in which the names
   of the roles being documented are:

      A. Responsible, Administration, Check, and Inform

      B. Reportable, Actionable, Check, and Inform

      C. Responsible, Accountable, Consult, and Inform

      D. Reportable, Actionable, Consult, and Implement

35. While reviewing project procurement and accounting records for your
    project, you discover there is a pattern of unauthorized expenses by a
    specific resource. These expenses are not within the scope of the project
    and were somewhat camouflaged within a number of large and
    complicated expense reports. What do you do?

      A. If the total expenses are less than 1 percent of the project budget, do
         nothing

      B. Fire the resource

      C. Notify the appropriate management immediately

      D. Confront the resource

36. Due to the unexpected release of a similar product from a competitor, the
    Widgets International executive team has stepped up the pressure on the
    product team to release the Widget product three months earlier. The
    project manager uses what technique to shorten the schedule but
    maintain the project scope?

      A. Schedule compression

      B. Rolling wave planning
      C. Schedule network analysis

      D. Schedule management planning

37. Which of the following indicates the required cost performance in order
    to complete the project on budget?

      A. TCPI

      B. CPI

      C. EAC

      D. SPI

38. A project to design and build a new aircraft is cancelled after the project
    has been underway for some time. What process is employed to
    document what work was done and to what extent it was completed?

      A. Validate Scope

      B. Control Scope

      C. Control Quality

      D. Close Project or Phase

39. The project manager of a large construction project is responsible for
    ensuring that all changes to the building plans are approved and tracked
    before they are implemented. These activities form part of which
    process?

      A. Validate Scope

      B. Perform Configuration Management
      C. Perform Integrated change control

      D. Control Quality

40. Vendor selection, vendor management, and documentation of lessons
    learned are tasks that fall under this process:

      A. Procurement management

      B. Deliverable management

      C. Conduct Procurements

      D. Scope management

41. The Conduct Procurements process receives bids or proposals and
    applies criteria to select one or more sellers who are both qualified and
    acceptable as a seller. Which of the following techniques is not a valid
    technique for this process?

      A. Make-or-buy analysis

      B. Proposal Evaluation Techniques

      C. Advertising

      D. Bidder Conference

42. You are managing a project that requires an environmental permit to do
    work. The approval is in the final stages when a confidential, reliable
    report is brought to your notice. The report indicates there is a high risk
    of an environmental hazard due to the project. Your manager tells you it
    is better to keep quiet at this stage since losses from terminating the
    project might be very high. You must:

      A. Send an email to your manager documenting the matter and disowning
         ownership of the project

      B. Inform the necessary authorities of the hazard, even if it means cancelling
         the project

      C. Wait for the project to start and see if the information in the report is true

      D. Keep quiet about the matter since you will follow your manager's
         instructions

43. A Work Breakdown Structure is a hierarchical illustration of all the work
    to be done in a project. A WBS component does not represent:

      A. Products

      B. Results

      C. Services

      D. Project activities

44. Work Performance Information is not an output of which of the
    following processes?

      A. Validate Scope

      B. Manage Communications

      C. Monitor Risks

      D. Control Scope

45. The business case to justify a project typically contains:

      A. The project's BAC and ETC
      B. Identification of alternatives

      C. Project WBS

      D. Variance Analysis

46. Which of the following is not a Risk Diagramming technique?

      A. Influence diagrams

      B. Control charts

      C. Decision trees

      D. Tornado diagram

47. The Cost of Quality principle includes:

      A. The costs of ensuring conformance to requirements

      B. The costs involved when changes are made to the requirements

      C. The cost of deploying a project Configuration Management System

      D. The costs associated with eliminating requirements

48. The most recent analysis of Microcorp's new fabrication facility
    renovation project shows a CPI value of less than 1.0. What does this
    indicate?

      A. The cost has overrun estimates.

      B. The cost has underrun estimates.

      C. The project is running ahead of schedule.
     D. The schedule has slipped.

49. Robert is managing a road construction project. Due to unseasonal
    weather conditions, the team productivity might be above or below
    target. This is an example of:

     A. Ambiguity risk

     B. Variability risk

     C. Mitigated risk

     D. Opportunity risk

50. Which of the following is NOT a valid WBS creation approach:

     A. Parametric approach

     B. Top-down approach

     C. Use of organizational guidelines

     D. Use of WBS templates

51. Project performance measurements assess the magnitude of variation
    from the original cost baseline. Once the degree of cost variation is
    known, what step is performed next?

     A. Audit the project team

     B. Upgrade the configuration management database with new controls.

     C. Replanning

     D. Perform root cause analysis of the variance's cause relative to the cost
        baseline
PMP Lite Mock Exam 8
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Analyze and report to each manager the impact your project will have
   on theirs. Not only will this help the functional managers plan proactively
   for those times that their resources will be required by your project, it will
   also ease hostility and promote cooperation among staff. PMI's Code of
   Conduct mandates that project managers act in good faith and provide
   timely and accurate information to affected stakeholders. [PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. B - Large variations in the periodic expenditure of funds are usually
   undesirable for organizational operations. Therefore, the expenditure of
   funds is reconciled with the funding limits set by the customer or
   performing organization on the disbursement of funds for the project.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 253] [Project Cost Management]

3. C - Calculation of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted
   portion of the project is called a backward pass. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]

4. D - Manage Project Knowledge is the PMBOK process about using
   existing knowledge and creating new knowledge to achieve the project's
   objectives and contribute to organizational learning. The rest of the
   choices are not PMBOK processes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 98]
   [Project Scope Management]

5. B - The on-demand scheduling approach used in agile environments is
   based on the theory-of-constraints and pull-based scheduling concepts
   from lean manufacturing to limit a team's work in progress. This is also
   called Kanban system. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
6. B - This is an example of source selection criteria used to rate or score
   proposals. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 478] [Project Procurement
   Management]

7. B - Deming's model is Plan-Do-Check-Act. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   275] [Project Quality Management]

8. C - The decision points are known as Decision nodes. The decision tree
   incorporates the cost of each available choice, the possibilities of each of
   the available choices, and possible scenarios. It shows how to make a
   decision among alternative capital strategies (decision nodes) when the
   environment is not known with certainty. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 435]
   [Project Risk Management]

9. A - Multiple relationships between the same activities are not
   recommended, so a decision has to be made to select the relationship with
   the highest impact. Closed loops are also not recommended in logical
   relationships. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190] [Project Procurement
   Management]

10. B - Organizational communication requirements should be considered
    during project stakeholder engagement plan development. However,
    these are part of organizational process assets and not enterprise
    environmental factors. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 519, 520] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

11. B - Interactive communication is the most efficient form of
    communication as it requires multidirectional exchange of information.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 374] [Project Communications Management]

12. B - The summary milestone schedule is normally included as part of the
    project charter, which documents the business need, understanding of
    customer's needs, and other high-level items. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    81] [Project Integration Management]
13. A - Maintaining the integrity of baselines is done in the Perform
    Integrated Change Control process. This process is conducted from
    project inception through project completion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    113] [Project Integration Management]

14. D - For complex and high value projects, activities of business analysis
    get started well before the project is initiated. Typically in such cases, the
    requirements management process starts with a business need analysis.
    The rest of the choices are the processes that are performed once the
    project has been initiated. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 132] [Project
    Quality Management]

15. C - Lessons learned can get documented during any project management
    process. The key benefit of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process
    is that it allows the project manager to increase support and minimize
    resistance from stakeholders, significantly increasing the changes to
    achieve project success. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 523] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

16. B - Ideally the detailed project schedule should remain flexible
    throughout the project to adjust for knowledge gained, increased
    understanding of the risk, and value-added activities. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 175] [Project Schedule Management]

17. A - CV equals earned value (EV) minus actual cost (AC). [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 262] [Project Cost Management]

18. D - Multiple relationships between the same activities are not
    recommended, so a decision has to be made to select the relationship
    with the highest impact. Closed loops are also not recommended in
    logical relationships. The other choices are valid approaches. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 190] [Project Quality Management]

19. B - A detailed milestone list is created as an output of the Define
    Activities process and includes information on whether the milestone is
    mandatory or optional. Note that the project charter also contains
    milestone information but at a higher level. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    186] [Project Schedule Management]

20. C - Agile methods purposefully build and review prototypes and release
    versions in order to refine the requirements. As a result, scope is defined
    and redefined throughout the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 133]
    [Prof. Responsibility]

21. B - The project manager must tailor the PMBOK processes to meet the
    needs of the project. However, this is a consideration while developing
    the overall project management plan for the project. The rest of the
    choices are more of a concern during the Plan Communications
    Management process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 366] [Project
    Communications Management]

22. B - Since the 25% schedule milestone has been achieved, the project's
    earned schedule (ES) is 25%. Further the project is in its third month of
    execution so the actual time is 33.33% (i.e. 4 months / 12 months). SPI =
    ES/AT = 25% / 33.33% = 0.75. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 233] [Project
    Schedule Management]

23. C - The correct option is to inform your company's HR department. This
    is a disciplinary matter, and the project manager needs to let the
    company guidelines handle the situation. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

24. C - Team Building Activities should take place throughout the project
    life cycle, but have greater benefit when conducted early in the project
    life cycle. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 341] [Project Resource
    Management]

25. B - Due to scarce nature of critical resources, several trends have become
    popular in the past several years, including but not limited to, Kaizen,
    Total Productive Maintenance, and Theory of Constraints etc. Critical
   Path Method is a project scheduling technique. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 310] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. A - All activities listed are planning activities. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 25] [Project Framework]

27. D - The probability and impact definitions are developed during the Plan
    Risk Management process which is a part of the Planning process group.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 407] [Project Risk Management]

28. D - Communication skills is a tool and technique of the Manage
    Stakeholder Engagement process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 523]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

29. D - The stakeholder register is not an input to the Develop Project
    Charter process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 75] [Project Integration
    Management]

30. D - Agreements are inputs to the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process
    that are provided by the Conduct Procurements process [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 517] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. A - Virtual teams are formed as a result of the Acquire Resources
    process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 333] [Project Resource
    Management]

32. A - Grade is a category or rank used to distinguish items that have the
    same functional use; Quality indicates the degree to which items have
    meet requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 274] [Project Quality
    Management]

33. B - Inspection is a scope validation technique that includes activities
    (such as measuring, examining, and verifying) to determine whether
    work and deliverables meet requirements and product acceptance
    criteria. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 163] [Project Scope Management]
34. C - In a RACI chart, the names of roles are Responsible, Accountable,
    Consult and Inform. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317] [Project Resource
    Management]

35. C - Notify the appropriate management of the unauthorized expenses.
    Project managers are required by PMI's Code of Ethics to report any
    unethical or illegal behaviors or activities to the appropriate
    management. Not doing so violates the PMI code. [PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. A - Schedule compression is the technique of shortening the project
    schedule duration without reducing scope. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    215] [Project Schedule Management]

37. A - The To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI) indicates the required
    cost performance in order to complete the project on budget. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 266] [Project Cost Management]

38. D - If the project is terminated early, the Close Project or Phase process
    should establish and document the level and extent of completion.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 121] [Project Integration Management]

39. C - Integrated change control includes maintaining the integrity of
    baselines by releasing only approved changes for incorporation into
    project products or services and by maintaining their related
    configuration and planning documentation. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    113] [Project Integration Management]

40. C - The Conduct Procurements process involves collecting sellers'
    responses, selecting the seller, and awarding the contract. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 482] [Project Procurement Management]

41. A - Make-or-buy analysis is not a valid technique in the Conduct
    Procurements process. The other three choices are valid techniques.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 482] [Project Procurement Management]
42. B - The best option is to inform the necessary authorities about the report
    so that the right decision can be made, even if it means the project will
    be cancelled. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

43. D - Upper level WBS components are decomposed into more easily
    managed elements and can be process- or product-oriented. The lowest
    level of the WBS is the work packages. The project activities are
    obtained by further decomposing the work packages. The activities
    become a part of the project schedule and not the WBS. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 156] [Project Scope Management]

44. B - Work Performance information is not an output of the Manage
    Communications Process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 379] [Project Risk
    Management]

45. B - The business case for any project includes the analysis of the
    situation, recommended solution and Identification of alternative
    solutions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 31] [Project Integration
    Management]

46. B - The business case for any project includes the analysis of the
    situation, recommended solution and Identification of alternative
    solutions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 31] [Project Risk Management]

47. A - Quality costs are the total costs incurred by investment in preventing
    nonconformance to requirements, appraising the product or service for
    conformance to requirements, and failing to meet requirements (rework).
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 282, 283] [Project Quality Management]

48. A - A CPI value of less than 1.0 indicates a cost overrun of the estimates.
    A CPI value greater than 1.0 indicates a cost underrun of the estimates.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 263] [Project Cost Management]

49. B - Examples of variability risks include: productivity may be above or
   below target, the number of errors found during testing may be higher or
   lower than expected, or unseasonal weather conditions may occur during
   the construction phase. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 398] [Project Risk
   Management]

50. A - A WBS structure may be created through various approaches. Some
    of the popular methods include the top-down approach, the use of
    organization-specific guidelines, and the use of WBS templates.
    Parametric approach is an estimation technique and not a valid WBS
    creation technique. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 159] [Project Risk
    Management]

51. D - Project performance measurements are used to assess the magnitude
    of variation. Important aspects of project cost control include
    determining the cause of variance relative to the cost baseline. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 262] [Project Scope Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Quality Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Quality Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project Quality
Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. A software team tracing the root cause of an application failure can use
   this to help determine the cause(s) of the failure:

      A. Ishikawa diagram

      B. Rummler-Brache swim lane diagram

      C. Threading analysis

      D. Deming chart

2. What is a control chart?

      A. A type of RACI chart
      B. A chart that shows the root cause of a problem

      C. A type of fishbone diagram

      D. A chart that shows the stability of a process

3. Which of the following tools can enhance the visibility of traditional
   written project plans and other documents to provide a real-time overview
   of the project status?

      A. Visual management tools

      B. Expert judgement

      C. Product backlog

      D. Change control system

4. The technique of comparing actual or planned project practices to those of
   other projects to generate ideas for improvement and to provide a basis by
   which to measure performance is known as:

      A. Workbench

      B. Benchmarking

      C. Quality control

      D. Dependency

5. There is a serious defect in the finished product of a project that was
   completed a few months ago, resulting in a recall campaign to recall the
   defective products. What would be the best classification for these types of
   costs?
      A. To complete performance index (TCP)

      B. Cost variance

      C. Cost of conformance

      D. Cost of nonconformance

6. Projects with adaptive life cycles use product backlogs to define a
   project's scope. The product backlog is a set of:

      A. Voice of the customer

      B. User stories

      C. Client lullabies

      D. Non-functional requirements

7. What is the process of random selection and inspection of a work product?

      A. Control Charting

      B. Flow Charting

      C. Statistical Sampling

      D. Benchmarking

8. Which of the following processes are usually not performed continuously,
   but rather, performed periodically as needed:

      A. Acquire Resources

      B. Monitor Risks
      C. Monitor Communications

      D. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

9. You have a contract to build a manufacturing plant in Kuala Lumpur.
   However, you are not familiar with the building codes in Kuala Lumpur or
   Malaysia, so you are reviewing all their building codes prior to "turning a
   shovelful of earth." This is an example of:

      A. Project initiation

      B. Quality assurance

      C. Quality planning

      D. Quality control

10. An automotive designer uses a certain technique to determine which
    combination of suspension and tires will produce the most desirable ride
    characteristics at a reasonable cost. To do this, the designer employs a
    statistical framework and systematically changes all the important
    parameters instead of changing the factors one at a time. This method is
    known as:

      A. Design of Experiments

      B. Nominal Group Technique

      C. Statistical Sampling

      D. Force Field Analysis
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Quality Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - Cause-and-effect diagrams, also called Ishikawa diagrams, illustrate
   how various factors might be linked to potential problems or effects.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

2. D - A control chart shows the stability of a process over time. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 304] [Project Quality Management]

3. A - Some project teams use visual management tools, rather than written
   plans and other documents, to capture and oversee critical project
   elements. Making key project elements visible to the entire team provides
   a real-time overview of the project status. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 73]
   [Project Quality Management]

4. B - Benchmarking is the technique of comparing actual or planned project
   practices to those of other projects to generate ideas for improvement and
   to provide a basis by which to measure performance. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 281] [Project Quality Management]

5. D - The correct response is Cost of Non-Conformance. This includes all
   costs incurred due to internal and external failures. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 282] [Project Quality Management]

6. B - In projects with adaptive life cycles, the overall scope of the project
   will be decomposed into a set of requirements and work to be performed,
   referred to as product backlog. Backlogs include product requirements and
   user stories. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131] [Project Quality
   Management]

7. C - Statistical sampling is the process of random selection and inspection
  of a work product. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 303] [Project Quality
  Management]

8. A - The Acquire Resources is performed as project resources are needed.
   This is an example of a process that is performed periodically as needed.
   The other choices are example of processes that are continuously
   performed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 22] [Project Quality Management]

9. C - All types of quality plans, such as building codes, OSHA guidelines,
   ISO 9000, or company quality plans are examples of Enterprise
   Environmental Factors and Organizational Process Assets which are inputs
   to the Plan Quality Management process. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Pages
   280, 281] [Project Quality Management]

10. A - The correct response is Design of Experiments; this method plays a
    key role in optimization of products or processes. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 290] [Project Quality Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 9
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 10
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You are a non-technical project manager. Two highly skilled and
   knowledgeable resources on your project are in conflict over the best
   technical solution to meet a project requirement. However, this is not
   affecting the project schedule. Who is initially responsible for the conflict
   resolution?

      A. The project sponsor is initially responsible for the conflict resolution.

      B. The project manager is initially responsible for the conflict resolution.

      C. Both team members are initially responsible for the conflict resolution.

      D. Either of the team members is responsible for the conflict resolution.
2. Which of the following are the tools and techniques used in both the Plan
   Communications Management and Manage Communications processes?

      A. Expert judgment

      B. Project reporting

      C. Communication requirements analysis

      D. Communication methods

3. A project manager presented earned value analysis data in a tabular format
   in a performance report. Another way the project manager could have
   presented the earned value analysis data is with:

      A. A linear graph

      B. An S-curve

      C. A logarithmic curve

      D. An Epsilon graph

4. David was required to investigate a business problem and describe the
   higher-level needs of the business as a whole. David's final reports
   describes in detail the features, functions and characteristics of the product
   that will meet the business and stakeholder requirements. What is wrong
   with David's report?

      A. David was asked to analyze the solution requirements, but he focused on
         the business requirements.

      B. David was asked to analyze the business requirements, but he focused on
         the solution requirements.
      C. David was asked to analyze the functional requirements, but he focused
         on the non-functional requirements.

      D. David was asked to analyze the non-functional requirements, but he
         focused on the functional requirements.

5. The project management processes communicate with each other through
   their inputs and outputs. Which of the following outputs of the Direct and
   Manage Project Work process is a prime input of the Monitor Stakeholder
   Engagement process?

      A. Change requests

      B. Work performance information

      C. Work performance data

      D. Expert judgment

6. Which of the following is the correct sequence of the PMBOK processes
   that collects work performance data, converts it to work performance
   information, formats it into work performance reports, and distributes
   these reports?

      A. Direct & Manage Project Work -> Monitor & Control Project Work ->
         Monitor Communications -> Manage Communications

      B. Monitor Communications -> Direct & Manage Project Work -> Monitor
         & Control Project Work -> Manage Communications

      C. Direct & Manage Project Work -> Monitor Communications -> Monitor
         & Control Project Work -> Manage Communications

      D. Direct & Manage Project Work -> Monitor & Control Project Work ->
         Manage Communications -> Monitor Communications
7. As the project manager of a large project, you have just completed the
   Estimate Costs process. As you begin the Determine Budget process,
   which of the following would you require as inputs to the process from the
   Estimate Costs process?

      A. Activity cost estimates, basis of estimates

      B. Activity cost estimates, activity resource estimates

      C. Resource breakdown structure, agreements

      D. Activity cost estimates, staff management plan

8. The Direct and Manage Project Work process has three tools and
   techniques. Two of them are Expert Judgment and Meetings. What is the
   third one?

      A. Scheduling System

      B. Configuration Management System

      C. Project Management Information System

      D. Change Control System

9. A project manager is trying to plan for a contingency reserve as part of the
   cost estimates for the project. Which of these would be an incorrect way to
   plan for contingency reserves?

      A. Start the project with a zero value for contingency reserve.

      B. Plan for contingency reserve as a fixed number.

      C. Plan for contingency reserve as a percentage of the estimated cost.
      D. Use quantitative analysis methods to arrive at the contingency reserve.

10. The stakeholder engagement plan is a subsidiary plan of the project
    management plan. It includes the strategies required to effectively
    engage project stakeholders. An ineffective stakeholder engagement
    strategy can lead to project failure. The stakeholder engagement plan:

      A. Must be formal and highly detailed

      B. Must be formal but broadly framed

      C. Can be formal or informal but must be highly detailed

      D. Can be formal or informal, highly detailed or broadly framed

11. A collection of formally documented procedures that define how project
    deliverables and documentation are controlled, changed, and approved
    is:

      A. An authorization system

      B. Project documentation

      C. A change control board

      D. A change control system

12. Ideally the relationship between a project manager and a business analyst
    should be:

      A. Business analyst should directly report to the project manager

      B. A collaborative partnership

      C. Project manager should directly report to the business analyst
      D. Business analyst must audit the project manager

13. The costs on a project are typically classified as direct and indirect costs.
    The cost of electric utilities for the office is:

      A. An indirect cost

      B. Appraisal cost

      C. A specific cost

      D. A direct cost

14. Which of the following is not an activity related to the Direct and
    Manage Project Work process?

      A. Inspecting the project deliverables for completeness

      B. Implementing approved changes

      C. Creating project deliverables to meet the planned project work

      D. Performing activities to accomplish project objectives

15. The stakeholder engagement plan is developed early during project
    planning phase. However, as the project moves into its execution phase,
    project stakeholders' needs, interests and/or influence might change. If a
    significant change happens, what should the project manager do?

      A. Refer the issue to the project sponsor

      B. Hold all project communications until the issue has a resolution

      C. Seek expert judgment from the project sponsor
      D. Revisit the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process

16. Which of the following is an output from the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process?

      A. Budgeted costs

      B. Project charter

      C. Work performance data

      D. Execution plan

17. Long hours to meet a looming deadline and immense pressure for
    success from management are causing a decline in team morale. There
    are occasional conflicts between team members over priorities and
    resources. How should these non-disruptive conflicts be handled?

      A. Use of disciplinary actions

      B. Using a private, direct, and collaborative approach first

      C. Escalation to senior management

      D. Arbitration

18. One of the senior team members, who is the best performer in your
    project, plays favorites. A few of the other team members who work
    closely with this team member have gotten exceptionally good appraisal
    reports in the past, even though they may not have deserved them. As the
    project manager, what do you need to actively do?

      A. Ask all the members of your team who are appraisers of other team
         members to be liberal in their appraisals. This will help compensate for
         the appraisals the senior team member does.
      B. Speak to the senior team member and ask him or her to do appraisals
         fairly, in accordance with the appraisal guidelines.

      C. Ignore the matter since you would otherwise lose a senior team member
         who is key to your project.

      D. Ensure that the senior team member does not get to appraise anybody.

19. Which type of risk analysis ranks risks for future action or analysis by
    evaluating their probability of occurrence and impact?

      A. RBS

      B. Assumptions analysis

      C. Qualitative analysis

      D. Quantitative analysis

20. Your manager is presenting a status report of all projects being run in his
    division. He reports that all projects are showing a positive CV.
    However, you know that your status reports for the last several weeks
    have been reporting a negative CV. What do you do?

      A. Do nothing.

      B. Offer to review all your manager's combined status reports before he
         presents them.

      C. Notify the appropriate management immediately.

      D. Ask your manager if that information was simply a typographical error.

21. A project manager from a buyer organization is invited to lunch by the
    manager of a seller organization. The project manager's organization
    does not permit receipt of gifts from vendors. The project manager
    should:

      A. Go out for lunch and refrain from informing his/her managers about the
         lunch

      B. Avoid going out to lunch with anyone from the seller organization

      C. Insist on paying for his/her own lunch

      D. Permit the manager from the seller organization to pay for his/her lunch
         since it has a very small value

22. The accuracy of estimates of the cost of a project will _________ over
    the life of a project.

      A. Be mitigated

      B. Remain neutral

      C. Decrease

      D. Improve

23. Which of the following can prove to be effective in addressing variability
    risks?

      A. Monte Carlo analysis

      B. Root cause analysis

      C. Mitigating opportunities

      D. Accepting the risk
24. What do the buyer and seller have in common with regard to Control
    Procurements?

      A. Both parties ensure that they meet their contractual obligations and that
         their own legal rights are protected.

      B. Both parties have specific resources that can be idle.

      C. Both parties have a contract change management plan.

      D. Each party has its own project plan and legal team.

25. Project managers need to be aware of Student Syndrome, also known as
    procrastination, which means that people start to apply themselves only
    at the last possible moment before the deadline. This concept is similar to
    Parkinson's Law which states that:

      A. Work only gets completed during the second half of the allocated time.

      B. Work never gets completed on time even if sufficient time has been
         allocated.

      C. Work expands to fill the time available for its completion.

      D. Effort expands to fill the time available for the completion of a work
         package.

26. Melissa is managing a hardware deployment project and is creating a risk
    management plan. Which of the following would not be included in this
    plan?

      A. Templates

      B. Roles and responsibilities
      C. Budgeting

      D. Methodology

27. Linda has been assigned to establish a PMO in her organization. Linda
    believes this project cannot succeed unless all the key project
    stakeholders support the project. She also believes she needs to pay
    special attention to stakeholder management to ensure success of this
    project. First, she needs to develop her stakeholder register. To produce
    the project stakeholder register, which of the following processes must
    Linda start?

      A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement

      B. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

      C. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      D. Identify Stakeholders

28. A fellow project manager is retiring and moving to the mountains; you
    will take over his project. Before he leaves, he tells you the project is on
    schedule but only because he "put the hammer down" on his project
    team and pushed them relentlessly. Pushing the team to perform
    activities to accomplish project objectives is a part of:

      A. Direct and Manage Project Work

      B. Monitor and Control Project Work

      C. Control Quality

      D. Control Scope

29. A technique that enhances brainstorming with a voting process used to
   rank the most useful ideas so they can be taken up for further
   brainstorming is:

      A. Six thinking hats

      B. Nominal group technique

      C. Affinity diagram

      D. Mind mapping

30. Which of the following is a type of leadership style in which leaders are
    hands-off and allow group members to make the decisions:

      A. Transactional

      B. Servant leader

      C. Transformational

      D. Laissez-faire

31. Your project team is having a dispute with a vendor about whether a
    specific task is within the project's scope. The scope statement does not
    provide implementation-level details that could resolve this dispute.
    There is no WBS, however, because the project sponsor insisted that the
    project be started right away without pausing to create standard project
    planning documentation. Who is at fault?

      A. The project manager

      B. The project sponsor

      C. The project stakeholders
      D. The project vendor

32. For a project following a predictive life cycle, which of the following
    statements is most accurate?

      A. Collect Requirements, Define Scope and Create WBS processes are
         performed toward the beginning of the project and updated as necessary,
         using the integrated change control process.

      B. Collect Requirements, Define Scope and Create WBS processes are
         performed toward the beginning of the project and updated as necessary,
         using the executing process.

      C. Collect Requirements, Define Scope and Create WBS processes are
         performed toward the beginning of the project and rarely updated.

      D. Collect Requirements, Define Scope and Create WBS processes are
         performed for each project iteration.

33. Which of the following is one of the most prominent features of a project
    following agile approach for product development?

      A. Produce defect-free deliverables

      B. Zero tolerance for rework

      C. Deliver incremental value to the customer

      D. Delivery of the product in a single sprint

34. You are the project manager for a Fortune 100 IT company, and you are
    currently engaged in an important project. You want to choose the best
    contractor for a specialized task. What should you do to evaluate
    potential contractors?
      A. Create a lessons-learned document

      B. Conduct a performance review

      C. Evaluate proposals

      D. Perform a Make-or-Buy analysis

35. You have recently finished an advanced project management training
    course your project budget paid for. Because the budget for your project
    is not large enough to train any other resources on the project, your
    manager has asked you to make copies of the course materials and
    distribute them to the rest of the staff. What do you do?

      A. Make the copies

      B. Provide a single copy of the materials

      C. Scan the materials and place them on the corporate intranet for easy
         access

      D. Refuse the request

36. A project manager is performing Reserve Analysis as a technique in one
    of the project management processes he is currently working on. Which
    of the following is likely to be that process?

      A. Estimate Reserves

      B. Report Costs

      C. Estimate Costs

      D. Plan Costs
37. You are forming a virtual project team that includes members from four
    different countries around the world. What is NOT an obstacle you must
    overcome to build an effective team?

     A. Different time zones

     B. Communication issues

     C. Cultural differences

     D. Members wanting to work from home

38. Joe is attempting to calculate the probable financial impact of some
    future uncertain scenarios. What method could he use?

     A. Pareto analysis

     B. Earned value analysis

     C. Variance analysis

     D. Expected monetary value analysis

39. A RAM diagram shows the relationship between ______________ and
    _____________ in a tabular format.

     A. Cause and effect

     B. Risks and mitigation plans

     C. Deliverables and costs

     D. Work packages and project team members

40. You took over a project from an individual who was fired. You are
    reading the project documentation and find that five managers signed the
    project charter. What should be your primary concern at this time?

      A. Determining reporting structure

      B. Communicating in a matrix organization

      C. Getting a single sponsor

      D. Identifying who can represent the project for change control

41. As part of Define Activities, you are looking at dependencies used to
    define the sequence among the activities. Which of these is not a valid
    type of dependency?

      A. Linked dependency

      B. External dependency

      C. Discretionary dependency

      D. Mandatory dependency

42. A company is looking for an experienced project manager to manage a
    large construction project. You meet all the requirements for the position
    except for one: The organization is looking for a certified PMP with five
    years of experience, but you have just four years of experience managing
    similar projects. What is the best way to fill out your application?

      A. Show how you meet the requirements but include your actual years of
         experience

      B. Do not fill out that particular section.

      C. Explain why years of experience should not matter.
      D. Since you have plenty of experience, embellish your actual years of
         experience.

43. Which of the following techniques used in adaptive lifecycles helps in
    minimizing scope creep?

      A. User stories

      B. User epics

      C. Iterations

      D. Time-boxing

44. When are risk identification activities performed?

      A. During the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process

      B. During the Plan Risk Management process

      C. During the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process

      D. Ongoing throughout the project

45. Bill is the project manager of a software project that was originally
    estimated to be completed in 12 months. Two months into the project, it
    is discovered that the original estimating assumptions were
    fundamentally flawed. The Estimate at Completion (EAC) in such a
    project will be:

      A. EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC

      B. EAC = BAC/CPI

      C. EAC = AC + [BAC - EV]/CPI
      D. EAC = AC + BAC - EV

46. How would you calculate your EAC if the ETC work is performed at the
    budgeted rate?

      A. EAC = BAC/CPI

      B. EAC= BAC-EV

      C. EAC = AC + BAC - EV

      D. EAC=(BAC-EV)*CPI

47. A project consists of multiple phases. Which of the following is a valid
    statement and applies to each phase of the project?

      A. Each phase is generally concluded with a review of the work
         accomplished but is only closed if the next phase has already started.

      B. Each phase of the project is considered complete when the project sponsor
         signs off on that phase of the project.

      C. Each phase of the project is generally concluded with a review of the
         work accomplished and deliverables to determine acceptance and whether
         the phase should be considered closed.

      D. Each phase is generally concluded with a review of the work
         accomplished. A phase is never considered complete until the end of the
         project when the entire project is complete.

48. Which of the following is not an example of data that may be presented
    in a performance report?

      A. Earned value
      B. Quality metrics

      C. Schedule variance

      D. Project charter

49. Risks may be identified during the entire lifecycle of a project. Identify
    Risks is what type of process?

      A. Qualitative

      B. Effort-driven

      C. Discrete

      D. Iterative

50. The most effective method of resolving conflict or other issues with
    stakeholders is _________.

      A. Ignore

      B. Arbitrate

      C. Collaborate

      D. Avoid
PMP Lite Mock Exam 9
Answer Key and Explanations
1. C - Initially, both team members are responsible for the conflict resolution.
   If the conflict escalates, the project manager should help facilitate a
   satisfactory resolution. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 348] [Project Resource
   Management]

2. D - Communication methods are the common tools and techniques for
   Plan Communications Management and Manage Communications
   processes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 360] [Project Communications
   Management]

3. B - The correct response is S-curve. Both S-curves and tabular formats can
   be used to represent earned value analysis data. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Pages 263, 264] [Project Cost Management]

4. B - David was asked to analyze the business requirements but he focused
   on the solution requirements. Business requirements describe the higher-
   level needs of the organization as a whole, such as the business issues or
   opportunities. While the solution requirements describes in detail the
   features, functions and characteristics of the product that will meet the
   business and stakeholder requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 148]
   [Project Framework]

5. C - Work performance data is provided to the Monitor Stakeholder
   Engagement process as an output from Direct and Manage Project Work
   process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 531] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

6. C - Direct & Manage Project Work -> Monitor Communications ->
   Monitor & Control Project Work -> Manage Communications is the
   correct response. The Direct & Manage Project Work process produces the
  work performance data. This work performance data is converted to work
  performance information by the Monitor Communications process. The
  Monitor & Control Project Work process uses this information and
  produces work performance reports which are then distributed to the
  stakeholders by the Manage Communications process. [PMBOK 6th
  edition, Pages 90, 105, 379, 388] [Project Communications Management]

7. A - Activity cost estimates are quantitative assessments of the probable
   costs required to complete project work. The basis of estimates consists of
   additional details supporting the cost estimate. These include
   documentation of the basis for the estimate, documentation of all
   assumptions, documentation of any known constraints and indication of
   the range of possible estimates. These are produced during the Estimate
   Costs process and form inputs to the Develop Budget process. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 240, 248] [Project Cost Management]

8. C - The three tools and techniques of the Direct and Manage Project Work
   process are: Expert Judgment, Project Management Information System,
   and Meetings. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 90] [Project Integration
   Management]

9. A - It would be incorrect to start the project with a zero value for
   contingency reserves. One of the three other methods listed could be used
   to arrive at a contingency reserve number. As more precise information
   about the project becomes available, the contingency reserve may be used,
   reduced, or eliminated. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 245] [Project Cost
   Management]

10. D - According to the PMBOK guide, the stakeholder engagement plan
    can be formal or informal, highly detailed or broadly framed. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 522] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. D - A collection of formally documented procedures that define how
    project deliverables and documentation are controlled, changed and
    approved is called a change control system. This is a subsystem of the
    configuration management system. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 700]
    [Project Integration Management]

12. B - Ideally the project managers and the business analysts should
    collaborate to achieve the project objectives. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    132] [Project Quality Management]

13. A - The cost of electric utilities for the office would be considered as an
    indirect cost. Indirect costs are also known as overhead, general, or
    administrative costs. They are the costs allocated by the project team as a
    cost of doing business. Examples include salaries of management
    indirectly involved in the project and the cost of electric utilities.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 246] [Project Procurement Management]

14. A - Inspections of deliverables are part of the Validate Scope process.
    The other choices are activities relating to the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 90-92] [Project Integration
    Management]

15. D - The Plan Stakeholder Engagement is an iterative process.
    Stakeholders' needs, interests or influence might change during the
    project lifecycle and whenever a significant change happens, the project
    manager must revisit the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process and
    update the stakeholder engagement plan accordingly. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 518] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. C - The Direct and Manage Project Work process involves the
    management of the direction of the planned project activities. Work
    Performance Data is routinely collected as part of this process. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 90] [Project Integration Management]

17. B - Conflicts should be addressed early. A private, direct and
    collaborative approach should be employed first. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 348] [Project Resource Management]
18. B - As project manager, you need to speak to the senior team member
    and ask for all appraisals to be done in an objective manner. The other
    options are incorrect. Ignoring the matter will not help solve it. The other
    two options are likewise impractical. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

19. C - Qualitative analysis examines risks from the risk register and
    analyzes each risk's probability of occurrence and the effect it would
    have on the project deliverables if it did occur. It ranks risks for future
    action or analysis by evaluating their probability of occurrence and
    impact. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 419] [Project Risk Management]

20. C - You should notify the appropriate management immediately that
    incorrect information has been presented about your project. The PMI
    Code of Ethics requires that managers report errors of others and provide
    accurate and truthful information to project stakeholders at all times.
    [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

21. C - The correct action is for the project manager to insist on paying for
    his or her own lunch. Avoiding going out to lunch with anyone from the
    seller organization is drastic, as such a lunch may be an opportunity to
    build relationships and to understand the seller's position on a project
    better. Going out to lunch and not informing his or her managers about
    the lunch is unethical. Allowing the seller organization to pay for an
    inexpensive lunch may be acceptable in certain organizations. For
    example, some organizations have placed a limit on the value of gifts
    that may be received by their employees, and permit gifts that do not
    exceed a certain value (e.g., $50). In such a case, a lunch may be within
    acceptable limits. However, in the current situation, the buyer
    organization does not permit its employees to receive any gifts from
    vendors. Therefore, this option is not acceptable. [PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

22. D - The accuracy of a project estimate will improve as the project
    progresses through the project lifecycle. In the initiation phase, a project
    could have a rough order of magnitude estimate in the range of -25% to
    +75%. Later, as more information becomes known, estimates could
    narrow to a range of -5% to +10%. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 241]
    [Project Cost Management]

23. A - Variability risks relate to uncertainty existing about some key
    characteristic of a planned event or activity or decision. Examples of
    variability risks include: productivity may be above or below target, the
    number of errors found during testing may be higher or lower than
    expected, or unseasonal weather conditions may occur during the
    construction phase. Variability risks can be addressed using Monte Carlo
    analysis, with the range of variation reflected in probability distributions,
    followed by actions to reduce the spread of possible outcomes. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 399] [Project Scope Management]

24. A - Both the buyer and the seller administer the contract for similar
    purposes. Each party ensures that both it and the other party meet their
    contractual obligations and that their own legal rights are protected.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 494] [Project Procurement Management]

25. C - According to the Parkinson's law, work expands to fill the time
    available for its completion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 197] [Project
    Quality Management]

26. A - Templates is not a valid response. The other choices are typical
    components of a Risk Management Plan. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    405] [Project Risk Management]

27. D - The stakeholder register is developed during the Identify
    Stakeholders process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 507] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

28. A - Performing activities to accomplish project activities is one of the
    goals of the Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 92] [Project Integration Management]

29. B - The nominal group technique enhances brainstorming with a voting
    process. This then allows the most useful ideas to be prioritized and
    taken up for further brainstorming. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 144]
    [Project Scope Management]

30. D - Laissez-faire leadership, also known as delegated leadership, is a
    type of leadership style in which leaders are hands-off and allow group
    members to make the decisions. Researchers have found that this is
    generally the leadership style that leads to the lowest productivity among
    group members. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 65] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

31. A - The project manager is at fault. The project manager must follow all
    project processes required for the success of the project, regardless of
    insistence by others that those processes are unnecessary and time
    consuming. Failing to do so is a violation of PMI's Code of Conduct and
    can lead to increased project cost and schedule slips. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

32. A - In a predictive project, the Collect Requirements, Define Scope and
    Create WBS processes are performed toward the beginning of the project
    and updated as necessary, using the integrated change control process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131] [Project Stakeholder Management]

33. C - In adaptive life cycles, the requirements are documented in user
    stories that are then prioritized and refined. The product features are
    developed using time-boxed periods of work. This approach is often
    used to deliver incremental value to the customer. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 177] [Project Resource Management]

34. C - An input to the Conduct Procurements process, seller proposals are
    prepared by sellers in response to a procurement document package.
    These are then evaluated by the buyer to perform source selection.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 487] [Project Procurement Management]

35. D - Refuse the request. If training the staff is a requirement, it should be
    adequately budgeted and scheduled. Making unauthorized copies of the
    intellectual property of others is unethical and may also be illegal. PMI's
    Code of Conduct and Processional Responsibility demands that project
    managers protect the intellectual property rights of others. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. C - Many cost estimators include reserves (also called contingency
    allowances) as costs in their schedule activity cost estimates.
    Contingency reserves are estimated costs to be used at the discretion of
    the project manager to deal with anticipated but not certain events. These
    events are "known unknowns" and are part of the project scope and cost
    baselines. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 245] [Project Cost Management]

37. D - Virtual teams share a common project goal but share little time in a
    traditional, face-to-face business environment. The virtual team concept
    is made possible with electronic communication; one of the benefits of
    such teams is the ability of members to work from home. The other
    choices are potential issues that can occur as a result of forming a virtual
    team. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 311] [Project Resource Management]

38. D - Expected monetary value (EMV) analysis is a statistical concept that
    calculates the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that
    may or may not happen. The EMV of opportunities will usually be
    positive values while risks will result in negative values. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 435] [Project Risk Management]

39. D - A responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) chart is used to illustrate
    the connections between work packages and project team members.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317] [Project Resource Management]

40. C - A charter should be issued, signed and updated by the project
    sponsor. Your immediate concern should be to find a single sponsor for
    the project. Note, though, that the sponsor can be either a person or a
    group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 77] [Project Integration Management]

41. A - Linked dependency is not a valid type of dependency. The other
    three choices are valid types of dependencies. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Pages 191, 192] [Project Schedule Management]

42. A - For project management professionals, honesty is the best policy.
    You should never mislead others about your experience in the field or
    your knowledge of the project management processes. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

43. D - Time-boxed periods are durations during which the team works
    steadily toward completion of a goal. Time-boxing helps to minimize
    scope creep as it forces the teams to process essential features first, then
    other features when time permits. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 182]
    [Project Framework]

44. D - Identify Risks is the process of determining what risks can affect the
    project. Many different stakeholders usually participate in the Identify
    Risks process. The process of Identify Risks is iterative because
    unknown risks can be discovered throughout the life cycle of the project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 409] [Project Risk Management]

45. A - The correct response is: EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC, where AC
    stands for the Actual Cost and ETC stands for the Estimate to Complete.
    ETC based on a new estimate must be used because the original
    assumptions were fundamentally flawed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    267] [Project Cost Management]

46. C - If the remaining project work is expected to be performed at the
    budgeted rate, then the formula for EAC is AC + (BAC - EV), where
    AC is the Actual Cost, BAC is the Budget at Completion, and EV is the
    Earned Value. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Project Cost
    Management]
47. C - A project phase is usually concluded with a review of the work
    accomplished and the deliverables to determine acceptance, whether
    extra work is still required and to decide whether the phase should be
    considered closed. The other options are not valid. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 121] [Project Framework]

48. D - The project charter is not a valid response. The other choices are data
    that can be presented in a work performance report. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 112] [Project Integration Management]

49. D - Identify Risks is an iterative process, because new risks may become
    known as the project progresses through its lifecycle. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 409] [Project Risk Management]

50. C - Collaboration requires incorporating multiple viewpoints from
    different perspectives. It requires a cooperative attitude and open
    dialogue, and typically leads to consensus and commitment. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 349] [Project Resource Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 10
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 11
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. At a division project status meeting, all attendees receive a dashboard of
   cost metrics for each project, and each project manager is presenting the
   status of his or her project. The metrics for one project show a BAC of
   $1100, an EV of $998, and an EAC of $1099. However, the project
   manager is reporting an ETC of $354. What do you do?

      A. Notify the appropriate management there is a calculation error

      B. Do nothing

      C. Advise the project manager to take the additional funds from her project
         contingency budget

      D. Congratulate the project manager for being under budget
2. Which of the following tools and techniques are not applicable while
   communicating project information?

      A. Communication requirements analysis

      B. Communication technology

      C. Communication methods

      D. Information management systems

3. Which of the following methods of forecasting EAC and ETC is the most
   accurate?

      A. ETC based on CPI

      B. ETC based on BAC

      C. ETC based on CPI and SPI

      D. ETC based on new estimate

4. Your team has built an exotic sports car for a wealthy client. The project
   team verified every deliverable against the quality requirements, and the
   client accepted. Now the project manager is arranging for the car delivery.
   This is part of which process group?

      A. Closing

      B. Monitoring and Controlling

      C. Planning

      D. Execution
5. The project sponsor has asked you to prepare a summary level description
   of each phase of the project, and also include a summary of the validation
   information for the final project deliverables. Which document is the
   sponsor asking you to prepare?

      A. Project charter

      B. Project management plan

      C. Project final report

      D. Project scope statement

6. Skills such as empathy, influence, creativity, and group encouragement are
   valuable assets when managing the project team. These skills are often
   referred to as ______________.

      A. Effort-based management

      B. Feedback-based skills

      C. Ad hoc skills

      D. Soft skills

7. The cost of running a project management office is an example of what
   type of cost?

      A. Reimbursable

      B. Fixed

      C. Direct

      D. Indirect
8. Andrew was working as a senior project manager at a company when he
   resigned from his position. This company recently hired Jack to replace
   Andrew. Jack had worked with Andrew in the past, and he knows him
   personally. Jack is now in charge of a project that Andrew left in the
   middle. If Jack calls Andrew for an opinion on this project, this
   constitutes:

      A. Jack`s incompetence since he is dependent on Andrew`s opinion

      B. An example of obtaining expert judgment from a senior

      C. Unethical behavior by Jack since Andrew has already resigned from the
         company

      D. A conflict of interest situation as Jack knows Andrew

9. Robert has recently joined an automobile manufacturer. He now has a
   project that was already in the execution phase. Recently, one of the key
   stakeholders has raised serious concerns over the project's scope. Robert
   now wants to review the previous project communications to understand
   how the current project scope was agreed to by all key stakeholders in the
   past. Where can he find this information?

      A. Organizational process assets

      B. Project management plan

      C. Stakeholder register

      D. Enterprise environmental factors

10. Which of these is an input to the Collect Requirements process?

      A. Observations

      B. Risk register
      C. Scope statement

      D. Project charter

11. Tim is the project manager of a project that has a timeline of 18 months.
    Tim plans to send daily status reports to all stakeholders. After receiving
    two such reports, Sue, the project sponsor, informs Tim she would like to
    have reports every two weeks only. Tim did an analysis of
    communications requirements and considered various attributes for the
    communications management plan. What aspect has he missed, which
    resulted in a daily status report being sent instead of two-week status
    reports?

      A. He has not considered the frequency of information distribution.

      B. He has not considered the purpose for distribution of information.

      C. He has not considered the project's timeline.

      D. He has not considered the content of the information.

12. A software development project team has determined that the best way to
    mitigate the risk of not having the computational resources to complete
    all bug testing on schedule is to add three more servers to the test bed.
    However, the network may not have enough capacity to handle the extra
    load of those three servers and could fail. This type of risk is a
    _______________ risk.

      A. Secondary

      B. Simulation

      C. Bottleneck

      D. Hidden
13. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors is not applicable
    to the Plan Resource Management process?

      A. Organizational culture and structure

      B. Existing resources, capabilities and competencies

      C. Marketplace conditions

      D. Lessons learned

14. As part of the quality control in your project, you are exploring a
    technique that shows the history and pattern of variation. This is a line
    graph that shows data points plotted in the order in which they occurred.
    You are most likely looking at a:

      A. Control chart

      B. Pareto diagram

      C. Histogram

      D. Cause-and-effect diagram

15. Which of the following actions decreases the risk of the project failing to
    meet its goals and objectives?

      A. Discouraging changes to the initial project scope

      B. Acquiring more than required resources

      C. Active management of stakeholders

      D. Fast-tacking the project schedule to finish the project before deadline
16. You are assisting Benjamin, another project manager, to interview
    candidates for a resource position on his project. While reviewing your
    interview notes together, you notice that he sorts the candidate`s resumes
    into two piles: One pile for further interviews, the other for candidates
    that did not meet the requirements for the position. You also notice that
    he has placed several of the highly qualified candidates in the second
    pile, stating that those interviewees "did not fit the corporate profile."
    Upon further review, you discover that all these candidates are of the
    same ethnic group. What do you do?

      A. Excuse yourself from the interviewing process

      B. Report this to the appropriate management

      C. File a complaint with PMI

      D. Do nothing

17. As a project manager, you are analyzing a process and looking for
    opportunities for improvements by identifying and analyzing non-value-
    added activities. This relates to which of the following tools and
    techniques of the Manage Quality process?

      A. Quality Audits

      B. Affinity diagrams

      C. Interrelationship digraphs

      D. Process Analysis

18. Which of the following processes gives the project management team
    insights into the health of the project?

      A. Develop Project Management Plan
      B. Perform Integrated Change Control

      C. Monitor and Control Project Work

      D. Determine Budget

19. Which of the following interpersonal skills is of prime importance during
    the collection and analysis of stakeholders' needs and expectations?

      A. Trust building

      B. Conflict resolution

      C. Overcoming resistance

      D. Active listening

20. After receiving some news about a delay on one of your project tasks,
    you review the schedule to determine how it will affect the project.
    While there is a substantial delay on this task, it is not a critical path item
    and will not affect delivery of any of your milestones. Another project
    manager advises you to just present the milestone chart during your
    meeting with the project stakeholders and tell them the project is
    progressing as planned. What do you do?

      A. Present the project as a milestone chart and advise that the progress is
         tracking according to plan.

      B. Present the schedule in a milestone chart and disclose full details of the
         delay.

      C. Present the schedule in a network diagram and advise that the project is
         tracking according to plan.

      D. Present the schedule as a bar chart and advise that the project is tracking
         according to plan.
21. The project manager in charge of a new credit card software project has
    asked the product manager to create a checklist to assist with identifying
    risks. A project manager can create a risk checklist from which of the
    following sources?

      A. Agreement templates

      B. Earned value measurements

      C. Project Management Information System

      D. The lowest level of the Risk Breakdown Structure

22. A planning technique used to provide products, services, and results that
    truly reflect customer requirements, by translating those customer
    requirements into the appropriate technical requirements for each phase
    of project product development, is:

      A. Six Sigma

      B. PDCA

      C. Voice of the Customer

      D. ISO

23. Administrative closure involves all the activities in a step-by-step
    manner to satisfy various completion and exit criteria for the project.
    This is part of which Project Management Knowledge Area?

      A. Project Communications Management

      B. Project Scope Management

      C. Project Integration Management
      D. Project Procurement Management

24. You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for
    your company. The project includes producing widgets for your
    customer. The collected data helps identify the greatest causes of defects
    in the overall process. Which technique should you use to determine the
    correlation between two variables being analyzed?

      A. Statistical sampling

      B. Pareto chart

      C. Scatter diagram

      D. Control chart

25. During the planning phase of your project, your team decided to procure
    a certain brand of hardware because it had the lowest price and came
    with free shipping and installation. This approach saved $6,000 over the
    other brands. Since that purchase, however, you discovered the annual
    maintenance costs for this hardware are $2,500 per year, and $12,500
    over the life of the hardware. These costs were not budgeted in the
    project, nor were they included in the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)
    analysis that was part of the project business case. What should you do?

      A. Request a new budget

      B. Notify the stakeholders immediately

      C. Revise the business case

      D. Do nothing. This will not affect the project budget

26. In a sender-receiver model for communication, information is sent and
    received between two parties, defined as the sender and the receiver. In
   such a model, anything that interferes with the transmission and
   understanding of the message is called:

     A. Noise

     B. Constraint

     C. Medium

     D. Decode

27. Which of the following is not an appropriate method for dealing with a
    negative risk?

     A. Avoid

     B. Exploit

     C. Transfer

     D. Mitigate

28. Statistical sampling involves choosing part of a population for
    inspection. Appropriate sampling can often ___________the cost of
    quality control.

     A. Neutralize

     B. Reduce

     C. Increase

     D. Mitigate

29. A risk with a positive outcome is an ___________.
      A. Unlikely risk

      B. Objective risk

      C. Opportunity

      D. Obsolete risk

30. Which of the following is not a basic input required to develop an
    effective project stakeholder engagement plan?

      A. Stakeholder register

      B. Enterprise environmental factors

      C. Organizational process assets

      D. Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix

31. Anne is a project manager. She has evaluated certain responses from
    prospective sellers and wants to select a contract model that will transfer
    risk to the seller. Which of the following should she select in order to
    achieve this?

      A. Time and Material contract

      B. Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract

      C. Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee contract

      D. Fixed-price contract

32. Predicting future performance based on historical events is called
    ___________.

      A. Historical analysis
     B. Trend analysis

     C. Parametric analysis

     D. Pareto analysis

33. Which of the following estimating techniques will cost less but is also
    typically less accurate?

     A. Parametric Estimating

     B. Analogous Estimating

     C. Resource Cost-based Estimating

     D. Bottom-up Estimating

34. A project manager is using a Risk Diagramming technique that is a
    graphical representation of situations showing causal influences, time
    ordering of events, and other relationships among variables and
    outcomes. This would be:

     A. A system flow chart

     B. An Influence Diagram

     C. A Pareto chart

     D. Histogram

35. You are authorized to approve expenditures above $15,000. For the last
    several weeks, you have been negotiating the terms and pricing of a
    contract with a vendor, and you want to keep costs as low as possible.
    This has been an exceedingly difficult negotiation process. A colleague
    suggests you tell the vendor you can only approve expenses below
   $10,000 as a way to keep the price low. What do you do?

      A. Ask for binding arbitration

      B. Tell the vendor you are only authorized to approve expenses under
         $10,000

      C. Do not follow the colleague`s advice

      D. Put a deadline on the negotiation completion

36. A project was estimated to cost $100,000 with a timeline of five months.
    Due to some unusual causes, the schedule was delayed. At the end of the
    third month, the project manager reviews the project and finds that the
    project is 40 percent complete and Actual Costs are $60,000. Assuming
    that the cost variations observed to date would not continue going
    forward, the Estimate to Complete (ETC) for the project are:

      A. 40000

      B. 120000

      C. 90000

      D. 60000

37. You are a project manager for Enormous Co. and are currently engaged
    in a highly visible project. The company is about to implement an
    independent review to ensure that the project work is continuing to
    comply with the project`s policies, processes, and procedures. During
    which process would this review occur?

      A. Close Project or Phase

      B. Control Quality
      C. Monitor Risks

      D. Manage Quality

38. A project employs a virtual team with team members located in different
    offices in the same city as well as across different cities. The project
    manager wishes to build trust and good working relationships. One of the
    best ways to do this is:

      A. To use team-building strategies

      B. Write a memo to the team detailing the need for good working
         relationships

      C. Plan for job-rotation on a weekly basis

      D. To encourage the use of telephonic conversations as much as possible

39. Which process group corresponds to the "act" component of the plan-do-
    check-act cycle?

      A. Monitoring & Controlling

      B. Executing

      C. Planning

      D. Initiating

40. Which option is not representative of the inputs, tools and techniques,
    and outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process?

      A. PMIS, Project Management Plan, and Deliverables

      B. Deliverables, Approved Change Requests, and Project Management
         Information System
      C. Approved Change Requests, Validated Changes, and PMIS

      D. Approved Change Requests, Project Management Plan, and Work
         Performance Data

41. As part of the Risk Response planning for your project, you are trying to
    come up with a strategy to deal with negative risks or threats. In order to
    eliminate the impact of a particular risk, you relax the objective that is in
    jeopardy by extending the project schedule. This is an example of:

      A. Transference

      B. Mitigation

      C. Avoidance

      D. Postponement

42. You are the Project Manager for the production of an exotic car. You
    have completed the Define Scope process for your project. Which of the
    following may be generated through this process?

      A. Project scope statement, project charter

      B. Project scope statement, updates to requirements traceability matrix

      C. WBS, updates to requirements traceability matrix

      D. Project scope statement, WBS

43. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is a quick way to prioritize how a
    project team will respond to risks. It is based on risk
    _________________ and _________________.

      A. Probability, exposure
     B. Probability, impact

     C. Probability, focus

     D. Exposure, cost

44. A project manager was assigned to a project when the project charter
    was in development. Which of the following is an input that the project
    manager will use to develop the project charter?

     A. Make-or-Buy analysis

     B. Organizational Process Assets

     C. Project Acceptance Criteria

     D. Project Scope Statement

45. The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented
    hierarchical decomposition of the work the project team will execute to
    accomplish the project objectives and create required deliverables. The
    Create WBS process falls under which knowledge area?

     A. Project Schedule Management

     B. Project Integration Management

     C. Project Scope Management

     D. Project Cost Management

46. Gene is the project manager of a large highway expansion project. He
    has a number of stakeholders with competing priorities and agendas, and
    he often has to resolve conflicts among stakeholders. Which knowledge
    area manages communications with the project stakeholders?
      A. Project Quality Management

      B. Project Stakeholder Management

      C. Project Communications Management

      D. Project Resource Management

47. Which of the following statements regarding team-building is correct?

      A. Team-building is essential during the middle of a project, and from there
         it is an ongoing process.

      B. Team-building is essential during the end of a project, and it is a one-time
         process.

      C. Team-building is essential during the end of a project, but it is an ongoing
         process.

      D. Team-building is essential during the front end of a project, but it is an
         ongoing process.

48. Which of the following is NOT considered a method in the Manage
    Communications process?

      A. Change control systems

      B. Communication technology

      C. Project reporting

      D. Project Management Information System

49. Robert's project is a high-priority project for his organization. Project
    stakeholder engagement is crucial for the project's success. Robert needs
   to discuss the project stakeholder engagement levels with his project
   team on a regular basis. Which of the following is the best platform
   where Robert can review this with his team?

     A. Phase gates

     B. Project status review meetings

     C. Kill points

     D. Information management system

50. Reporting performance about scope to stakeholders is a part of which
    knowledge area?

     A. Project Communications Management

     B. Project Scope Management

     C. Project Quality Management

     D. Project Integration Management
PMP Lite Mock Exam 10
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - If ETC is being reported, then EAC should be AC + ETC. You must
   notify the appropriate management that there is a calculation error. Project
   managers are required by the PMI Code to accept ownership of their own
   errors and to report to the appropriate management any errors they have
   observed being made by others. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Prof.
   Responsibility]

2. A - The question is asking for a tool and technique that is not part of the
   Manage Communications process. Communication requirements analysis
   is a tool and technique of the Plan Communications Management process
   and not the Manage Communications process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   379] [Project Communications Management]

3. D - The bottom-up ETC gives the most accurate results. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 264] [Project Cost Management]

4. A - It must be noted that the car has been built, and the Control Quality
   and Validate Scope processes have been performed for every deliverable.
   The question is asking about PRODUCT delivery, which occurs during the
   closing process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 123] [Project Integration
   Management]

5. C - Most probably the project sponsor is asking you to prepare the
   project's final report as all of the mentioned sections are part of a final
   report. The rest of the choices are project documents that do not have these
   sections, especially the validation information for the final project
   deliverables. This also implies that the project is in the closing phase.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 127] [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. D - Interpersonal skills, sometimes known as "soft skills," are particularly
  important to team development. By understanding the sentiments of
  project team members, anticipating their actions, acknowledging their
  concerns, and following up on their issues, the project management team
  can significantly reduce problems and increase cooperation. [PMBOK 6th
  edition, Page 357] [Project Resource Management]

7. D - Indirect costs are those costs that cannot be directly traced to a specific
   project. These costs are accumulated and allocated equitably over multiple
   projects by an approved and documented accounting procedure. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 246] [Project Cost Management]

8. B - Asking a senior for an opinion is an example of obtaining expert
   judgment. Andrew knows the project better than Jack since he had
   managed it in the past. If Jack seeks an expert opinion from Andrew, this
   is neither unethical nor a conflict of interest situation; neither does it
   suggest that Jack is an incompetent project manager. Rather, Jack is
   employing expert judgment, a good project management practice.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 79]

9. A - Neither the project management plan nor the stakeholder register
   documents the stakeholder communication records. These records are
   incorporated in the project records folder, which is an organizational
   process asset during the Manage Communications process. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 388]

10. D - The project charter is an input to the Collect Requirements process.
    The other choices are not valid. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 138]

11. A - Tim has most likely not considered the frequency of distribution of
    the information. He should have analyzed the stakeholder requirements
    and planned for distribution of the status reports accordingly. It is
    unlikely that on an 18-month project, the project sponsor would want to
    receive daily status reports. (Perhaps only near the end of the project,
    with just a few days or weeks to go, the project sponsor might request
    daily reports to monitor the project closely or to deal with certain issues.)
   Hence, Tim should have considered stakeholder requirements and
   planned the frequency of the status reports accordingly. The remaining
   choices are incorrect. The choice that Tim has not considered the
   timeline of the project may be one of the factors that influence the
   frequency of information distribution, but is not a complete response by
   itself. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 377] [Project Communications
   Management]

12. A - A secondary risk arises as a direct result of implementing a risk
    response. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 439] [Project Risk Management]

13. D - Lessons learned from historical projects are valuable inputs to the
    Plan Resource Management process. However, these are classified as
    organizational process assets. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 315] [Project
    Resource Management]

14. A - This is most likely to be a control chart. A control chart shows the
    trends in a process over a period of time. The remaining choices are not
    line graphs. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 304] [Project Quality
    Management]

15. C - Changes are inevitable. Acquiring more than required resources with
    put a strain on the budget and hence might compromise the project's
    financial goals. Fast-tracking always induces risk to the project.
    However, active management of stakeholders almost guarantees a
    decrease in project risk. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 504-506] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

16. B - Report this to the appropriate management immediately.
    Discrimination based on nationality is prohibited by the PMI Code of
    Ethics and may also be illegal, depending on local laws. PMI requires
    project managers to report discriminatory behavior to the appropriate
    management; not doing so is a violation of the Code of Ethics. [PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]
17. D - Process analysis helps identify opportunities for improvements by
    identifying and analyzing non-value-added activities. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 292]

18. C - It must be a process from the Monitoring and Controlling process
    group. The correct response is Monitor and Control Project Work. This is
    the process for collecting, measuring, and disseminating performance
    information and for assessing measurements and trends to effect process
    improvements. Monitoring includes status reporting, progress
    measurement, and forecasting. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 105] [Project
    Integration Management]

19. D - Active listening is a communication technique that requires the
    listeners to feedback what they hear to the speaker, by way of re-stating
    or paraphrasing what they have heard in their own words, to confirm
    what they have heard and moreover, to confirm the understanding of
    both parties. Active listening is of prime importance during the collection
    and analysis of stakeholders' needs and expectations. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 386] [Project Stakeholder Management]

20. B - Present the schedule in a milestone chart and disclose the details of
    the delay. Concealing delays is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct. Project managers must provide accurate and
    timely information. Providing half-truths about a project's schedule is
    unacceptable. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

21. D - The lowest level of the RBS can be used as a risk checklist.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 416] [Project Risk Management]

22. C - The correct response is Voice of the Customer. This is one of the
    non-proprietary approaches to quality management. In this planning
    technique, the customer's requirements are exactly met in the finished
    product during each phase of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages
    145, 726] [Project Quality Management]
23. C - The Administrative Closure activities are part of the Close Project or
    Phase process under the Project Integration Management knowledge
    area. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 123]

24. C - Scatter diagrams are used to determine if a correlation exists between
    two variables. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality
    Management]

25. B - Notify the project stakeholders of this situation immediately. Once
    they have been notified of the lifecycle costing, a path forward can be
    developed. Project managers are responsible for providing accurate and
    timely information. Even though this cost will not impact the project
    budget directly, it is still a critical component of the ongoing operation of
    the project's product. Failing to communicate this information is a
    violation of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. [PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. A - In a sender-receiver model, the key components include: Encoding of
    thoughts or ideas, a message as the output of encoding, a medium to
    convey the message, and decoding of the message back into meaningful
    thoughts or ideas. Anything that interferes with the transmission and
    understanding of the message is termed noise (such as distance, for
    example). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 372] [Project Communications
    Management]

27. B - Exploitative strategies are selected for risks with positive impacts
    where the organization wishes to ensure the opportunity is realized. This
    strategy seeks to eliminate the uncertainty associated with a particular
    upside risk by making the opportunity happen. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Pages 443, 444] [Project Risk Management]

28. B - Appropriate sampling can often reduce the cost of quality control as
    it selects a part of the population for inspection. In some application
    areas, it may be necessary for the project management team to be
    familiar with a variety of sampling techniques. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 303] [Project Quality Management]

29. C - Risks can pose a threat or an opportunity to a project. Positive risks
    are called opportunities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 444] [Project Risk
    Management]

30. D - The stakeholder engagement plan is developed during the Plan
    Stakeholder Engagement process. The stakeholder register, enterprise
    environmental factors and the organizational process assets are all basic
    inputs to this process. The stakeholder engagement assessment matrix is
    developed during this process and is not an input to this process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 516] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. D - A fixed-price contract enables the buyer to transfer risk to the seller
    by setting a fixed total price for a defined service, or result to be
    provided. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 471]

32. B - Trend analysis is an analytical technique that uses mathematical
    models to forecast future outcomes based on historical results. It is a
    method of determining the variance from a baseline of a parameter. It
    uses prior progress reporting periods' data to project how much that
    parameter's variance from baseline might be at some future point in the
    project if no changes are made in executing the project. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 111] [Project Schedule Management]

33. B - Analogous cost estimating is typically less costly but also less
    accurate than other cost estimating techniques. It uses the actual cost of
    previous, similar projects as the basis for estimating the cost of the
    current project. It is more reliable when the previous projects are similar
    in fact and not just in appearance, and the persons estimating have the
    needed expertise. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200] [Project Cost
    Management]

34. B - A Risk Diagramming technique that is a graphical representation of
    situations showing causal influences, time-ordering of events and other
    relationships among variables and outcomes is known as an Influence
    Diagram. The Cause-and-Effect diagram also identifies the causes of risk
    but does not have the time-ordering of events. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 436] [Project Risk Management]

35. C - Do not follow your colleague's advice. Providing false or misleading
    information for any reason is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics.
    [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. D - The budget at completion (BAC) = $100,000 (given). The Actual
    Cost (AC) = $60,000 (given). The Earned value (EV) =
    (40/100)*100,000 since 40% of the project is complete. Hence, Earned
    Value (EV) = $40,000. This is an instance of an atypical cause of
    variance in the project. The formula for estimate to complete (ETC) is:
    ETC = BAC - EV = 100,000 - 40,000 = 60,000. [PMBOK 6th Edition,
    Page 267]

37. D - Quality audits are performed during the Manage Quality process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 294] [Project Quality Management]

38. A - Use of team-building activities helps in building trust and
    establishing good working relationships. As for the other choices:
    Encouraging the use of telephone calls can also help in building
    relationships, especially in distributed teams. However, this cannot be an
    alternative to email communication. Job-rotation within the team may
    also help team morale; however, doing it on a weekly basis may be
    counterproductive and inefficient. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 341]
    [Project Resource Management]

39. B - The "act" component of the plan-do-check-act cycle relates to the
    Executing process group. The plan-do-check-act cycle was created by
    Shewhart and modified by Deming to illustrate how different results
    from one cycle become an input to another cycle. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 275] [Project Quality Management]
40. C - Validated Changes are not inputs, tools and techniques, or outputs of
    the Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    90] [Project Integration Management]

41. C - This is an example of avoidance. It involves changing the project
    management plan to "eliminate" the threat posed by an adverse risk,
    isolating the project objectives from the risk's impacts, or relaxing the
    objective that is in jeopardy, such as by extending the schedule or
    reducing scope. Transference involves shifting the negative impact of a
    threat along with the ownership of the response. Mitigation implies a
    reduction in the probability and impact of an adverse risk. Postponement
    is not a valid strategy since it does not address the risk. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

42. B - The Define Scope process will result in development of the Project
    Scope statement and updates to project documents such as stakeholder
    register, requirements documentation and the requirements traceability
    matrix. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 150] [Project Scope Management]

43. B - Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is usually a rapid and cost-
    effective means of establishing priorities for the Plan Risk Responses
    process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 419] [Project Risk Management]

44. B - When developing the project charter, the project manager can draw
    on the assets that are part of the organizational process assets. There may
    be formal or informal policies, procedures, plans, and guidelines whose
    effects must be considered. Organizational process assets also represent
    the organization's learning from previous projects such as completed
    schedules, risk data, and earned value data. These are invaluable in
    developing the project charter. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 75] [Project
    Integration Management]

45. C - The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented
    hierarchical decomposition of the work to be executed by the project
    team to accomplish the project objectives and create required
    deliverables. The Create WBS process falls under the Project Scope
    Management knowledge area. The WBS subdivides the project into
    smaller, more manageable pieces of work, with each descending level of
    the WBS representing an increasingly detailed definition of the project
    work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25] [Project Scope Management]

46. C - Manage Communications is the process of producing and distributing
    project information to the project stakeholders. This process is a part of
    the Project Communications Management knowledge area. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 25] [Project Communications Management]

47. D - Team building is essential during the front end of a project, but it is
    an ongoing process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 341]

48. A - The change control system is not a tool and technique of the Manage
    Communications process. The other choices are valid tools and
    techniques of this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 379] [Project
    Communications Management]

49. B - The phase gates and the kill points are the project reviews that are
    done at the closure of each phase of the project. Managing stakeholder
    engagement levels should be a continuous process that does not wait for
    a project phase to complete. Information management systems can be
    used for the exchange of project information, but project status review
    meetings are interactive communication sessions among the project team
    members. A project status review meeting provides the best platform to
    discuss the current engagement levels of the project stakeholders.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 535]

50. A - Project Reporting is a tool and technique of the Manage
    Communications Process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 379] [Project
    Communications Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Human Resource Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Human Resource Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project Human
Resource Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. Earned Schedule (ES) is an extension to the theory and practice of EVM.
   Earned schedule theory replaces the schedule variance measures used in
   traditional EVM with ES and actual time (AT). Using the alternate
   equation for calculating schedule variance:

      A. AT - ES

      B. EV - PV

      C. PV - EV

      D. ES - AT

2. You are the project manager of a project whose team has interacted with a
  number of stakeholders. You believe that in order to have an objective
  project performance appraisal, you would like to obtain feedback for the
  project team members from all the people they have worked with,
  including superiors, peers and subordinates. Project performance
  appraisals are performed during which of the following processes?

      A. Close Project or Phase

      B. Acquire Resources

      C. Manage Team

      D. Develop Team

3. Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Plan Resource
   Management process?

      A. Organizational theory

      B. Meetings

      C. Hierarchical charts

      D. Rewards and recognition

4. Which of these is not an Enterprise environmental factor that can influence
   the Plan Resource Management process?

      A. Organizational culture

      B. Lessons learned on organizational structures

      C. Marketplace conditions

      D. Facilities and resources
5. A project involved team members situated in Arizona, Nebraska, New
   York, and Ireland. Which of the following activities becomes crucial in
   such a team environment?

      A. Team-building

      B. Status reporting

      C. Conflict resolution

      D. Communication planning

6. You are managing a project. An audit team wants to know where they can
   find information on training plans for the project team members and
   certification requirements. This are in the:

      A. Resource Breakdown Structure

      B. Staff Release Plan

      C. Resource Management Plan

      D. Communications Management Plan

7. You are managing a project and find you need to apply resource leveling.
   Which of the following tools can help you identify resources that are over-
   allocated?

      A. Resource Assignment Matrix

      B. Network diagram

      C. Resource Histogram

      D. Resource Breakdown Structure
8. Clear criteria for rewards and a planned system for their use promotes and
   reinforces desired behaviors in the project. Creating a recognition plan
   with established times for rewards ensures that recognition takes place and
   is not forgotten. This is usually part of the:

      A. Project Dashboard

      B. Resource Management Plan

      C. Company HR plan

      D. Communications Management Plan

9. Ground rules are established to set clear expectations regarding acceptable
   behavior by the project team members. Whose responsibility is it to
   enforce ground rules?

      A. The project manager

      B. All project team members share the responsibility for enforcing the rules
         once they are established in the Team Charter

      C. The HR team

      D. The project manager and senior team members

10. Conflict management is a tool and technique of which of the following
    processes?

      A. Control Procurements

      B. Identify Stakeholders

      C. Close Project or Phase
D. Manage Team
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Human Resource Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - The alternate equation for calculating schedule variance is SV = ES -
   AT. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 233] [Project Resource Management]

2. C - Project performance appraisals are performed during the Manage
   Team process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 342] [Project Resource
   Management]

3. D - Rewards and Recognition is a tool and technique used in the Develop
   Team process, not in the Plan Resource Management process. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 312] [Project Resource Management]

4. B - Lessons learned are important inputs to the Plan Resource
   Management process. However, these are organizational process assets
   and not enterprise environmental factors. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 315]
   [Project Resource Management]

5. D - Communication planning is critical when virtual teams are involved.
   Lack of face-to-face interaction can cause misunderstandings and conflict.
   These risks need to be addressed by proper communication planning.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 333] [Project Resource Management]

6. C - The correct response is the Resource Management Plan. This
   documents information such as training plans, certification requirements
   and compliance issues. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 318, 319] [Project
   Resource Management]

7. C - The Resource Histogram is a tool for charting human resources. It
   illustrates the number of hours that a person, department or entire project
   team will be needed each week or month over the course of the project.
  The chart can include a horizontal line that represents the maximum
  number of hours from a particular resource. This can be used for a
  resource leveling strategy. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 211, 719] [Project
  Resource Management]

8. B - The plan for rewards and recognition is part of the Resource
   Management plan. The recognition and rewards are developed as part of
   the Plan Resource Management process. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Pages 318,
   319] [Project Resource Management]

9. B - All project team members share responsibility for enforcing the rules
   once they are established in the Team Charter. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   319, 320] [Project Resource Management]

10. D - Conflict Management is a tool and technique of the Manage Team
    process. Claims Administration, a tool and technique of the Control
    Procurements process, relates somewhat to conflict management.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 348] [Project Resource Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 11
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 11
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. Your project is nearing completion, but a previously unidentified risk has
   arisen, and it could significantly affect one of the project deliverables.
   What do you do?

      A. Transfer the risk

      B. Develop a risk mitigation plan

      C. Include the issue in the project risk log

      D. Notify the project stakeholders immediately

2. James is currently managing a software upgrade project. He has recently
   identified and analyzed his key project stakeholders. He is now searching
  his organizational process assets for a template with which he can update
  the results of this analysis along with the planned strategies required to
  engage the stakeholders effectively. Which of the following should he
  search for?

      A. Risk management plan

      B. Change request form

      C. Stakeholder register

      D. Stakeholder engagement plan

3. As a project manager based at the customer location for a performing
   organization, you build rapport with a customer manager. As the project
   progresses, the manager asks you to make certain changes to the project
   scope and wants this handled on an informal basis. You should:

      A. Contact your manager in your organization and ask for this work to be
         done without payment, as a goodwill gesture.

      B. Comply with the manager's request. It is important to continue to maintain
         a good relationship with the manager.

      C. Refuse to take up any changes since the manager has asked you to do it
         informally.

      D. Explain to the manager that you would need to formally document
         as part of project scope change and put it through the change management
         process.

4. A large network hardware upgrade project was scheduled to take place
   over a weekend. During the course of the implementation, several
   previously unidentified dependencies on additional materials were
   discovered. The project manager gave approval for the tech staff doing the
  implementation to procure with corporate credit cards several hundred
  dollars' worth of additional equipment required to complete the
  implementation. However, these additional expenses caused the project to
  exceed its budget. How should the project manager handle this?

      A. Notify the project stakeholders immediately of the additional expenses
         incurred and follow project and company procedures for budget
         variances.

      B. Ask the IT Director to cover those expenses from his budget.

      C. Advise the staff to submit expense reports for the purchases. Because the
         cost is relatively small, it can be categorized as miscellaneous purchases
         that are not associated with the project.

      D. Do nothing; that's what reserves are for.

5. Which of the following PMBOK processes produces a project stakeholder
   engagement plan?

      A. Identify Stakeholders

      B. Plan Stakeholder Engagement

      C. Plan Communications Management

      D. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

6. The project management team performed activities such as measuring,
   examining, and verifying to determine whether work and deliverables met
   requirements and product acceptance criteria. Which of the following
   choices refers to a different set of activities than the ones just mentioned?

      A. Walkthroughs
     B. Prevention

     C. Inspection

     D. Reviews

7. ___________________ is performed on risks that have been prioritized by
   the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process as potentially and
   substantially impacting the project's competing demands.

     A. Perform Risk Cost Analysis

     B. Perform Risk Exposure Analysis

     C. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

     D. Perform Risk Outcome Analysis

8. Which of the following tools will help trace the requirements to product
   design?

     A. Requirements traceability matrix

     B. Design traceability matrix

     C. Project scope statement

     D. Product traceability matrix

9. As the Project Manager for Midway Carnival Rides, you are beginning the
   Define Scope process. Which of the following is a key input to this
   process?

     A. Project Scope Statement
     B. Expert Judgment

     C. Project Charter

     D. WBS

10. Which of the following processes belong to the planning process group?

     A. Identify Stakeholders

     B. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

     C. Plan Stakeholder Engagement

     D. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

11. A key output of Plan Resource Management is a list of project roles and
    responsibilities. What should this document include?

     A. Work packages, Effort, Authority, Duties

     B. Role, Responsibility, Authority, Risk

     C. Role, Title, Resource Cost, Responsibility

     D. Role, Authority, Responsibility, Competence

12. What is the best way to show, at a glance, all the work packages or
    project activities assigned to a specific organizational department?

     A. Organizational Breakdown Structure

     B. RACI chart

     C. Work Breakdown Structure
      D. Roles and Responsibilities Chart

13. RACI stands for______________, ________________, ___________,
    _______________.

      A. Review, Analyze, Calculate, Implement

      B. Responsible, Actual, Complete, Informative

      C. Roles, Activities, Costs, Instructions

      D. Responsible, Accountable, Consult, Inform

14. Rob has been assigned to manage a complex project. Rob has recently
    acquired his PMP certification and is excited about applying his newly
    acquired knowledge to his project. During the project initiation, he
    produced the stakeholder register and impressed his project sponsor. Rob
    is now about to develop the stakeholder engagement plan for his project.
    This has made the project sponsor a bit uncomfortable because he thinks
    Rob is spending too much time doing paperwork instead of actually
    executing the project work. The project sponsor has asked Rob to explain
    the difference between the stakeholder register and the stakeholder
    engagement plan. How should Rob respond?

      A. The stakeholder register only contains basic stakeholder assessment
         information, while the stakeholder engagement plan includes detailed
         stakeholder engagement strategy that ensures project success.

      B. The stakeholder engagement plan is a component of the project
         management plan, while the stakeholder register is not.

      C. The stakeholder register is produced during the project initiation, while
         the stakeholder engagement plan is produced during the project planning
         phase.
      D. Developing the stakeholder engagement plan is a good project
         management practice.

15. Which of the following stakeholder analysis techniques is recommended
    when you need to analyze project stakeholders based on their power,
    urgency, and legitimacy?

      A. Salience model

      B. Power/interest grid

      C. Power/influence grid

      D. Influence/impact grid

16. You are a project manager working on a project to create high-efficiency
    electric motors for a company introducing a new electric golf cart. Your
    company's president is keenly interested in the project and requests a
    chart that shows the number of defects by type ordered by their
    frequency of occurrence. Which type of chart would BEST meet this
    request?

      A. Histogram

      B. Control chart

      C. Statistical sampling

      D. Scatter diagram

17. What term defines the work needed to deliver a product, service, or
    result?

      A. Product scope
      B. Scope creep

      C. Scope verification

      D. Project scope

18. During a weekly status meeting, a team member suggests adding a
    component to the project. As the project manager, you maintain that all
    focus should stay on the current scope and not on any enhancements.
    Focusing on the current scope is an example of:

      A. Gold-plating

      B. Scope verification

      C. Scope management

      D. Change control

19. What type of method uses a weighting ranking system for quantifying
    qualitative data to minimize the effect of personal bias during the process
    of selecting a seller?

      A. Independent estimates

      B. Source Selection Criteria

      C. Vendor audits

      D. Sourcing workshops

20. You have been offered a position managing a project that will last 12
    months. However, you know that in six months, you will be relocating to
    another state for family reasons. What should you do?
      A. Turn down the position

      B. Accept the position and provide four weeks' notice before leaving the job

      C. Accept the position and compress the schedule to complete the project in
         six months

      D. Disclose your relocation plans to the hiring manager

21. A project manager wants to proactively monitor a manufacturing process
    to determine whether the quality level is within acceptable limits for that
    process. What tool will help with this?

      A. Control charts

      B. Ishikawa diagram

      C. Histogram

      D. PERT chart

22. You are planning a storage device migration in a data center. During this
    phase of the project, who should control the project?

      A. Project Manager

      B. SMEs

      C. Sponsor

      D. Management

23. As project manager, you find you are constantly dealing with conflict
    among your team members. Everyone argues over sharing available
    project resources, so you plan to use a conflict resolution method to
   alleviate the tension among team members. What conflict resolution
   method is not recognized by the Project Management Institute?

     A. Forcing

     B. Withdrawal

     C. Elaboration

     D. Smoothing

24. In a project that was yet to begin, many of the project team members
    were known in advance. This is:

     A. Proactive planning

     B. Skill matching

     C. Pre-assignment

     D. Staffing assignment

25. You have been managing a construction project in a developing country,
    and now you are closing the project. The tools and equipment that were
    used on the project have to be returned to your company's European
    headquarters. A nongovernmental organization that builds and repairs
    medical facilities in this country has come to you to request that this
    equipment be donated to them. What should you do?

     A. Donate all tools and equipment

     B. Refuse the request

     C. Donate only the tools and equipment whose value is below your purchase
        approval limit
      D. Notify the appropriate management

26. All of the following are components of an effective change control
    process, except:

      A. Variance analysis

      B. Expert judgment

      C. Change control tools

      D. Meetings

27. What similarity exists between a cost-reimbursable contract and a time-
    and-materials contract?

      A. They are open-ended.

      B. The closure date is part of the contract.

      C. They have fixed bonus rates.

      D. They can never grow in value.

28. Kate's project is in execution. During an internal project review meeting,
    Kate learns that the stakeholder engagement plan needs an update. The
    last update was done two weeks earlier. According to the stakeholder
    engagement plan, the plan must be reviewed and updated on a monthly
    basis. The nature of the required update does not require following the
    formal change control process. What should Kate do?

      A. Wait for a couple of weeks to do the required update

      B. Update the plan review procedure first before making the required update
      C. Go ahead and do the required update

      D. Seek the project sponsor`s guidance

29. A team of engineers is reviewing a scatter diagram to determine how the
    changes in two variables in a new type of automobile tire are related. The
    closer the points on the diagram are to a diagonal line,
    _______________.

      A. The more likely a control group is required

      B. The more closely they are related

      C. The less likely they are to be related

      D. The less likely a control group is required

30. Which of the following stakeholder groups, especially if the size of the
    group is large, is ideal for the success of the project?

      A. Supportive stakeholders

      B. Leading stakeholders

      C. Neutral stakeholders

      D. Unaware stakeholders

31. You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for
    your company. The project is 40 percent complete after three months and
    has cost $350,000. The budget for the project is $950,000 and is
    scheduled to last eight months. How is the project performing?

      A. The project is behind schedule and over budget.
      B. The project is ahead of schedule and under budget.

      C. The project is behind schedule and under budget.

      D. The project is ahead of schedule and over budget.

32. Sarah is about to start developing her project stakeholder engagement
    plan. She is currently gathering all the required inputs for this process.
    She has already created the stakeholder register and has gotten access to
    the organizational process assets and enterprise environmental factors.
    Which of the following inputs is also critical for the process?

      A. Expert Judgment

      B. Benchmarking

      C. Root cause analysis

      D. Project management plan

33. Product scope is measured against the product requirements, while
    project scope is measured against:

      A. The WBS and WBS dictionary

      B. The project scope statement and its associated WBS and WBS dictionary

      C. The project requirements and WBS

      D. The acceptance criteria

34. In the procurement process, the seller may be viewed initially as a
    bidder, then as the selected source, and then as the contracted supplier.
    The seller will typically manage the work as a project. In such an
    instance, which of the following is not true?
      A. The buyer becomes the customer and is then a key project stakeholder for
         the seller.

      B. Terms and conditions of the contract become key inputs to many of the
         seller's management processes (ex: major deliverables, key milestones,
         cost objectives).

      C. There need not be a contractual relationship between the buyer and the
         seller.

      D. The seller's project management team is concerned with all the processes
         of project management and not just procurement management.

35. The product design your project team developed was extremely well
    received by the customer. There were two key contributors to this design.
    The customer calls you to tell you how pleased he is with the design.
    What do you tell him?

      A. Ask to negotiate a bonus payment.

      B. Thank the customer.

      C. Thank him on behalf of the team and call out the contributions two of the
         team members made.

      D. Tell the customer you worked very hard on the design, and you are happy
         he is pleased.

36. Lucy is managing a complex design-and-build project. Stakeholder
    involvement and influence have been significant since the project's
    inception. Under such circumstances, the Monitor Stakeholder
    Engagement process should be:

      A. Performed by a person external to the project
      B. A discrete process repeated at monthly intervals

      C. Performed by the project sponsor

      D. A continuous process

37. Tom is a project manager who is assigned to a foreign country to manage
    a project. The project is a large one and comprises smaller sub-teams
    contributing to the entire project. As part of rewards and recognition
    within the project, Tom plans for a team award for the best sub-team.
    Recognition and Rewards is associated with which of the following
    processes?

      A. Close Project or Phase

      B. Develop Team

      C. Control Quality

      D. Manage Team

38. A first-time project manager was assigned to a project that had a duration
    of three months. In order to get a head start on the project, the manager
    took an older, completed the project and incorporated all the tools,
    techniques, and checklists in their entirety from that project into the
    current one. The older project was completed in 14 months' time and
    was remarkably similar in nature. The most appropriate comment on this
    would be:

      A. This is an excellent example of re-use of artifacts from prior projects.

      B. This may be unnecessary. The project management team needs to decide
         what is appropriate for the project.

      C. This is not the correct procedure. The project manager should always
        create processes and documents afresh for new projects.

      D. This is not correct. The project manager is violating copyright and
         intellectual property rights of the organization's prior customers.

39. A first-time project manager wanted to have a "perfect project." This
    manager informed the customer that this project would not accept change
    requests of any kind and that the scope would need to be defined
    precisely at the very start of the project. The customer agreed to this
    request. What would your comment on this situation be?

      A. The is a good example of how the project management team can decide
         what is and what is not necessary for the project. Not allowing changes is
         a good way of ensuring that the project meets requirements as detailed in
         the project scope.

      B. This is unrealistic and impractical. Change is inevitable and rather than
         look at a 'no change' project, it would be more in the project interests to
         plan for a robust change control process.

      C. This indicates that the project manager is very aggressive and is likely to
         take the project to successful completion. Since he has announced the 'no
         change requests' policy, the customer manager can no longer request
         changes.

      D. This is unrealistic and impractical. The project manager should not have
         announced his intentions to the customer. He should have had an
         unofficial policy of rejecting all change requests.

40. A project manager has scheduled technical training for his or her project
    team members to increase their skills. During which of the following
    processes will the team member receive this training?

      A. Manage Quality
      B. Acquire Resources

      C. Develop Team

      D. Plan Resource Management

41. You have identified a risk that will negatively affect your security
    project. You and your team have decided to use an older encryption
    technology because of the high risk associated with the new technology.
    What type of risk strategy are you using?

      A. Mitigation

      B. Exploitation

      C. Avoidance

      D. Transfer

42. A project is contracted on a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) basis. The
    targeted cost is US$200,000 with a fee of US$30,000. If the project
    comes in at US$170,000, what would be the total cost of the contract?

      A. US$ 195,500

      B. US$230,000

      C. US$ 200,000

      D. US$170,000

43. A project is contracted on a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) basis. The
    contract states that if the final costs are less than expected costs, the
    sharing formula for cost savings is 80:20. The targeted cost is
    US$500,000 with a 10 percent fee. If the project comes in at
   US$450,000, what would be the total cost of the contract?

      A. US$495,000

      B. US$510,000

      C. US$505,000

      D. US$550,000

44. A project is contracted on a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) basis with a fee
    of 10 percent of estimated costs. The estimated cost is US$50,000. If the
    project comes in at US$75,000 with no changes in project scope, what
    would be the total cost of the contract?

      A. US$55,000

      B. US$125,000

      C. US$75,000

      D. US$80,000

45. Creating a sense of community is a benefit of what type of strategy?

      A. Group-based management

      B. Hoteling

      C. Co-location

      D. Virtual teams

46. You are new to project management, but you have been managing a
    small project successfully. Now, management has given you another
    project to manage, something you are excited about. However, the new
    project is growing exponentially every day. You have also learned that a
    project manager you work with managed a similar project last year.
    What should you do?

      A. Wait to see if the scope of the project continues to grow

      B. Get the project assigned to the PM who managed the similar project

      C. Obtain historical records and get guidance from the project manager

      D. Speak to the other project manager to develop your project plans

47. A seller was notified they were one of the selected sellers based on their
    proposal. The seller immediately circulated an internal newsletter stating
    they had just been awarded a large contract for a period of five years.
    Would the newsletter be factually correct?

      A. The newsletter is likely factually incorrect. A selected seller is one whose
         proposal has been accepted, and a contract has been completed pending
         signatures of the authorized parties.

      B. It is likely that the newsletter is factually incorrect. While the seller has
         been selected for the work, it is unlikely that the term of the project would
         have been five years.

      C. It is likely that the newsletter is factually incorrect. A selected seller is one
         whose proposal is judged to be in a competitive range. It does not mean
         they have the work.

      D. The newsletter is likely factually correct. A selected seller is one who has
         a contract based on the procurement process.

48. You have been asked by your project manager to help create a chart that
    illustrates the project resources that will be working on each work
    package. What would be the best type of chart to use?

      A. Milestone chart

      B. RACI chart

      C. Project organization chart

      D. WBS

49. As the project manager of a development project, you are aware that
    there is a slight defect in the developed product; as a result, it will fail to
    meet certain regulatory standards. This was due to faulty requirements.
    You are also aware that the product will continue to function properly
    even though it fails to meet those standards. Your customer manager
    asks you to certify that the product meets the necessary regulatory
    standards, stating that this will not be verified when the report is
    submitted to the necessary authorities. Your stance is that:

      A. You certify the product. Regulations are only guidelines in the industry.
         Not meeting a regulation does not mean anything.

      B. As a one-off instance, you will certify the product to make sure the project
         goes through successfully.

      C. You will not certify that a product meets certain regulations when it does
         not, even though the product continues to function well.

      D. You certify the product, but you document your conversation with your
         customer manager for future purposes.

50. The selection of lifecycle for the project, the processes to be applied to
    each phase, and the results of the tailoring by the project management
    team are usually found in the:
A. Project scope statement

B. Project management plan

C. Project schedule

D. Project charter
PMP Lite Mock Exam 11
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - Notify the project stakeholders immediately about the new risk. Once
   the stakeholders have been made fully aware of the circumstances and
   potential impacts, a plan to deal with this risk can be developed. The PMI
   Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct requires project managers to
   provide accurate and timely project information at all times and to follow
   all project processes and policies. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
   Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. D - A change request form is used to initiate a change in the project
   baselines. The risk management plan does not document the stakeholder
   engagement strategy. Although the stakeholder register contains
   stakeholder identification, classification and assessment information, it
   does not record the stakeholder engagement strategy. James should search
   for a stakeholder engagement plan template where all this information can
   be updated. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 522]

3. D - The correct response is that you would explain to the manager that you
   would need to formally document these changes as part of project scope
   change and put them through the change management process. Complying
   with the manager's request is incorrect and violates the code of ethics and
   professional responsibility. Refusing to consider changes may be too
   drastic a step. After you have tried to get these changes formally included
   in the change management process, you may consider contacting your
   manager in your organization. However, the decision to do work without
   payment involves financial considerations and will be a more involved
   one. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

4. A - Notifying project stakeholders and following proper procedures for
   dealing with budget variances is the best response. Attempting to pass off
   or hide an unexpected expense in another budget or in expense reports
  rather than following proper procedures is dishonest and unprofessional.
  The PMI code of ethics requires project managers to be honest, take
  responsibility for errors, and follow all organizational rules and policies.
  [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

5. B - The stakeholder engagement plan is produced during the Plan
   Stakeholder Engagement process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 516]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. B - The activities such as measuring, examining, and verifying to
   determine whether work and deliverables met requirements and product
   acceptance criteria are variously referred to as inspections, audits, reviews,
   product reviews, and walkthroughs. Prevention is not a valid term to
   describe these activities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 675] [Project Quality
   Management]

7. C - Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis is performed on risks that have
   been prioritized by the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process as
   potentially and substantially impacting the project's competing demands.
   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis analyzes the effect of those risk events
   and assigns a numerical rating to those risks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   429] [Project Risk Management]

8. A - The requirements traceability matrix provides a structure to trace
   requirements to product design. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 148] [Project
   Scope Management]

9. C - The Project Charter is the document that formalizes the project. It
   gives the Project Manager the authority to lead the project. It is a key input
   to the Define Scope process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 150] [Project
   Scope Management]

10. C - All of the given choices are the processes from the project
    stakeholder management knowledge area. However, only the Plan
    Stakeholder Engagement process belongs to the planning process group.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. D - The following items should be addressed when listing the roles and
    responsibilities of team members needed to complete the project: Role,
    authority, responsibility, and competence. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages
    318, 319] [Project Resource Management]

12. A - The organizational breakdown structure (OBS) looks similar to the
    WBS; however, instead of being arranged according to a breakdown of
    project deliverables, it is arranged according to an organization's existing
    departments, units, or teams. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 316] [Project
    Resource Management]

13. D - RACI stands for Responsible, Accountable, Consult, Inform.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317] [Project Resource Management]

14. A - It must be noted that the project manager is responding to the project
    sponsor in order to defend a position. The sponsor is asking for the
    difference between the two documents. The best response should not
    only clarify the difference between the two, it should also make some
    business sense. All of the statements are technically correct, but having a
    stakeholder engagement strategy to ensure success makes more business
    sense. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 522]

15. A - The salience model is used to analyze classes of stakeholders based
    on their power (ability to impose their will), urgency (need for
    immediate attention), and legitimacy (their involvement is appropriate).
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 513] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. A - Histograms show a graphical representation of numerical data. A
    histogram can be used to display how many defects were produced by
    type or category of cause and ordered by their frequency. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

17. D - Project scope describes the work that must be performed to deliver a
    product, service, or result to the stakeholders. Product scope describes
    the features and functions that characterize a product, service, or result.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131] [Project Scope Management]

18. C - This is an example of scope management. If the team actually
    implemented the change, that would be gold plating. Scope verification
    is done near the closure of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 129]
    [Project Scope Management]

19. B - A weighting system is a method for quantifying qualitative data to
    minimize the effect of personal bias on seller selection. This is a part of
    the source selection criteria. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 478] [Project
    Procurement Management]

20. D - Disclose your relocation plans to the hiring manager upfront. The
    hiring manager can then determine what sort of impact this could have
    on the project and if it would be appropriate to move ahead with hiring
    you. Failing to disclose this information upfront with the intention of not
    completing the project or modifying the project schedule to meet your
    needs runs counter to the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
    This code requires project managers to put the needs of the project ahead
    of their own and to fulfill the commitments they undertake. [Reference:
    PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

21. A - Control charts can be used to monitor any type of output variable and
    process performance. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 304] [Project Quality
    Management]

22. A - Once the project manager is assigned to the project, he should be in
    control. However, it is the sponsor who ultimately has the responsibility
    of ensuring that the project is completed successfully. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 51] [Project Integration Management]

23. C - Elaboration is not one of the five conflict-resolving methods that are
    recognized and endorsed by the Project Management Institute (PMI).
    The five methods recognized and endorsed by PMI include Forcing,
    Smoothing, Compromising, Collaborating and Withdrawing. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 349] [Project Communications Management]

24. C - This is known as pre-assignment. This situation can occur if the
    project is the result of specific persons being promised as part of a
    competitive proposal, if the project is dependent on the expertise of
    particular persons, or if some staff assignments are defined within the
    project charter. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 333] [Project Resource
    Management]

25. D - Notify the appropriate management about the donation request.
    Management can then evaluate the request and make a determination
    how to proceed. If the request is approved, you can then modify the
    project plan as needed to accommodate the request. However, making a
    decision that runs counter to project processes and policies by disposing
    of these materials in a manner other than what had been previously
    defined is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics. [PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. A - Variance analysis is not a tool and technique of the Perform
    Integrated Change Control process. The other choices are valid tools and
    techniques of this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 113] [Project
    Integration Management]

27. A - Time-and-materials contracts resemble cost-reimbursable contracts
    in that both are open-ended. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 472] [Project
    Procurement Management]

28. C - There is no need to seek the project sponsor's guidance on this issue.
    Kate is the project manager, and as long as the nature of the needed
    update does not require following the formal change control process, she
    can update the plan right away. Although the stakeholder engagement
    plan requires a monthly review, updates can be done at any time as
    needed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 530]
29. B - A scatter diagram shows the pattern of relationship between two
    variables. The closer the points are to a diagonal line, the more closely
    they are related. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality
    Management]

30. A - Neutral and unware stakeholders usually don't pose any serious
    threat but they are volatile and can sway in any direction as more
    information becomes available to them. Leading stakeholders are
    beneficial for the project as long as they are limited in number. If the size
    of the group is large this can be damaging. The supportive stakeholders
    are usually low in potential to affect the project but high in potential for
    collaboration. This is an ideal stakeholder group that supports the
    project's goals and objectives. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 521] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

31. B - CPI=EV/AC. CPI = (950000*40%)/350000 = 380000/350000 = 1.09
    (under budget). SPI=EV/PV. SPI = 380000/(950000*0.375) =
    380000/356,250 = 1.07 (ahead of schedule). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    267] [Project Cost Management]

32. D - Sarah is about to start the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process. The
    project management plan is one of the inputs of the process. The rest of
    the choices are tools and techniques of the process. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 516]

33. B - The project scope is measured against the project scope baseline,
    which consists of the project scope statement, its associated WBS and
    the WBS dictionary. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 161] [Project Scope
    Management]

34. C - The statement that there need not be a contractual relationship
    between the buyer and the seller is incorrect. Whenever the seller is
    external to the organization, there needs to be a contractual relationship
    between the buyer and the seller. The other statements are correct.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 460] [Project Procurement Management]
35. C - Thank the customer on behalf of the team and cite the contributions
    made by two of the team members. PMI's Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct requires project managers to act fairly and
    truthfully. Accepting the credit due to another person or failing to denote
    where credit is actually due is dishonest and a violation of this code.
    [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

36. D - Monitoring stakeholder engagement is the responsibility of the
    project manager. Project stakeholder engagement, especially in complex
    projects, should be continuously monitored. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    530]

37. B - Recognition and Rewards is a tool of the Develop Team process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 341] [Project Resource Management]

38. B - The correct response is that this may be unnecessary. The project
    management team needs to decide what is appropriate for the project.
    Since the prior project had a duration of 14 months and the current one is
    of 3 months' duration, it is unlikely that the current project will have
    exactly the same processes applied. Some amount of tailoring will be
    required. The other responses are not valid. It cannot be said with
    certainty that the project manager will not be violating copyright and
    intellectual property rights of prior customers. Most organizations have
    clear guidelines on what information can go into their organizational
    assets' database. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 28] [Project Framework]

39. B - The correct response is that this is unrealistic and impractical.
    Change is inevitable. Rather than insist on a "no change" project, it
    would be more in the project's interest to plan for a robust change
    control process capable of handling any new changes. Mandating that
    there will be no changes will be ineffective. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    168] [Project Scope Management]

40. C - Training is part of the Develop Team process. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 342] [Project Resource Management]

41. C - In this scenario, you decided to avoid the risk by using an older
    technology, because the risk of using the new technology is too high.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

42. C - In a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract, the seller is
    reimbursed for allowable costs and receives a fixed fee payment
    calculated as a percentage of the estimated project costs. The fixed fee
    does not vary with actual costs unless the project scope changes. In the
    current scenario, the fixed fee is US$30,000. Although the actual project
    comes in at US$170,000, the fixed fee remains the same. Hence, the total
    cost of the contract will be 170,000 + 30,000 = 200,000. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 472] [Project Procurement Management]

43. B - In a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) type of contract, the seller is
    reimbursed for allowable costs for performing the contract work and
    receives a predetermined fee. In some cases, if the final costs are less
    than the expected costs, then both the buyer and the seller benefit from
    the cost saving based on a pre-negotiated sharing formula. In the current
    situation, the predetermined fee is 10% of US$500,000 = US$50,000.
    Since the project came in at US$450,000, the cost saving is 500,000 -
    450,000 = 50,000. The sharing formula is 80:20, hence the additional
    payout to the seller = (20/100)*50,000 = 10,000. Therefore, the total cost
    of the contract = 450,000 + 50,000 + 10,000 = US$510,000. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 472] [Project Procurement Management]

44. D - In the Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract, the seller is
    reimbursed for allowable costs for performing the contract work and
    receives a fee calculated as an agreed-upon percentage of the costs. The
    costs vary depending on the actual cost. The fee is based on estimated
    costs unless the scope of the project changes. For the current project, the
    agreed-upon percentage of costs is 10%. The actual cost is US$75,000
    even though the initial estimate was US$50,000. However, the fee is
    calculated as 10% of 50,000 = (10/100)*50,000 = 5,000. The total cost of
    the contract is 75,000 + 5,000 = US$80,000. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    472] [Project Procurement Management]

45. C - Co-location involves placing many or all of the most active project
    team members in the same physical location to improve their ability to
    perform as a team. Co-location strategy can include a team meeting
    room, places to post schedules, and other conveniences that enhance
    communication and a sense of community. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    340] [Project Resource Management]

46. C - The historical records will give you an understanding of the prior
    project; however, you should also obtain guidance from the project
    manager. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 58] [Project Integration
    Management]

47. C - The newsletter will probably be factually incorrect. A selected seller
    is one whose proposal has been judged to be in the competitive range
    based on bid evaluation. The seller would have negotiated a draft
    contract that could become the actual contract when the award is made.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 488]

48. B - RACI stands for Responsible, Accountable, Consult, and Inform.
    This is a type of responsibility assignment matrix that is used to illustrate
    the relationship between team members and work that needs to be
    completed. In a RACI chart, a matrix is created with work packages in
    the rows and team member roles in the columns. Typically, a RACI chart
    assumes that one person will be accountable for a work package, and
    more than one person may be responsible for completing the work
    package. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317] [Project Resource
    Management]

49. C - Your stance will be that you will not certify that a product meets
    required standards when it does not, even though the product continues
    to function well. The customer manager might not be pleased with your
    stance. As a Project Manager, however, you have an obligation to uphold
    ethical practices, and so you cannot certify a product that fails to meet
    required standards. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]

50. B - Details of the life cycle, processes selected, and results of tailoring by
    the project management team are found in the project management plan.
    This plan integrates and consolidates all the subsidiary management
    plans from the planning processes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 82, 83]
    [Project Integration Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 12
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 12
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You are managing a project for your company constructing an office
   complex in another country. The construction work on two of the
   buildings is complete, and those buildings are ready for move-in.
   However, the construction supervisor informs you that you must pay a fee
   to a local government agency to issue an occupancy permit for any new
   construction in that country. What should you do?

     A. Pay the fee

     B. Ask your legal department if this is legal

     C. Notify project stakeholders that you have been asked to pay a bribe

     D. Do not pay the fee
2. As part of tracking a project, a project manager is validating the
   completion of project scope. He or she would measure this against:

      A. Requirements traceability matrix

      B. The project management plan

      C. The project charter

      D. The requirements management plan

3. Which of the following is NOT a valid statement regarding the critical
   path method?

      A. The early start and finish dates and late start and finish dates are
         calculated without factoring in resource limitations.

      B. A forward pass and backward pass are performed through the project
         network paths.

      C. The resulting late start and finish dates will be the project schedule
         baseline.

      D. The flexibility of the schedule is measured by the difference between
         early and late dates.

4. You are the project manager of a large IT project. A manager from a
   company contracted to work on the project offers you free tickets to a
   local sporting event. The tickets are expensive, but your organization has
   no formal policy regarding gifts. What is the best way to handle the offer?

      A. Refuse the tickets and report the offer to your employer

      B. Accept the tickets but notify your employer
      C. Politely refuse the tickets

      D. Accept the tickets since there is no policy

5. Which of the following techniques can ensure that the stakeholders are
   engaged at appropriate project phases and to obtain or confirm their
   continued commitment to the success of the project?

      A. Performance audits

      B. Setting ground rules

      C. Stage gate meetings

      D. Managing project team

6. As project manager, you scheduled a status update meeting. During the
   meeting, a problem developed, and the group discussed it. The day after
   the meeting, Kevin approached you and expressed his concern that the
   problem was not truly resolved. After thinking about it, he felt that his
   concerns were still valid and should be addressed. What conflict resolution
   method was likely used at the status meeting?

      A. Smoothing

      B. Forcing

      C. Withdrawal

      D. Collaboration

7. You are a project manager for your company. Part of the project requires
   producing 10,000 widgets, which your company will outsource. The
   company has agreed to pay all related costs and 5 percent of the estimated
   project costs. What type of contract has been negotiated?
     A. Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee contract

     B. Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract

     C. Time and Material contract

     D. Fixed-price contract

8. You are the Project Manager for JT's Lumber Yard. You are trying to
   forecast estimates for the final phase of the project you are currently
   working on. Based on the performance of the project to date, which
   formula can be used to estimate the total value of the project when
   completed, assuming similar variances will not occur?

     A. ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI

     B. SV = EV - PV

     C. CPI = EV/AC

     D. EAC = AC + BAC - EV

9. You work as an engineer for a large engineering firm. During this past
   week, you have corresponded with your department supervisor about the
   horizontal stabilizers required for the wings on a new aircraft you are
   designing. Which communication dimension does this represent?

     A. Horizontal

     B. Formal

     C. External

     D. Upward

10. Which of the following tools helps in determining the gaps between the
    current and desired stakeholder engagement levels?

      A. Stakeholder register

      B. Monte Carlo analysis

      C. Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix

      D. Fishbone diagram

11. Which of the following statements about team-building activities is
    incorrect?

      A. It can be a five-minute agenda item in a status review meeting.

      B. It can be a professionally facilitated experience designed to improve
         interpersonal relationships.

      C. The objective of team-building activities is to help team members work
         individually and effectively.

      D. Informal communication and activities help in building trust and
         establishing good working relationships.

12. Julia is managing a software development project. Recently, an
    unexpected event delayed the project by 15 days. Julia has called a team
    meeting to identify measures to take to bring the project back on
    schedule. A measure that is taken to bring future results back in line with
    the project plan is best described as?

      A. Change request

      B. Preventive action

      C. Corrective action
     D. Defect repair

13. Which of the following is not a Tuckman's team development stage?

     A. Confronting

     B. Forming

     C. Norming

     D. Adjourning

14. Which process is MOST responsible for managing changes to the
    schedule components of the Project Management Plan?

     A. Control Schedule

     B. Create WBS

     C. Develop Project Management Plan

     D. Develop Schedule

15. Why is the project change log a prime input to the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process?

     A. So that the changes and their impact can be communicated to the
        appropriate stakeholders

     B. So that the new identified changes can be appended to the log

     C. So that stakeholders can review the log and prioritize the issues

     D. So that the Integrated Change Control process is made redundant

16. Your project team works in two different buildings across the city. The
    team has been struggling to perform effectively and has a difficult time
    resolving problems. What would be the BEST team development
    technique to resolve this issue?

      A. Mediation

      B. Rewards

      C. Co-location

      D. Training

17. You have been asked to create a graphic display of schedule-related
    information, listing schedule activities on the left side of the chart, dates
    on the top, and activity durations as date-placed horizontal bars on the
    right side. What is such a chart called?

      A. PERT chart

      B. Gantt chart

      C. Hunt chart

      D. GERT chart

18. Which of the following techniques can help clarify the structure,
    requirements, and other terms of the purchases so that mutual agreement
    between a buyer and a seller can be reached prior to signing the contract?

      A. Independent estimates

      B. Advertising

      C. Bidder conferences

      D. Procurement negotiations
19. A complicated software project was authorized by a project sponsor.
    However, the users who were intended to use the product found it
    extremely difficult to articulate their requirements. What technique can
    be employed to elicit requirements for such a project?

      A. Job overlaying

      B. Hidden participant

      C. Job duplication

      D. Job shadowing

20. The manager of a project that your company is running in another
    country is at the corporate headquarters for a company-wide project
    management meeting. During a break, you overhear the project manager
    discussing payments made to local municipal governments for
    construction permits for the project. Your company has a strict policy
    about paying or taking bribes. What should you do?

      A. Report him to PMI

      B. Report him to his manager

      C. Notify his project stakeholders

      D. Do nothing

21. Organizational process assets are key inputs to the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process. The key elements of the organizational process
    assets that are used during this process are organizational communication
    requirements, issue management procedures, and the change control
    procedures. Which of the following is also a key organizational process
    asset that must be considered during this process?
      A. Process audit procedures

      B. Human resource policies

      C. Project document templates

      D. Historical information about previous projects

22. Which of the following is an incorrect classification of a feasibility
    study?

      A. A feasibility study may be considered a stand-alone project.

      B. A feasibility study may be considered pre-project work.

      C. A feasibility study may be considered the first phase of a project.

      D. A feasibility study may be considered a program.

23. Which tool is BEST used to display how a company structures itself
    departmentally?

      A. WBS

      B. BOM

      C. OBS

      D. RBS

24. Which of the following statements is incorrect?

      A. A project can create a capability to perform a service.

      B. A project cannot be terminated before the deadline.
      C. A project can involve a single resource.

      D. Project work can be outsourced.

25. You have recently been successful in passing the Project Management
    Professional exam. Others within the organization you work for are also
    pursuing the certification and have sought your assistance. They have
    requested that you provide them with a detailed list of the questions that
    you had on the exam. What is the FIRST course of action you should
    take?

      A. Pretend you do not recall any of the questions

      B. Indicate that you cannot disclose questions you saw on the exam

      C. Offer your coworkers a listing of all the questions you recall from the
         exam

      D. Report the violation to the PMI

26. The project sponsor asks you to increase budget estimates by 25 percent
    to ensure that the project has enough funds budgeted. What should you
    do?

      A. Add 25 percent to your contingency reserves

      B. Fast track the project

      C. Add 25 percent to all costs across the board

      D. Ask for additional information

27. You are the project manager for a project and have just entered the third
    year of a scheduled four-year project. You need to evaluate new risks
    that have arisen since the project began. What agenda item do you need
    to add to your next team meeting?
     A. Variance and trend analysis

     B. Process Improvement Plan

     C. Risk audit

     D. Risk re-assessment

28. What is the BEST tool/technique that provides expected cost of a
    procurement by a third party and helps identify significant variations
    from cost estimates prepared in-house?

     A. Screening system

     B. Bidder conferences

     C. Independent estimates

     D. Buyer-conducted performance review

29. To create a quality product, the project management team invested in
    training the project team members and purchasing high-end equipment.
    Such costs are:

     A. Failure costs

     B. Costs of Nonconformance

     C. Appraisal costs

     D. Prevention costs

30. You are managing an enterprise solution deployment project. The end
    users are not happy with the solution. You decide to meet the end users
    and find out that they haven't received proper training on the new
    system. What should you do first?

      A. Update the issue log

      B. Arrange additional training

      C. Investigate further into the issue and determine the root-cause

      D. Update the project management plan with the necessary changes

31. You are the project manager for GeoThermal Systems. Which of the
    following must be done FIRST before proceeding with a new project?

      A. Create the Project Scope Statement

      B. Stakeholder analysis

      C. Product analysis

      D. Obtain Project Charter approval

32. You are a project manager for an automotive parts company. Your
    organization was hired to produce clutches for an exotic car company.
    This will involve the design and production of custom clutches. During
    the course of the project, as you review a quality control statistics chart
    that examines every clutch produced for the month, you notice several
    cases where the spring component of the clutch is expanding with too
    much force and is falling outside the upper control limit. Which type of
    Quality Control tool are you most likely using?

      A. Control charts

      B. Statistical Sampling

      C. Cause-and-Effect diagram
      D. Precedence Diagramming Method

33. You are the project manager for Wicked Fast Cars Corp. You are
    working on a project for the Human Resources department that is
    scheduled to take one year. After three months into the project, you
    calculate the EV at $35,000 and the PV at $45,000. Which option below
    represents the value for the SV?

      A. ($10,000)

      B. 1.29

      C. 0.78

      D. $10,000

34. You are a project manager creating the final project report. Which
    information would you NOT include in this report?

      A. Scope objectives

      B. Lessons learned from previous similar projects

      C. Risk summaries

      D. Cost objectives

35. The sponsor of your facilities upgrade project has left the company to
    join another organization. Several weeks later, you are reviewing the
    business case for the project, and you find that there are several
    inconsistencies between what is stated in the business case and what is
    described in the project scope. Further research shows that the business
    case as a whole is based on inaccurate information. What do you do?

      A. Notify your project stakeholders immediately
      B. Add this to the risk log

      C. Update the requirements

      D. Call the sponsor for clarification

36. A first-time project manager is trying to understand the difference
    between configuration control and change control. The difference is:

      A. Configuration control is focused on the specification of both the
         deliverables and the process, but change control is focused on identifying,
         documenting, and controlling changes to the project.

      B. Configuration control is focused on ensuring that all changes are
         documented whereas change control is focused on the approval process.

      C. Change control is focused on the specification of both the deliverables and
         the process whereas configuration control is focused on identifying,
         documenting and controlling changes to the project.

      D. Change control is focused on ensuring that approved changes are
         documented and controlled whereas configuration control is focused on
         ensuring that changes are properly identified and approved by the change
         control board.

37. The two key processes that happen early in the project lifecycle are:

      A. Define Scope and Identify Stakeholders

      B. Define Scope and Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      C. Develop Project Charter and Plan Communications Management

      D. Develop Project Charter and Identify Stakeholders

38. All of the following statements are true about the cause-and-effect
   diagram except:

     A. A maximum of six causes are listed on the cause-and-effect diagram.

     B. Ishikawa is another name for the cause-and-effect diagram.

     C. The effect being studied is normally stated at the head of the diagram.

     D. The cause-and-effect diagram is one tool that can be used for problem
        solving.

39. You are the project manager for Commodities, Inc. You are involved in a
    new project to create an internal website for the employees that will
    allow them to view events within the company. All of the following
    options listed are project constraints except:

     A. The project must be completed by December 31 of the current year.

     B. There is a budget of $75,000 for the project.

     C. The navigation menu for the website must be on the top of the page.

     D. Only three employees are available to work on the project.

40. If you had an experience with a particularly well or poorly performing
    vendor, what is the correct way to document this experience for future
    projects?

     A. Call the vendor and talk to them about the experience

     B. Tell all your friends about it

     C. Create a seller performance evaluation

     D. Vow to only work with that vendor from now on
41. What BEST describes the role of the project team members?

     A. To perform the project's work

     B. To approve the change requests

     C. To accept ultimate responsibility for the project's success

     D. To authorize the project

42. What is the MAIN reason for controlling the project scope?

     A. To enable scope creep

     B. To prevent changes from affecting the project

     C. To ensure timely closure of the project

     D. Preventing scope creep

43. A project manager is trying to budget time for the various processes in
    the Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area. As project activities
    are performed, in which of these processes will the majority of effort
    occur?

     A. Control Schedule

     B. Estimate Activity Durations

     C. Define Activities

     D. Develop Schedule

44. Which strategy attempts to reduce the probability and the impact of a
    risk to the point where the risk is acceptable?
      A. Mitigation

      B. Avoidance

      C. Acceptance

      D. Transfer

45. You are a project manager for Groceries 'R' Us, a supermarket chain,
    and are currently working on a project to build a new outlet. The planned
    values (PV) for the foundation and the frame were $150,000 and
    $500,000. After five months, you do a performance measurement
    analysis. You are currently not ahead of schedule. The actual costs for
    the foundation and frame were $175,000 and $650,000. At this point,
    100 percent of the foundation is complete, and only 80 percent of the
    frame is complete. Which value represents the cost performance index
    (CPI) to two decimal places at this point in the project?

      A. 0.84

      B. 1.5

      C. 0.67

      D. 1.19

46. A project manager prepared quantitative assessments of the probable
    costs required to complete a project and produced activity cost estimates.
    He or she also prepared some supporting detail for these estimates.
    Which of the following would not be a supporting detail for cost
    estimates?

      A. Indication of the range of possible estimates (ex: $5,000 +/- 5%)

      B. Indication of the confidence level of the final estimate (ex: 90 percent )
      C. Documentation of the basis of the estimates

      D. Indication of the profit margin that can be expected on the project

47. A project manager is estimating activity durations for a project. Which of
    the following should he or she consider while performing this activity?

      A. While calculating the duration of schedule activities, differences in the
         capabilities of staff assigned should not be taken into consideration. All
         senior and junior staff should be given equal weight.

      B. While calculating the duration of schedule activities, differences in staff
         capabilities should be taken into consideration. A senior staff member will
         generally be expected to finish an activity in 80 percent of the time that a
         junior member.

      C. While calculating the duration of schedule activities, differences in staff
         capabilities should be taken into consideration. A senior staff member will
         generally be expected to finish an activity in less time than a junior
         member.

      D. While calculating the duration of schedule activities, an average should be
         used and the actual differences in the capabilities of staff assigned should
         not be taken into consideration.

48. Which of the following is an output of the Conduct Procurements
    process?

      A. Advertising

      B. Selected Sellers

      C. Bidder conferences

      D. Expert Judgment
49. Which technique is NOT commonly used to align the timing of activities
    with available resources?

      A. Critical Path Method

      B. Resource Leveling

      C. Resource optimization

      D. Resource Smoothing

50. You have been asked to determine the early start and finish dates for the
    activities that make up a project. What would be the BEST technique to
    use?

      A. Resource Smoothing

      B. Critical Path Method

      C. What-If scenario analysis

      D. Resource Leveling
PMP Lite Mock Exam 12
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - Pay the fee to the local agency. Because it is a standard fee for a
   permit that is required of all new construction, it is not a bribe. PMI's Code
   of Ethics and Professional Conduct prohibits accepting or paying bribes.
   [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. B - Completion of project scope is measured against the project
   management plan. In contrast, the product scope is measured against the
   product requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131]

3. C - The critical path method is a technique that calculates the earliest and
   latest possible start and finish times for work activities in a project. It uses
   the estimated duration of activities and the dependencies among them to
   determine limits for when each activity can be performed. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]

4. C - The best way to handle this type of offer is to politely reject the offer.
   Taking gifts can be viewed as personal gain and may affect your integrity
   as a Project Manager. It may leave you and your organization open to
   allegations of improper conduct. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
   Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

5. C - Stage gate or phase review meetings give project stakeholders a chance
   to review project progress and planned future actions. This gives them a
   chance to have their voice heard and recorded. The rest of the choices are
   techniques that are internal to a project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 21]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. A - Smoothing is the method that was most likely used to resolve the
   conflict that arose at the status meeting. Smoothing is a temporary way to
   resolve conflict. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 349] [Project Resource
  Management]

7. B - This is an example of a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract. This type of
   contract determines the profit element as a fixed percentage of the
   estimated project cost. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 472] [Project
   Procurement Management]

8. D - The formula EAC = AC + BAC - EV is used to determine the total
   value of the project when completed, assuming similar variances will not
   occur for the uncompleted project activities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   267] [Project Cost Management]

9. D - In this case, your communication is with your supervisor who has a
   different level of responsibility and authority. This is an example of an
   upward dimension of communications. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 361]
   [Project Communications Management]

10. C - Monte Carlo analysis and the fishbone diagram are risk management
    and quality management tools respectively. Stakeholder register is a
    project artifact and not a tool or technique. The correct answer is
    `stakeholder engagement assessment matrix' which helps a project
    manager in mapping the current and desired stakeholder engagement
    levels. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 521] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

11. C - The objective of team-building activities is to help team members
    work together and not individually. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 341]
    [Project Resource Management]

12. C - A corrective action is anything that needs to be done to bring the
    project back on track. Care must be taken not to confuse corrective
    action with preventive action. Corrective action is taken to correct the
    results of a non-conformance event that happened in the past. Whereas,
    preventive action is taken to avoid or mitigate any potential non-
    conformance event that may occur in the future. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 96] [Project Integration Management]

13. A - Confronting is not a valid choice. The Tuckman ladder's team
    development stages are: Forming, storming, norming, performing and
    adjourning. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 338] [Project Resource
    Management]

14. A - The Control Schedule is the process of managing the changes to the
    schedule baseline to achieve the project management plan. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 222] [Project Schedule Management]

15. A - A change log is used during the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    process so that the project changes and their impact on the project in
    term of time, cost, and risk can be communicate to the appropriate
    stakeholders. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 525] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

16. C - Co-location is an organizational placement strategy where the project
    team members are physically moved or placed next to one another to
    improve communication, working relationships and productivity.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 340] [Project Resource Management]

17. B - Such a chart is called a Gantt chart. This is a popular representation
    of project schedule information. Activity start dates, end dates, durations,
    dependencies, and milestones are easily depicted on this chart in a
    graphical manner. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 217] [Project Schedule
    Management]

18. D - Procurement negotiations help clarify the structure, requirements,
    and other terms of the purchases so that mutual agreement between a
    buyer and a seller can be reached prior to signing the contract. The
    bidders' conferences are carried out prior to this stage, and they are used
    to ensure that all prospective sellers have a clear and common
    understanding of the procurement requirements. Advertising and
    Independent Estimates cannot help in this case. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 488] [Project Procurement Management]

19. D - Job shadowing is a technique that can be employed in this case. It is
    done externally by an observer who views the user doing his or her job.
    This technique is also called observation. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    145] [Project Scope Management]

20. D - Do nothing. Paying fees to government organizations to cover the
    administrative costs associated with issuing various types of permits is a
    common practice in many parts of the world. These payments are not
    considered bribes. PMI's code prohibits project managers from engaging
    in bribery, and it requires project managers to report others who do to the
    appropriate management. In this case, however, there is nothing to
    report. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

21. D - All of the given choices are organizational process assets. However,
    the organizational policies and templates are more relevant during the
    planning phase of the project. For the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    process, a process from the executing process group, historical
    information about previous projects is considered a critical input from
    the organizational process assets. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 526]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

22. D - Organizations may classify projects differently depending on their
    internal policies and structures. Hence, a feasibility study can be
    considered pre-project work, the first phase of a project, or a stand-alone
    project. However, it cannot be considered a program. A program will
    have much larger scope. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 11]

23. C - The Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS) is a hierarchical
    organization chart that includes employees, department structures, and
    associated responsibilities. It is organized by the company's teams or
    department breakdown. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 316] [Project
    Resource Management]
24. B - Projects can be terminated whenever the project deliverables or
    results are no longer required by the performing organization. The other
    choices are correct statements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 5]

25. B - The first course of action is to indicate that you cannot disclose
    questions you saw on the exam. PMI requires the candidates and those
    seeking certification to maintain and respect the confidentiality of the
    contents of the PMP examination. The PMI code of conduct mandates
    respecting copyrights of others. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. D - Ask for additional information on the risks that would cause the
    original budget estimates to be too low. Simply increasing the project
    budget by 25% without identifying the underlying reasons means you are
    providing inaccurate information. PMI's Code of Ethics requires project
    managers to provide accurate information at all times. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

27. D - A risk reassessment is a technique that involves reevaluating project
    risks and identifying new risks that arise as the project moves forward.
    These risks are evaluated and placed in the risk register. The PMBOK
    recommends conducting risk reassessments during team meetings as a
    part of the Monitor Risks process.[PMBOK 6th edition, Page 457]
    [Project Risk Management]

28. C - Independent estimates provides the expected cost of a procurement
    by a third party. It helps identify significant variations from cost
    estimates prepared by the project team. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 708]
    [Project Procurement Management]

29. D - Investments in training and equipment are examples of prevention
    costs. Appraisal costs include the testing, losses due to destructive
    testing, and inspections. Collectively, these costs are called Cost of
    Conformance. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 282]
30. A - The first action you must take upon identification of any issue is to
    update the issue log. Once this has been done, you need to carry out a
    root-cause analysis and take appropriate corrective actions. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 96] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. D - When managing a project, you must first ensure that the project
    charter is signed and approved before proceeding. The Project Charter is
    the document that formalizes the project. It gives the project manager the
    authority to lead the project. The project charter is created first during the
    Initiating process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 75] [Project Integration
    Management]

32. A - Control charts graphically display the interaction of process variables
    on a process. Control charts have three lines: a center line which gives
    the average of the process, an upper line designating the upper control
    limit (UCL) and showing the upper range of acceptable values, and a
    lower line designating the lower control limit (LCL) and showing the
    lower range of acceptable values. Points that fall outside of this range are
    evidence that the process may be out of control. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 304] [Project Quality Management]

33. A - SV = Earned Value (EV) - Planned Value (PV). SV = $35,000-
    $45,000 SV = -$10,000. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Project Cost
    Management]

34. B - The lessons learned from the previous similar projects are used
    throughout the project. These are already part of the organizational
    process assets and are not recorded in the final project report. The rest of
    the choices are valid sections of a final project report. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 127] [Project Integration Management]

35. A - Notify your project stakeholders immediately. They can determine
    the best path forward. An incorrect business case could have a serious
    impact on the usability of the final output of your project, or it could
    even impact the company's strategic goals. Failure to point out this error
    to the appropriate management is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics.
    [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. A - Configuration control is focused on the specification of both the
    deliverables and the process, whereas change control is focused on
    identifying, documenting, and controlling changes to the project. A
    configuration management system with integrated change control
    provides a standardized and effective way to centrally manage approved
    changes within the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 118]

37. D - The two initiating processes are Develop Project Charter and Identify
    Stakeholders. The chances of success of the project are enhanced if the
    project charter is well written and the appropriate stakeholders are
    identified early, as part of the initiating process group. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 25]

38. A - While listing six causes is possible, there is no rule that states a
    maximum of six causes can be listed. You could list four or eight, for
    example. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

39. C - Constraints limit the project team's options. Predefined budgets,
    limits on the number of resources available, and imposed dates are
    project constraints. Positioning of the menu for the website is one of the
    requirements for the project, and so this is not considered a constraint.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 28] [Project Scope Management]

40. C - A seller performance evaluation is created by the buyer and provides
    information about the seller's performance. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    501] [Project Procurement Management]

41. A - Project team members are responsible for performing the actual
    project work. They work with the project manager to complete project
    activities and achieve the goals of the project. The project manager is
    assigned by an organization to achieve specific project objectives. While
    the sponsor authorizes the project, ultimate responsibility for the
    project's success lies with the project manager and the project sponsor.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 51] [Project Framework]

42. D - The main reason for controlling the project scope is to deal with the
    impact of changes on the project. This is done by managing approved
    changes and disregarding rejected changes. This reduces the risk of
    scope creep on the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 168] [Project
    Scope Management]

43. A - Project Schedule Management has five planning processes and one
    monitoring and controlling process. As project activities are being
    performed (the project is in execution), the majority of effort in the
    Project Schedule Management Knowledge Area will occur in the Control
    Schedule process to ensure completion of project work in a timely
    manner. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25]

44. A - Risk mitigation is a strategy that seeks to reduce the risk to a level
    that the risk becomes acceptable. A Project Manager may add specific
    project tasks to the work of a project to reduce the level of risk.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

45. C - We calculate the total actual cost by adding the $175,000 and
    $650,000 for the foundation and frame. The total actual cost is $825,000.
    Now we calculate earned value (EV). We need to identify all of the
    activities that have been completed or partially completed as of the
    measurement date. If partially completed, we calculate the fractional
    value of the budgeted cost for the activity by the percent completed. Add
    up the budgeted costs for completed or partially completed work
    activities including any work that has been performed ahead of schedule.
    We are told that we are not ahead of schedule, so there is no budgeted
    cost to include for that. 100% of the foundation is complete, and only
    80% of the frame is complete. Therefore, we add 100% of $150,000 and
    80% of 500,000 (which is $400,000) to get a total EV of $550,000. Now
    find the CPI by dividing the total EV by the total actual cost for the same
    time period. The result for CPI is $550,000/$825,000 or 0.67. [PMBOK
    6th edition,

46. D - Indication of the profit margin that can be achieved on the project is
    not a supporting detail for cost estimates. The focus of the Estimate
    Costs process is to perform a quantitative assessment of all costs that are
    probably required to accomplish the project work. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 247]

47. C - When calculating the duration of schedule activities, differences in
    the capabilities of assigned staff should be taken into consideration.
    Hence, a senior staff member will typically be expected to finish an
    activity in less time than a junior member. There is no generic rule that a
    senior resource can finish an activity in 80% of the time that a junior
    resource could. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 196]

48. B - Selected seller is the output of the Conduct Procurements process.
    The other choices are the tools and techniques of this process. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 482] [Project Procurement Management]

49. A - The critical path method is not a technique commonly used to align
    the timing of activities with available resources. The critical path method
    is a technique used to establish a rough timeline fitting the project's work
    activities within the deadlines defined in the scope statement. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Pages 210, 211] [Project Schedule Management]

50. B - The critical path method is a technique that calculates the earliest and
    latest possible start and finish times for work activities in a project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Communications Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Communications Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project
Communications Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. In projects with adaptive life cycles, the overall scope of the project will
   be decomposed into a set of requirements and work to be performed,
   sometime referred to as:

      A. Assumptions backlog

      B. Feature list

      C. Project attributes

      D. Product backlog

2. Communications management plans should include all of the following
   except:
      A. Stakeholder communication requirements

      B. Reasons for information distribution

      C. Escalation process

      D. Risk Register

3. When one factor used to determine the effort required to produce a unit of
   work is increased while all other factors remain fixed, a point will
   eventually be reached at which additions of that one factor start to yield
   progressively decreased productivity. This is known as:

      A. The 100 percent rule

      B. The Pareto Law

      C. The law of diminishing returns

      D. The theory of constraints

4. Which of the following approaches deliberately spends less time trying to
   define and lock project scope early during the project and spends more
   time establishing the process for requirements gathering, scope definition
   and refinement?

      A. Waterfall methods

      B. Predictive methods

      C. Agile methods

      D. Kanban methods

5. You are the Project Manager and are responsible for the development of a
  mall. As with any construction project, there will be multiple iterations of
  blueprints and engineering drawings. Therefore, you have decided to
  create an online database that can be used to query the documents by
  name, type, date, etc. This is an example of what type of communication
  tool?

      A. Project Management Information System

      B. Lessons Learned

      C. Project Records

      D. Configuration Management System

6. You are working on a project with all the team members located in
   geographically different areas, and all communication is by email and
   chat. It is sometimes hard to infer the true meaning of these messages
   because you cannot see facial expressions or hear tones of voice. This is an
   example of:

      A. Encoding

      B. Medium

      C. Decoding

      D. Noise

7. In complex and high value projects, which of the following activities will
   typically be performed by a business analyst prior to the project initiation?

      A. Define project scope and develop WBS

      B. Finalize the project scope statement and the WBS dictionary

      C. Establish the project's scope baseline
      D. Determine problems, identify business needs and viable solutions

8. Your project calls for communication with an extremely large audience.
   What communication method would be appropriate under such
   circumstances?

      A. Pull communication

      B. Interactive communication

      C. Two-way communication

      D. Verbal communication

9. If you are writing a proposal for additional funding, which communication
   style should you choose?

      A. Formal and horizontal

      B. Formal and upward

      C. Informal and downward

      D. Informal and horizontal

10. Which of the following two project documents are sometimes perceived
    as containing a certain degree of redundancy?

      A. Project scope statement and scope management plan

      B. Project charter and project scope statement

      C. Risk management plan and scope management plan

      D. Scope statement and quality management plan
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Communications Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - In projects with adaptive life cycles, the overall scope of the project
   will be decomposed into a set of requirements and work to be performed,
   sometime referred to as a product backlog. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   131] [Project Communications Management]

2. D - The Risk Register is part of Risk Management and is not included in
   the Communications Management Plan. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 377]
   [Project Communications Management]

3. C - When one factor used to determine the effort required to produce a unit
   of work is increased while all other factors remain fixed, a point will
   eventually be reached at which additions of that one factor start to yield
   progressively decreased productivity. This is commonly known as the law
   of diminishing returns. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 197] [Project
   Communications Management]

4. C - Agile methods deliberately spend less time trying to define and lock
   project scope early during the project and spend more time establishing the
   process for requirements gathering, scope definition and refinement.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 133] [Project Communications Management]

5. A - The online database is an example of a Project Management
   Information System. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 95] [Project
   Communications Management]

6. D - Anything that interferes with the meaning of a message is considered
   noise. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 372] [Project Communications
   Management]
7. D - Typical business analyst's responsibilities would include determining
   problems, identifying business needs, and recommending viable solutions
   for meeting those needs. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 132] [Project
   Communications Management]

8. A - The situation in the project would call for pull communication. This is
   suitable for a large audience, and it allows them to access information at
   their own discretion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 374] [Project
   Communications Management]

9. B - Since this will be an official project document, it should be formal.
   Additionally, since you are requesting money from someone higher up in
   the organization, you are creating an upward communication. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 361] [Project Communications Management]

10. B - The project charter and project scope statement are sometime
    perceived as containing a certain degree of redundancy, although they
    are different in the level of detail contained in each. The project charter
    contains high-level information, while the project scope statement
    contains a detailed description of the scope components. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 154] [Project Communications Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 13
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 13
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You have completed your estimates for your project and have determined
   that it will take 10 months to complete. However, your project sponsor
   insists that it be completed in nine months. How do you handle this?

     A. Increase the budget by 10 percent

     B. Inform the sponsor you will have to explore the options before committing
        to that timeline

     C. Reduce scope

     D. Add resources

2. A project manager prepared a composite resource calendar. Which of the
  following is unlikely to be part of the resource calendar?

      A. Availability of Resources

      B. Skills of Human Resources

      C. Cost of Resources

      D. Capabilities of Human Resources

3. You have just become the project manager of a project already in
   execution. During your first week on the job, you receive multiple requests
   from different stakeholders asking for project reports in various formats.
   These requests overwhelm you. What should you do first?

      A. Ignore the requests and send the standard project report

      B. Issue a change request

      C. Stakeholders are always right, fulfill their requests on top priority

      D. Review the communications management plan

4. A project was awarded based on a competitive proposal. Management
   made a commitment that a few key team members would work on the
   project. When such assignments happen, they are:

      A. Bargaining agreements

      B. Schedule constraints

      C. Assignment risk

      D. Pre-assignments
5. You have recently been assigned to a research project. Although there is a
   limited number of key stakeholders, there is a big number of other
   stakeholders involved in this project, especially the ones who will be using
   the research's outcome. You have some specific questions. Which of the
   following is the best way to quickly obtain responses from a big group of
   stakeholders?

      A. Focus groups

      B. Questionnaires

      C. Interviews

      D. Phone calls

6. Your project team members have just started to work together and are now
   adjusting their work habits and behaviors to support each other. Which
   stage of the Tuckman ladder has your team just entered?

      A. Norming

      B. Performing

      C. Forming

      D. Storming

7. A project manager had scheduled a number of training programs for his
   team. However, he was aware that apart from planned training, unplanned
   training also took place in a number of ways. Which of these is not one of
   the ways in which unplanned training can take place?

      A. Classroom

      B. Observation
      C. Project performance appraisals

      D. Conversation

8. As part of the procurement process, the procuring organization elected to
   have an estimate of costs prepared by an outside professional estimator.
   The estimator came up with an estimate of $500,000. However, the cost
   estimates prepared by prospective sellers were in the range of $200,000.
   How can this be best interpreted?

      A. The procurement statement of work was deficient and ambiguous.

      B. The professional estimator has inflated the estimate of costs.

      C. The prospective sellers do not have the required skills to do the project.

      D. Prospective sellers are trying to underbid and win the project.

9. Which of the following allows a project management team to
   communicate all approved and rejected changes to the stakeholders
   consistently?

      A. Configuration management system

      B. Verification management system

      C. Configuration status accounting

      D. Change management board

10. Which of the following are more important inputs to the Manage
    Stakeholder Engagement process in relation to the others?

      A. Risk management plan and Scope management plan
      B. Communications management plan and Cost management plan

      C. Stakeholder engagement plan and Schedule management plan

      D. Stakeholder engagement plan and Communications management plan

11. Which of the following is incorrect?

      A. Contingency reserves are not part of the project cost baseline.

      B. Management reserves are not part of the project cost baseline.

      C. The project manager needs to get approval before spending management
         reserve.

      D. Reserves are usually included in the total budget of a project.

12. Linda is a first-time project manager and is analyzing a project schedule.
    She intends to apply resource leveling, and she has the following
    guidelines on Resource Leveling. Which of these four statements is
    incorrect?

      A. Resource Leveling can often cause the critical path to change.

      B. Resource Leveling is applied to a schedule before it has been analyzed by
         the critical path method.

      C. Resource Leveling is applied to keep resource usage at a constant level.

      D. Resource Leveling is necessary when resources have been over-allocated.

13. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct has as its foundation four
    values identified by practitioners from the global project management
    community. They are:
     A. Respect, fairness, transparency, and freedom

     B. Responsibility, transparency, fairness, and honesty

     C. Respect, freedom, honesty, and transparency

     D. Responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty

14. Prompt lists are usually developed based on historical information and
    knowledge accumulated from previous similar projects. Which of the
    following statements about risk prompt lists is wrong?

     A. The prompt list can be used as a framework

     B. The lowest level of the Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) cannot be used
        as a risk prompt list.

     C. Prompt lists can be used for idea generation

     D. Prompt list is a predetermined list of risk categories

15. Lena is managing the construction of a new office facility for her
    company. The project is halfway through the execution. The project
    sponsor has asked Lena to ensure that all key project stakeholders are
    still committed to the project. How can Lena assess the stakeholders'
    current engagement levels?

     A. By analyzing the most recent issue register

     B. By reviewing the Stakeholders Engagement Assessment Matrix last
        updated during the planning phase of the project

     C. By requesting the key stakeholders to submit a signed declaration of
        commitment
      D. By communicating and interacting with the key stakeholders

16. The list of identified risks is found in the risk register. However, the
    overall high-level project risks is first listed in the:

      A. Scope statement

      B. Requirement document

      C. Project charter

      D. Risk management plan

17. A number of identified risks occurred early in a project. As a result, most
    of the project objectives ended up in jeopardy. The project manager
    decided to present a case to management that the project be closed down.
    This is an example of:

      A. Risk Acceptance

      B. Risk Mitigation

      C. Risk Avoidance

      D. Risk Transfer

18. 20 percent of the work was completed in a project. At this stage, the
    project manager determined that the budget at completion (BAC) was no
    longer viable and developed a forecasted estimate at completion (EAC).
    What index can the project manager use to look at the calculated
    projection of cost performance that must be achieved on the remaining
    work?

      A. Schedule Performance Index (SPI)
      B. Cost Performance Index (CPI)

      C. Cost Variance (CV)

      D. To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI)

19. A project uses rounding of activity cost estimates data to the nearest
    $100, uses staff hours as the unit of measure for resources, and has a
    variance threshold of 10 percent deviation from the baseline plan. These
    approaches are typically documented in the:

      A. Cost management plan

      B. Scope Statement

      C. WBS

      D. Project charter

20. You are two days late on reporting the status for a project you are
    managing. The status report indicates that the project is lagging behind
    schedule. During the current week, you are confident of making up some
    of the lost time. How should you report project status?

      A. Since the status report is already due, do nothing. Send out the status
         report next week when the project is back on track.

      B. Since the status report is already two days overdue, you may communicate
         to stakeholders that you will send a consolidated status report next week.
         In this manner, you can avoid being untruthful or falsifying reports.

      C. Send out a status report to all stakeholders indicating that the project is on
         track. Once this week goes by, things will be fine, and the status reports
         will be back to normal.
      D. You should report project status exactly as it is. You may also mention
         that you expect to make up some of the lost ground but will truthfully
         represent current status.

21. You are a business development manager at a mid-sized automobile
    manufacturing company. Recently, you were given a project to assess the
    feasibility of manufacturing light-duty trucks in a Southeast Asian
    country. To develop a cost estimate, you visit the country with a team of
    experts to analyze local resources such as power, labor, and real estate.
    After the visit, you discuss the findings with an automobile
    manufacturing consultant. The consultant notes that the local laws and
    government bureaucracy typically make foreign investors spend more
    than a year obtaining all necessary permits. To avoid these delays, the
    consultant advises giving a small amount of company stock to the son of
    the country's president. In return, the president's son will personally
    expedite the issuing of all required permits. What should you do?

      A. Add the opportunity costs associated with the year delay in getting
         permitted without local assistance.

      B. Notify your company that a bribe is necessary to avoid lengthy delays in
         permitting.

      C. Facilitate a meeting with the president's son and your managing director
         to finalize the details of the stock for services arrangement.

      D. Determine the legality of the proposed exchange of stock for permitting
         assistance.

22. Sally, a project manager who is a PMP, discovered an error in the
    estimation of a project. A certain cost was double calculated; as a result,
    the budget, which is already approved, was now in excess by $25,000.
    She knows that publicizing this information may cause her to get a poor
    performance appraisal, since her company is meticulous about such
    matters. What should she do?
      A. She does not need to do anything since this will have a positive impact on
         the project's spend and margins.

      B. Since the excess funds won't be required, she can now use the funding to
         make additional investments for the project.

      C. She should bring this to the notice of the appropriate stakeholders and
         have the necessary steps taken to decrease the budget.

      D. She does not need to do anything since the budget is already approved.
         This situation is okay as long as the extra funds are not spent.

23. Conformance to requirements and fitness for use are key concepts in
    quality management. Which of the following is another name for
    customer needs?

      A. Scope creep

      B. Process mapping

      C. Voice of the Customer

      D. Prompt list

24. At the beginning of the project, a project manager realized that the
    technical expertise of the team was limited, a risk to the project. Midway
    through the project, the project manager decided this was no longer a risk
    and considered it outdated. As part of which process would he do the risk
    reassessment?

      A. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

      B. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

      C. Identify Risks
      D. Monitor Risks

25. You were just hired by a waste management company to develop a solid
    waste management program in an underdeveloped country. The project
    will be on a build-operate-transfer basis and will have a two-year
    duration. At the close of the project, local authorities will run the
    program. The World Bank sponsors the project, and a large consortium
    has received the award. Your company is subcontracted to do this project
    along with two more contractor companies. After the project scope was
    finalized, you developed a cost estimate of US$5.5 million. The sponsor
    reviews your detailed costing sheets and is concerned about the total cost
    figure. He tells you that the maximum allowable budget he can allocate
    for this project is US$5 million. What should you do?

      A. Ask for a reduction in scope.

      B. Evaluate ways that can result in cost savings and re-estimate the project.

      C. Advise the sponsor that the project cannot be completed within the
         available budget.

      D. Begin the project with the intent of requesting a budget increase at a later
         point in time.

26. A certain project was in the Collect Requirements phase. The product's
    eventual users could not define their requirements. In this scenario,
    which of the following tools could have helped determine the
    requirements?

      A. Interviews

      B. Prototypes

      C. Surveys
      D. Questionnaires

27. All team members have not yet been hired for a project. However, the
    project manager went ahead with estimating activity durations,
    budgeting, and other activities. What could likely happen to the activity
    durations?

      A. The activity durations are likely to decrease.

      B. The activity durations are likely to change.

      C. The activity durations will remain the same.

      D. The activity durations are likely to increase.

28. The senior analyst on a project came up with Activity Duration Estimates
    as follows: Activity A: 10 days + a lag of two days; Activity B: 1 week +
    a lead of three days. The project manager who reviewed these estimates
    raised some objections to them. What would they most likely be?

      A. The analyst should have included percent variance information while
         mentioning the Activity Duration Estimate. This would indicate a range of
         possible results.

      B. Activity Duration Estimates should not include any lag or lead
         information.

      C. It is advisable not to mix up units such as days and weeks while coming
         up with Activity Duration Estimates.

      D. The Activity Duration Estimate should have also mentioned the
         predecessor or successor activity to which the lag or lead is attached.

29. The sponsor of a project created a document that included the business
    need and the cost-benefit analysis. What would this document be termed
   as?

      A. The project statement of work

      B. The business case

      C. The project management plan

      D. The contract

30. Mark is managing a telecom network deployment project. The buyer of
    the telecom network is an external entity. Recently, the customer
    requested that all future project updates be posted to their information
    system automatically. In order to implement this, the project team needs
    to customize their project management information system so it can be
    integrated with the customer's information system. This is a new
    customer requirement that was not a part of the original project's scope.
    What should the project manager do?

      A. Request that the customer terminate the current contract and award a new
         contract.

      B. Ask the project team to customize the project management information
         system.

      C. Ignore the request; this is outside the project's scope.

      D. Initiate the formal change control process.

31. Variance analysis refers to cost performance measurements used to
    determine the magnitude of variation in comparison to the original cost
    baseline. What is the trend on the percentage range of acceptable
    variances as the project progresses?

      A. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease as the
         project progresses.

      B. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to increase as the
         project progresses.

      C. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease first
         and then increase as the project progresses beyond 50 percent completion.

      D. The percentage range of acceptable variances remain the same as the
         project progresses.

32. Many organizations consider contract administration to be an
    administrative function separate from the project organization. Who
    carries out the function of contract administration in such organizations?

      A. The Project Manager

      B. The Procurement Advisor

      C. The Procurement Administrator

      D. The Contract Advisor

33. An experienced project manager was assigned a project of small scope.
    Which of the following could be true of the project?

      A. Defining Activities, sequencing activities, estimating activity durations,
         and developing the schedule could be viewed as a single process.

      B. Estimating activity durations may be skipped for the project.

      C. Developing and Controlling the schedule could be viewed as a single
         process.

      D. Defining Activities, estimating activity durations, developing the
         schedule, and controlling the schedule could be viewed as a single
         process.

34. A project was randomly selected for a quality audit, and the external
    auditor found various issues and nonconformance. The project manager
    lodged a complaint with the quality department that this was improper
    procedure, and he should have received notice since an external auditor
    was involved. What is your view?

      A. The project manager is correct. Quality audits need to be scheduled when
         an external auditor is involved so that the project manager has time to
         prepare for them.

      B. The project manager is correct. The project team must perform all quality
         audits.

      C. The project manager has no case. Quality audits may be random and
         performed by internal or external auditors.

      D. The project manager has no case. Quality audits are always carried out by
         external auditors.

35. You are reviewing the response to an RFP issued by your company for a
    project that will last a year and exceed US$5 million. Three vendors have
    been shortlisted. The first, Nosteltec, Inc., is a relatively new company in
    this industry. It has assembled a team of industry experts with vast
    industry experience and qualifications. The second company, Xen
    Contractor, has been in business for 20 years. You and your company
    have a long and positive history working with this vendor. The third
    company is SonoNet LLC. It has been in business for 10 years and has a
    reputation for extensive expertise and superior delivery. They are also
    well-known for being one of the more expensive providers in the market.
    You have many relationships with the Xen Contractor staff, which you
    established during prior procurement contracts with this company. As a
    result, a project manager from Xen Contractor, with whom you are
   friendly both personally and professionally, calls you for clarification on
   a point

      A. Clarify via email

      B. Clarify via phone call

      C. Advise the vendor that the RFP is self-explanatory

      D. Send the clarification to all three vendors

36. During the procurement process, a contractual relationship is established
    between a buyer and a seller. During the contract lifecycle, what is the
    correct sequence in which the following terminology is applied to a
    seller: Vendor, selected source, and bidder?

      A. The seller is viewed first as a selected source, then as a bidder and then as
         a vendor.

      B. The seller is viewed first as a vendor, then as a bidder and then as a
         selected source.

      C. The seller is viewed first as a bidder, then as a selected source and then as
         a vendor.

      D. The seller is viewed first as a bidder, then as a vendor, then as a selected
         source.

37. A project manager is analyzing the relationship between the consumption
    of project funds and the work being accomplished for such expenditures.
    In which project management process would this be done?

      A. Determine Budget

      B. Estimate Costs
      C. Control Costs

      D. Manage Costs

38. One of the stakeholders of a project initiated a change request, which
    was then documented in the change control system. Who would typically
    be responsible for approving or rejecting the change request?

      A. An authority within the project management team or external organization

      B. The sponsor

      C. The stakeholder who raised the change request

      D. The project manager

39. A critical project rollout was delayed because one of the stakeholders did
    not receive necessary communication on time. On further analysis, the
    project manager discovered that the communication was sent to the
    wrong teams. This could have happened because:

      A. Communication broke down between the project team and the
         stakeholder.

      B. The project manager failed to manage stakeholder expectations.

      C. The stakeholder communications requirements were not properly
         analyzed during the Plan Communications Management process.

      D. The stakeholder did not proactively ask for updates.

40. While sequencing activities for a project, the project management team
    applied certain discretionary dependencies. This was based on their
    knowledge of best practices within the project application area. What is
    the potential risk involved in using such dependencies?
      A. They can create fixed float values and create external dependencies.

      B. They can create arbitrary float values and limit later scheduling options.

      C. They can create arbitrary float values and create external dependencies.

      D. They can create arbitrary float values and create mandatory dependencies.

41. Activity attributes extend the description of the activity by identifying
    various components associated with the activity. Typically, how many
    attributes are associated with each activity?

      A. They should be between five and ten.

      B. The number of attributes varies by application area.

      C. They should be fewer than five.

      D. The number of attributes depends on the activity duration.

42. Due to a tight project schedule, a project manager did not document
    lessons learned throughout the project cycle. However, at the end of the
    project, he finally documented the lessons learned. Your comment on
    this is:

      A. This is not OK. Lessons learned must be documented throughout the
         project as well as at the end of the project.

      B. This is OK. Lessons learned should be documented at the end of the
         project.

      C. This is not OK. Lessons learned need to be documented throughout the
         project and must not be done at the project's end.

      D. This is correct. Lessons learned are intended to be documented only at the
         project's end.

43. A project manager is preparing the WBS for a software project. The
    WBS includes all the product and project work but excludes the project
    management work. From the following choices, choose a statement that
    correctly describes this situation.

      A. This is incorrect. Include product work and project management as part of
         the WBS but exclude project work.

      B. This is incorrect. Project work and project management are part of the
         WBS, but product work is not.

      C. This is incorrect. Include product work, project work, and project
         management work.

      D. This is correct. Include product and project work as part of the WBS but
         exclude project management work.

44. As part of earned value management (EVM), a project manager is
    calculating the to-complete performance index (TCPI) based on EAC.
    The data he has is as follows: The budget at completion for the project is
    $100,000. The earned value for the project is $25,000. The actual costs
    to date are $40,000, and the estimate at completion is $115,000. What is
    the TCPI that he will get?

      A. 1.1

      B. 0.9

      C. 1

      D. 0

45. How can changes be made to a project management plan once the project
   manager baselines it?

      A. By generating a change request and having it approved through the
         Perform Integrated Change Control process.

      B. This is typically done by using a version control system. The project
         manager creates a new version with the changes and baselines it as the
         new baseline.

      C. This is done by maintaining a revision history or log. The project manager
         documents the changes in detail and then baselines it.

      D. A project management plan cannot be changed once it is baselined. An
         addendum has to be created to incorporate the changes.

46. The morale of the team members of a project is very low. The team
    members feel they were not given opportunities to participate in the
    organizational team development activities due to over-allocation to
    project tasks, and so, they missed opportunities to develop. Which of the
    following is the most likely cause of this situation?

      A. Use of zero-sum rewards in the project

      B. A poorly defined resource calendar

      C. Too many senior team members

      D. Poor interpersonal skills in the team

47. Given multiple alternatives, the group decision method that allows the
    largest block in a group to decide (even if more than 50 percent of the
    members of the group do not support the decision) is:

      A. Dictatorship
      B. Plurality

      C. Unanimity

      D. Majority

48. In a multi-phase project, the procurement team decided to close the
    procurements applicable to a particular phase of the project. What
    happens to unresolved claims?

      A. Unresolved claims are usually resolved at the end of all phases of the
         project.

      B. Unresolved claims are also closed when the procurements for that phase
         are closed.

      C. Unresolved claims remain open for a period of one year from closure of
         procurements.

      D. Unresolved claims may still be subject to litigation after closure.

49. During the Control Scope process, analysis of the scope performance
    resulted in a change request to the scope baseline. This change request
    will be processed for review and disposition in the:

      A. Control Quality

      B. Perform Integrated Change Control

      C. Monitor and Control Project Work

      D. Validate Scope

50. The quality cost of a project rose significantly during the course of the
    project. A post-mortem analysis of the increased cost revealed that this
was due to poorly defined acceptance criteria. During which phase
should the acceptance criteria have been properly captured?

 A. Develop Project Charter process

 B. Define Scope process

 C. Manage Stakeholder Engagement process

 D. Plan Quality Management process
PMP Lite Mock Exam 13
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Inform the sponsor you must explore other options before committing
   to that timeline. Changing the budget, reducing scope, or adding resources
   are activities that must be agreed on by the project stakeholders before you
   can proceed. PMI requires project managers to provide timely and
   accurate information, and to follow all decision-making processes and
   policies. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
   Responsibility]

2. C - A resource calendar does not usually contain cost information. The
   other choices are valid constituents of a resource calendar. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 323]

3. D - The first step should be to determine if the requests are legitimate or
   not. The ideal place to locate this information is the communications
   management plan. The communications management plan documents
   stakeholder communication requirements including the content, language
   and format. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 377] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

4. D - When team members are assigned to projects in advance of the start of
   the project, they are termed as pre-assignments. Such assignments can
   happen when resources are promised as part of a competitive proposal,
   when projects are dependent on critical resources, or if some staff
   assignments have been defined in the project charter. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 333] [Project Resource Management]

5. B - Questionnaires offer a quick way of obtaining responses from a big
   group of people especially when the specific questions are known in
   advance. Interviews, phone conversations and focus groups are more time
   consuming techniques. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 143] [Project
  Stakeholder Management]

6. A - During the norming stage, the project team members start to work
   together and adjust their work habits and behaviors to support each other.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 338] [Project Resource Management]

7. A - Scheduled training occurs as stated in the Human Resource plan and
   can include online, classroom, on-the-job, etc. Unplanned training can take
   place through conversation, observation, and project performance
   appraisals. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 342] [Project Resource
   Management]

8. A - When prospective bids are significantly different from the estimates
   prepared by a professional estimator, it likely means that the procurement
   statement of work (SOW) was deficient or that the prospective sellers have
   misunderstood the procurement SOW. The other choices jump to
   conclusions without relevant data. It is possible that some prospective
   sellers do not have the skills or are trying to underbid; but in this case, all
   of them are off by a large percentage. Hence, it points to a deficient
   statement of work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 479] [Project Procurement
   Management]

9. A- A configuration/change management system, including change control
   processes, provides a mechanism for the project management team to
   communicate all approved and rejected changes to the stakeholders
   consistently. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 115]

10. D - Any component of the project management plan can be used as an
    input but the most important ones are the communications management
    plan, the risk management plan, the stakeholder engagement plan and the
    change management plan. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 525]

11. A - Contingency reserves are included in the project cost baseline.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 254] [Project Cost Management]
12. B - Resource leveling is a schedule network analysis technique. It is
    applied to a schedule that has already been analyzed by the critical path
    method. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 211] [Project Schedule
    Management]

13. D - The values that practitioners from the global project management
    community have identified as being the most important are:
    Responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty. These values form the
    basis for the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

14. B - The lowest level in the RBS can be used as a basic risk prompt list.
    The other statements are all true. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 416]
    [Project Risk Management]

15. D - The stakeholders' current engagement levels can be assessed by
    communicating and interacting with them. Reviewing the Stakeholders
    Engagement Assessment Matrix developed during the planning phase of
    the project will be of little help, if it has not been reviewed since then.
    Analyzing the issue register can indicate stakeholder engagement levels,
    but this document alone is not sufficient to determine the current
    engagement levels. Asking the stakeholders to sign a declaration of
    commitment is ridiculous. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 524] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

16. C - The project charter is a document that authorizes the project. Along
    with details such as the purpose of the project, project objectives, high-
    level requirements, etc., it also lists the overall project risks. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 81] [Project Integration Management]

17. C - Risk avoidance involves changing the project management plan to
    eliminate the risk. Although an extreme situation, shutting down a
    project constitutes a radical but legitimate avoidance strategy. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]
18. D - The to-complete performance index (TCPI) is the calculated
    projection of cost performance that must be achieved on the remaining
    work to meet a specified goal such as the BAC or EAC. It is defined as
    the work remaining divided by the funds remaining. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 266] [Project Cost Management]

19. A - Cost management processes and their associated tools and techniques
    are documented in the cost management plan. These include parameters
    such as the level of accuracy (how much rounding), units of measure
    (staff hours, weeks, etc.), and control thresholds (percentage deviation
    from baseline plan). [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 238, 239] [Project Cost
    Management]

20. D - As practitioners in the global project management community, it is
    our responsibility to be honest in our communications and conduct. We
    need to provide accurate information even if it is not favorable to us.
    [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

21. D - Determine the legality of the proposed exchange of stock for
    assistance with permitting. If this arrangement does not violate the laws
    of your country, the country where you are hoping to start work,
    corporate regulations, or industry regulations, the cost of the exchange
    may well offset the opportunity cost of a yearlong permitting delay.
    Once the legality has been established, a plan forward can be developed.
    [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

22. C - She needs to notify management and the appropriate stakeholders of
    this discrepancy so that corrective action can be taken. She needs to do
    this even at the cost of receiving a poor performance appraisal. [PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

23. C - In quality management, customer needs and requirements are also
    known as voice of the customer (VOC). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 145]
    [Project Quality Management]
24. D - Risk reassessment is performed as part of the Monitor Risks process.
    Such project risk reassessments should be regularly scheduled and may
    result in the closure of outdated risks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 453]

25. B - You should evaluate approaches that can result in cost savings and
    re-estimate the project. Requesting a change in budget or scope without
    fully analyzing the options or simply moving ahead with plans to request
    additional funds in the future are violations of the PMI Code of Ethics.
    This code requires project managers to provide accurate, timely, and
    truthful project information at all times. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. B - Prototypes are working models of the expected product before
    actually building it. The tangible nature of prototypes allows users to
    experiment with a model of their final product early in the project life
    cycle and to generate clear feedback. Interviews, questionnaires and
    surveys were unlikely to help in this case since the users were struggling
    to define their requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 147]

27. B - Project team assignments are an input to the Estimate Activity
    Durations process. Estimating activity durations without this input is
    risky. When estimating of activity durations is done when all team
    members have not been acquired, it is possible that the competency
    levels of the newer team members will be different from those planned.
    Therefore, it can only be said that the activity durations will likely
    change. Whether they will remain the same, increase, or decrease, will
    depend on the competency levels of the new team members. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 198] [Project Resource Management]

28. B - Activity duration estimates are quantitative assessments of the likely
    work periods to complete an activity. They do not contain any lag or lead
    information. Lead and lags are determined during the Develop Schedule
    process when schedule network analysis is performed. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 209] [Project Schedule Management]
29. B - The business case usually provides information from a business
    standpoint so that any investment in the project can be justified.
    Typically it would contain both the business need as well as the cost-
    benefit analysis. The business case is an input to the Develop Project
    Charter process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 77] [Project Integration
    Management]

30. D - Change requests do come. They are never ignored; they are managed
    through the integrated change control process. This does not require
    terminating the contract. Implementing the new requirement without
    following the change control process is not advisable. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 113] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. A - At the start of the project, larger percentage variances are acceptable.
    However, as more work is accomplished, the percentage range of
    acceptable variances will tend to decrease. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    262] [Project Cost Management]

32. C - In many organizations, a procurement administrator is responsible for
    ensuring that the procurement relationship is properly managed. The
    procurement administrator may be on the project team but typically
    reports to a supervisor from a different department. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 494] [Project Procurement Management]

33. A - On projects with small scope, defining activities, sequencing
    activities, estimating activity durations, and developing the schedule are
    tightly linked and are often viewed as a single process. The other choices
    are incorrect. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 175]

34. C - The project manager has no case. Quality audits may be scheduled or
    random and may be conducted by internal or external auditors. It is the
    responsibility of the project manager and the project management to
    ensure that the project documentation is kept up to date and available for
    any quality audit. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 294] [Project Quality
    Management]
35. D - Send the clarification to all three vendors. PMI's Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct mandates that project managers provide fair and
    equal access to information and apply the rules of the organization
    without favoritism. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]

36. C - During the contract life cycle, the seller can be viewed first as a
    bidder, then as a selected source, and then as the contracted supplier or
    vendor. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 461] [Project Procurement
    Management]

37. C - Control Costs is the process of monitoring the status of a project to
    update the project budget and manage changes to the cost baseline. Much
    of the effort of cost control involves analyzing the relationship between
    the consumption of project funds and the work being accomplished for
    such expenditures. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 257]

38. A - Typically, some authority within the project management team or an
    external organization would approve or reject the change request.
    However, on many projects the project manager is given authority to
    approve certain types of change requests. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    115] [Project Integration Management]

39. C - It is likely that stakeholder communications requirements were not
    properly analyzed during the Plan Communications Management process
    and the Project Communications Management Plan was not accurate.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 377] [Project Stakeholder Management]

40. B - Discretionary dependencies are established based on the knowledge
    of best practices within a specific application area. This is done to
    achieve a specific sequence even though there are other options. The risk
    is that they may cause arbitrary float values and later limit scheduling
    options because of the specific sequencing chosen. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 191] [Project Schedule Management]
41. B - Activity attributes can vary by application area. Components for each
    activity change over time. Initially they may include activity ID, WBS
    ID, and activity name. Later, they may include activity codes, activity
    description, predecessor activities, successor activities, logical
    relationships, leads, lags, resource requirements, imposed dates,
    constraints, and assumptions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 186] [Project
    Schedule Management]

42. A - Lessons learned should be documented throughout the project cycle.
    The Manage Project Knowledge process is an executing process that
    stresses on this requirement. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 98] [Project
    Integration Management]

43. C - The WBS is a deliverable-oriented decomposition of all the work to
    be done by the project team to achieve project objectives. It organizes
    and defines the total scope of the project. Thus, it includes product work,
    project work and the project management work required to complete the
    project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 159] [Project Scope Management]

44. C - TCPI based on EAC = (BAC - EV)/(EAC - AC) = (100000 -
    25000)/(115000 - 40000) = 75000/75000 = 1. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    266] [Project Cost Management]

45. A - Once the project management plan has been baselined, it may be
    changed only when a change request is generated and approved through
    the Perform Integrated Change Control process. To keep track of
    changes, a version control system or a revision log will also be
    maintained. However, the changed version can be baselined only after
    approval. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 113] [Project Integration
    Management]

46. B - Resource calendars identify times when the project team members
    can participate in team development activities. If the team members are
    unable to find time for such activities because they are over allocated, it
    is likely that the calendar has been poorly planned. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 323] [Project Resource Management]

47. B - This group decision-making technique is called Plurality. Even if a
    majority (where more than 50% of the members support the decision) is
    not achieved, the largest block in the group makes the decision.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 144] [Project Scope Management]

48. D - Even after the procurements for a particular phase are closed,
    unresolved claims are still subject to litigation. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 498] [Project Procurement Management]

49. B - Analysis of Scope performance is done as part of the Control Scope
    phase. Determining the cause and degree of variance relative to the scope
    baseline is an important aspect of this activity (called Variance
    Analysis). Change requests that result from this activity are processed in
    the Perform Integrated Change Control phase. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 113] [Project Integration Management]

50. B - Acceptance criteria are documented in the project scope statement,
    developed during the Define Scope process. Poorly defined acceptance
    criteria would then propagate to the Plan Quality Management process
    used for planning quality. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 154]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 14
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 14
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You are an electrical engineer with extensive experience in managing
   transmission projects but limited experience with electronic design
   projects. However, in a stretch assignment, you were recently transferred
   to another department in your company that focuses on electronic design.
   Furthermore, you were asked to lead a highly important project involving
   both transmission and electronic design. In preparation for a meeting with
   your manager to discuss this opportunity, you review the initial project
   design brief. Due to your limited background in electronic design, a
   number of items in this document seem unclear to you. When you arrive at
   your meeting, your manager asks if you will be leading the project. How
   do you respond?

      A. Accept the project and tell your manager that your expertise in
         transmission makes you an ideal manager for this project.
      B. Decline the project, citing your lack of experience in electronics design.

      C. Accept the project, but do not discuss your qualifications or lack thereof.

      D. State that you would like to lead the project, but you must disclose that
         your primary domain of expertise is transmission, and that you may need
         supplementary training in electronics design.

2. A seller began a project that was contracted on a time-and-materials
   (T&M) basis. Based on the agreed-upon rates and effort, the initial
   contract amount was $100,000 over a one-year period. However, when the
   project was completed, the total contract value turned out to be $350,000
   over a two-year period. What mechanism could the buyer have used to
   prevent this unlimited cost growth and schedule change?

      A. Use of a not-to-exceed value and a time limit on the contract

      B. A service level agreement

      C. A penalty based on the increased cost and timeline

      D. Use of a fixed price contract

3. The Budget at Completion (BAC) for a project is $50,000. The Actual
   Costs (AC) to date are $10,000. The Earned Value (EV) is $7,000. At this
   stage, the project management team did a manual bottom-up summation of
   costs and forecast an Estimate to Complete (ETC) of $50,000. What is the
   Estimate at Completion (EAC) for the project?

      A. $57,000

      B. $40,000

      C. $60,000
      D. $53,000

4. Projects, portfolios, and programs are different entities in an organization.
   Which of the following choices states a correct relationship between them?

      A. A portfolio consists of a collection of projects or programs that are
         grouped together to achieve strategic business objectives. The projects or
         programs need not be directly related.

      B. A project is a collection of programs and portfolios that are grouped
         together to achieve the project objectives.

      C. A program consists of a collection of projects or portfolios that are
         grouped together to achieve strategic business objectives.

      D. A program is a collection of projects that are grouped together for
         convenience. It may include unrelated work if the work is under the same
         business division.

5. Carole is managing a hotel refurbishment project. She has identified her
   project's key stakeholders. Carole now wants to expand this list of
   stakeholders and convert it to a comprehensive list of project stakeholders.
   What should Carole do?

      A. Do not spend more time on identifying the non-key stakeholders

      B. Seek expert judgment from the identified key stakeholders

      C. Request that the project sponsor provide the details of the remaining
         stakeholders

      D. Carry out a stakeholder analysis with the identified key stakeholders

6. Janice, a project manager, wanted to obtain early feedback on the project
   requirements. However, she was concerned that the abstract
   representations of the requirements might not elicit useful feedback.
  Which of the following tools and techniques might help her overcome this
  hurdle?

      A. Histograms

      B. Prototypes

      C. Ishikawa diagram

      D. Control charts

7. You are the project manager of a project and are about to conduct a risk
   identification exercise in a few days' time. You want to remind the
   participants in the exercise beforehand of the various sources from which
   risk may arise in the project. What could you use to help you do this?

      A. A Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)

      B. A Risk Simulation Structure (RSS)

      C. A Risk Register

      D. An Impact Matrix

8. Ron is a project manager handling an alternate water-supply project.
   During a project performance review, he notices the following: (i) Activity
   A, on the critical path, is delayed by four days. (ii) Activity B, not on the
   critical path, is delayed by nine days. (iii) Activity C, on the critical path,
   is delayed by two days. (iv) Activity D, not on the critical path, is delayed
   by five days. In what sequence should Ron prioritize his efforts in
   addressing these delays?

      A. First Activities A and B, and then Activities C and D

      B. First Activities A and C, and then Activities B and D
     C. First Activities C and D, and then Activities A and B

     D. First Activities A and D, and then Activities B and C

9. Many quality problems plagued a project. The quality of the work
   products deviated considerably from specifications. The project manager
   decided to do a root cause analysis. What activities does a root cause
   analysis include?

     A. Discovery of the underlying causes of a problem

     B. Problem Identification and discovery of the underlying causes of a
        problem

     C. Identification of a problem

     D. Problem identification, discovery of the underlying causes of a problem,
        and development of preventive actions

10. Mary has recently finalized her project management plan and has gotten
    it approved. She is managing a complex manufacturing process
    improvement project. The project stakeholders' constant support and
    commitment are crucial for the success of the project. Which of the
    following are the most important stakeholder management processes at
    this stage?

     A. Plan Stakeholder Engagement and Manage Stakeholder Engagement

     B. Identify Stakeholders and Plan Stakeholder Engagement

     C. Manage Stakeholder Engagement and Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

     D. Plan Stakeholder Engagement and Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

11. An important aspect of project management is the handling of
    stakeholder expectations. Typically, at what level are the stakeholders
    with respect to the project manager?

      A. At higher levels and with greater authority

      B. At all levels and with varying degrees of authority

      C. At higher levels but only the project sponsor has authority greater than the
         project manager

      D. At the same level with varying degrees of authority

12. Public recognition of superior performance creates positive
    reinforcement for the team members. When is the best time for a project
    manager to recognize team members' performance?

      A. During the lifecycle of the project

      B. At the end of every phase of the project

      C. At the end of the project

      D. As mandated by the HR department

13. The requirements elicitation team has generated a large number of ideas
    during sessions to gather product and project requirements. Which of the
    following techniques is best suited to sorting these ideas into groups for
    review and analysis?

      A. Control chart

      B. Venn diagram

      C. Affinity diagram

      D. Brainstorming
14. One of the performance requirements of a company website development
    project is that the home page should load in one second. Such
    performance requirements are usually part of:

      A. Business needs

      B. Business requirements

      C. Project management requirements

      D. Product requirements

15. Anna has recently taken over a project as the project manager. The
    project is early in the executing phase. Although all the key stakeholders
    signed off on the project scope statement, Anna learns that some of the
    key stakeholders do not fully understand the project scope. The
    stakeholders' constant support is crucial for the success of the project.
    What must Anna do?

      A. Email the copy of the scope management plan to the key project
         stakeholders

      B. Don't do anything since all the key project stakeholders signed the scope
         statement.

      C. Email the copy of the scope statement to the key project stakeholders.

      D. Conduct one-to-one meeting sessions with these key stakeholders to
         ensure they understand the project scope

16. You have just joined a new organization as a project manager. You have
    heard a number of rumors about the procurement manager having
    possible underhanded dealings with suppliers. However, you have no
    proof these rumors are true. Your project requires a large number of
    dump trucks. Company policy mandates that all purchases go through
    the procurement department rather than the department employees. The
   value of the dump truck purchase is US$395,000, and the contract went
   to a supplier your company regularly uses. Shortly after taking delivery
   of the dump trucks, you learn the procurement manager is driving a new
   car. What should you do?

     A. Ask the procurement manager about the purchase of her new car

     B. Report this to the appropriate management

     C. Talk to the supplier to find out if there was a bribe involved in the project

     D. Do nothing

17. The project management team expects that during the course of the
    project there could be delays in component delivery due to strikes,
    changes to the permitting processes, or extensions of specific
    engineering durations. What analysis could be helpful in preparing
    contingency and response plans to mitigate these issues?

     A. Contingency analysis

     B. Variance analysis

     C. What-If scenario analysis

     D. Schedule compression

18. In the earned value management technique, the cost performance
    baseline is:

     A. Cost Measurement Baseline (CMB)

     B. Performance Measurement Baseline (PMB)

     C. Performance Base Value (PBV)
      D. Actual Baseline (AB)

19. A seller entered into a contract with a buyer. At the end of the project,
    the seller was reimbursed for the cost of the project but received a low
    fee based on certain subjective criteria that were specified in the contract.
    What type of contract is this likely to be?

      A. Cost Plus Fixed Fee (CPFF) contract

      B. Fixed Price Incentive Fee (FPIF) contract

      C. Cost Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) contract

      D. Cost Plus Award Fee (CPAF) contract

20. You have just completed a solid waste management project in an
    underdeveloped country. The contractor you are working for has a strict
    policy of abiding by local laws and rules although the local resources
    working on the project have a much more lax approach to following laws
    and policies. Now at the end of the project, you are handing over the
    operational equipment to the local operators and disposing of the leftover
    inventory and other materials that were used during the project. More
    than 50 percent of the toxic materials used during the project remains in
    your inventory. There is no law that would prohibit you from disposing
    of either the type or quantity of remaining materials in the local sewage
    system. What should you do?

      A. Give the material to local resources to dispose of by selling it to a
         recycling facility

      B. Do not dispose of the materials improperly

      C. Dispose of the material in the local sewage system; there is no law
         applicable here

      D. Abandon the materials in the project facility you are handing over to the
         local operators

21. Progressive elaboration is least applicable to which of the following
    processes?

      A. Create WBS

      B. Control Schedule

      C. Develop Schedule

      D. Estimate Activity Durations

22. During a cost performance review with certain senior officers from the
    finance department, you discover there are certain inconsistencies in the
    way cost performance reporting is done, and you obtain data that shows
    these officers are deliberately misleading senior management. What
    should you do?

      A. Write an anonymous letter to senior management about these activities.

      B. Bring this to the notice of senior management even though there are no
         formal policies in place for whistleblowers.

      C. Do nothing but make sure that the data for your project is clean.

      D. Do nothing. The corrupt behavior of the finance department officials has
         nothing to do with your project.

23. Your company is planning to bid on a project in an application area you
    have never worked before. You are aware your company does not have
    any resources with the necessary expertise, but you are confident of
    ramping up the necessary skills and delivering the project successfully.
    Further, the buyer has not specifically asked for prior experience of
    completed projects of similar size and scope. Your management is
    pressuring you to submit a bid. What should you do?
      A. Refuse to do what your company management asks you to do since it
         violates the code of ethics and professionalism.

      B. Do what your management asks you to do. Your loyalty needs to be with
         your company. As long as management has the confidence you can do the
         project, you can go with the plan.

      C. Do what your management asks you to do, but inform them that you do
         not want to be associated with the project since it violates the code of
         ethics and professionalism.

      D. Explain the gaps to your management clearly and also explain that this
         will be a stretch assignment. You can further explain to them that it is best
         to reveal to the potential buyer that your company does not possess the
         necessary skills but that you are confident of ramping up the necessary
         skills and delivering the project successfully, based on your company's
         track record.

24. Which of the following processes goes beyond the distribution of
    relevant information and seeks to ensure that the information being
    communicated to project stakeholders is appropriately generated, as well
    as received and understood?

      A. Manage Communications

      B. Monitor Communications

      C. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      D. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

25. Eric, a project manager, is a certified PMP. He is responding to an RFP
    from a buyer and needs to fill in details on his company's financial
    performance. His company has performed poorly during the current
    quarter, and the results will be published in two to three days. However,
    the company has done very well in the previous quarters. The RFP is due
    in 10 days, and all the information in the RFP is complete except the
    financial information. What should Eric do?

      A. Eric should fill in the information for the previous quarter and ignore the
         current quarter. This is an aberration, and the company will eventually
         come out of the bad patch.

      B. Eric should present the previous quarter's results as the latest results. This
         will give his company a better chance to win the project.

      C. Eric should fill in the financial information for the previous quarter and
         send out the RFP response before the current quarter results are published.

      D. Eric should wait until the current results are out and update the latest
         financial information before sending out the RFP response.

26. You are managing a project with more than 130 procurement contracts.
    Because of the number of contracts, your project team includes a
    procurement manager and a procurement assistant. Company policy
    requires that certain types of procurements be advertised to potential
    bidders by means of newspaper advertisements. The procurement
    assistant typically reviews the bids received and shortlists the suppliers
    for further review by the procurement team. During a meeting to review
    and select a vendor from the shortlisted suppliers, you discover that one
    of the suppliers is a company your cousin owns. Which of the following
    is your best course of action?

      A. Because the procurement assistant prepared the short list, not you, you do
         not need disclose your relationship with the supplier and may continue to
         participate in the selection process

      B. Disclose your relationship with the provider and continue to participate in
         the selection process

      C. Ask the procurement manager to lead the vendor selection process for this
        contract and excuse yourself from the review

     D. Remove the supplier from the short list

27. A buyer and seller are looking at getting into a long-term relationship
    spanning 10 years. Both parties would like to be protected from the
    unstable financial conditions of their country, which are beyond their
    control. What type of contract is appropriate for such a relationship?

     A. Fixed Price Incentive Fee (FPIF)

     B. Firm Fixed Price (FPP)

     C. Time & Material (T&M)

     D. Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment Contract (FP-EPA)

28. Which of the following quality control tools and techniques may not be
    used for root cause analysis?

     A. Fishbone diagram

     B. Scatter diagram

     C. Ishikawa diagram

     D. Cause-and-effect diagram

29. Midway through the Collect Requirements process, a project manager
    finds there are many unresolved issues regarding product requirements.
    Which of the following is usually the best way to discover and resolve
    issues?

     A. Interviewing

     B. Use of a stakeholder register
      C. Questionnaires

      D. Workshops

30. During a project update meeting, one of the key stakeholders expressed
    his displeasure over the project management approach. One percent of
    the produced deliverables had minor defects which required a rework.
    This stakeholder has been a resisting stakeholder so far. What must the
    project manager do to bring the future project performance in line with
    the approved quality requirements?

      A. Investigate the root cause and identify the required defect repair.

      B. Investigate the root cause and identify the required preventive action.

      C. Investigate the root cause and identify the required corrective action.

      D. Ignore the complaint from the resisting stakeholder.

31. A project manager would like to resolve conflicts by a give-and-take
    attitude rather than by a one-sided approach. Which of these approaches
    is he likely to use?

      A. Forcing

      B. Problem-solving

      C. Directing

      D. Withdrawing

32. A small project with a limited budget is trying to curtail costs. Which of
    the following processes may be eliminated in such a project?

      A. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
     B. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

     C. Identify Risks

     D. Plan Risk Management

33. A number of deliverables were submitted to the buyer as part of a
    project. Where would the project manager find documentation on the
    requirements for formal deliverable acceptance and on how non-
    conforming deliverables can be addressed?

     A. In the SOW

     B. In the lessons-learned document

     C. In the deliverable release note

     D. In the agreement

34. Late in the project cycle, it was discovered that some of the project's
    human resources should have trained in a specific methodology. Where
    should these training strategies have first been documented?

     A. Resource management plan

     B. In the procurement contract

     C. In the project scope statement

     D. In the company HR policy

35. You are managing an electronic chip design project for a customer.
    There are a number of engineers and subject matter experts from the
    customer's organization that have been assigned as resources to the
    project plus several additional design engineers that your company has
    supplied. All the engineers were involved in the development of a
    prototype chip, an extremely time-consuming and expensive process.
    Upon the completion of the prototype, you submit it for review to ensure
    there are no patent infringement issues with the design. However, the
    review determines there are several issues that could result in an
    intellectual property dispute with the patent owners should the prototype
    design be released commercially. Resources from your company
    developed the affected prototype elements, as well as from your
    customer's organization. What should you do?

      A. Ask the engineers to revise the design and resubmit it

      B. Notify the project stakeholders immediately

      C. Request permission to use the copyright material

      D. Submit the prototype as is since the budget and schedule do not
         accommodate rework

36. While managing a large project, the project manager decided to include
    indirect costs as part of his cost estimate. If indirect costs are included in
    an estimate, which of the following is true?

      A. Include indirect costs at the activity level or higher levels

      B. Include indirect costs at the activity level only

      C. Include indirect costs only in earned value measurements and not in cost
         estimates

      D. Exclude indirect costs in cost estimates

37. Which of these is not a legitimate model used to analyze stakeholders?

      A. Influence/impact grid
      B. Power/influence grid

      C. Sufficiency model

      D. Salience model

38. A project manager analyzed the project's communication requirements
    and decided that 10 out of the 30 stakeholders in the project would only
    need voicemail updates of certain information. This type of
    communication is:

      A. Push communication

      B. Pull communication

      C. Interactive communication

      D. On-demand communication

39. A project involved development of a high-speed, hard disk drive. As part
    of its testing, the hard disk was subjected to continuous operation at a
    high speed and an elevated temperature. At the end of the test, the hard
    disk was destroyed beyond use. The cost of such testing is usually
    classified as:

      A. Appraisal costs

      B. Internal failure costs

      C. Cost of nonconformance

      D. Prevention costs

40. Identification of new risks, reassessment of old risks, and closing of
    outdated risks are part of the Monitor Risks process. How often should
    project risk reassessment be scheduled?
      A. It depends on how the project progresses relative to its objectives.

      B. Reassessment is necessary at the 50 percent and 75 percent stages of
         project completion.

      C. Reassessment is necessary at the 25 percent, 50 percent, and 75 percent
         stages of project completion.

      D. Reassessment is necessary at the 20 percent, 40 percent, 60 percent and
         80 percent stages of project completion.

41. Which of the following is the process of communicating and working
    with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address issues as
    they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder involvement?

      A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      B. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

      C. Manage Communications

      D. Monitor Communications

42. Rick has just been assigned as the project manager of a project to
    develop a complex product. The project is in the Define Scope phase.
    Which of these tools and techniques will Rick not use in this phase?

      A. Systems analysis

      B. Process analysis

      C. Product breakdown

      D. Value engineering
43. Teams go through various stages of development. According to the
    Tuckman ladder of development, the stage during which the least amount
    of work gets done is usually the:

      A. Storming phase

      B. Forming phase

      C. Norming phase

      D. Performing phase

44. Analysis of the scope performance resulted in a change request to the
    scope baseline. Change requests can include all the following except:

      A. Defect repair

      B. Supportive action

      C. Corrective action

      D. Preventive action

45. A senior project manager advises a first-time project manager that
    identifying risks is just one step. On a continuing basis, new risks need to
    be identified, and existing risks need to be analyzed and tracked, and
    their status reported. All this is done as part of what process?

      A. Direct and Manage Project Work

      B. Monitor and Control Project Work

      C. Perform Integrated Change Control

      D. Plan Risk Management
46. A project manager has decided to use a decision tree to do a build or
    upgrade analysis. The build requires an investment of $200M. On the
    build decision branch, there is a 60 percent probability of strong demand
    (yielding a revenue of $400M) and a 40 percent probability of weak
    demand (yielding a revenue of $150M). What is the expected monetary
    value (EMV) of the build?

      A. $100M

      B. $300M

      C. $140M

      D. $200M

47. Quality metrics used during the Control Quality process are defined
    during which process?

      A. Plan Quality Management

      B. Define Scope

      C. Collect Requirements

      D. Manage Quality

48. In order to keep costs low, a project management team decided to apply
    statistical sampling while inspecting some of the work products. They
    decided to select 10 out of 50 engineering drawings for inspection.
    During which process should the sample be collected?

      A. Collect Requirements

      B. Control Quality

      C. Plan Quality Management
      D. Manage Quality

49. A project manager prepared a presentation that included data on the
    project's use of resources, improvements in staff efficiency, and the cost
    savings. These activities are part of what process?

      A. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      B. Monitor and Control Project Work

      C. Control Schedule

      D. Control Quality

50. A critical resource is on another project team. It is essential that you get
    his time for your project. You have contacted the resource's team
    manager several times but have received a poor response. What should
    you consider doing next?

      A. Plan for an alternate resource since this resource is not available.

      B. Try to use management influence to obtain the resource's time.

      C. Contact the manager once again to see if he can help.

      D. Train another resource within your project.
PMP Lite Mock Exam 14
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - State that you would like to lead the project, but disclose that your
   expertise is in transmission, not electronics design. PMI's Code of Ethics
   and Professional Conduct mandates that project managers accept only
   those projects for which they have appropriate qualifications and
   experience. However, if project stakeholders are fully informed of the
   areas where you may be lacking skills or knowledge, and they still wish
   you to lead the project, this is not a violation of the code. [PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. A - Use of not-to-exceed values and time limits on T & M contracts help
   prevent unlimited cost growth or schedule changes. A fixed-price contract
   is an option, but whether to choose that option is a decision to be made
   prior to awarding the project and signing the contract. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 78] [Project Procurement Management]

3. C - When a bottom-up manual forecasting has been done for the ETC, the
   calculation for EAC is EAC = AC + bottom-up ETC. Hence, EAC =
   10,000 + 50,000 = $60,000. Note that the BAC is no longer viable at this
   stage. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Project Cost Management]

4. A - A portfolio is a collection of projects or programs that are grouped
   together to achieve a strategic business objective. Portfolio management
   focuses on ensuring that projects and programs are reviewed to prioritize
   resource allocation and that the management of the portfolio is aligned
   with organizational strategies. The projects or programs need not be
   directly related. A program is a collection of projects with common
   objectives, so unrelated work cannot be grouped together under a program.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 11] [Project Framework]

5. B - The project manager is responsible for stakeholder identification; this
  cannot be delegated to the project sponsor. Identifying and analyzing the
  key stakeholders is not enough to ensure the success of the project. Other
  project stakeholders can be identified by interviewing the stakeholders
  who are already identified. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 511] [Project
  Stakeholder Management]

6. B - Prototypes are working models of the expected product before actually
   building it. The tangible nature of prototypes allows stakeholders to
   experiment with a model of their final product early in the project life
   cycle and to generate clear feedback. The other choices are incorrect as
   they are quality management tools. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 147]

7. A - The Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchically organized
   depiction of identified project risks arranged by risk category and
   subcategory. This may be based on a previously prepared categorization
   framework. The RBS serves to remind participants in the risk
   identification exercise of the different sources from which project risk may
   arise. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 405] [Project Risk Management]

8. B - An important part of schedule control is deciding if schedule variation
   requires corrective action. Activities on the critical path get first priority
   for immediate action. Larger delays on activities not on the critical path
   may not require immediate attention since they may not affect the overall
   project schedule. Hence, Ron will first deal with the delays on the critical
   path and then tackle the delays on the other paths. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]

9. D - Root cause analysis includes all of the following: Problem
   identification, discovery of the underlying causes of a problem, and
   development of preventive actions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 292]

10. C - Approval of the project management plan marks the closure of the
    planning phase of the project. The stakeholder management processes
    from the executing and the monitoring & controlling process groups
    should be the center of attention now. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. B - Project stakeholders are persons and organizations having a stake in
    the project. They typically exist at different levels and have varying
    degrees of authority. For example, the project sponsor will be at a higher
    level and have greater authority than the project manager. In contrast, a
    team member may be at a lower level and have lesser authority.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 550] [Project Stakeholder Management]

12. A - A good strategy for project managers is to give the team all possible
    recognition during the life cycle of the project rather than after the
    project is completed. This will keep the team members motivated
    through the duration of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 342]
    [Project Resource Management]

13. C - The affinity diagram enables a large number of ideas to be sorted into
    groups for further review and analysis. It is a tool used in gathering of
    requirements. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 144] [Project Scope
    Management]

14. D - Performance requirements such as the loading time of websites are
    usually considered as part of product requirements and scope. Project
    requirements include business requirements, project management
    requirements and delivery requirements, whereas product requirements
    include technical, security, and performance requirements. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 131] [Project Scope Management]

15. D - It is Anna's duty to ensure that all key project stakeholders
    understand the project scope and are aligned with the project
    management plan. Anna must conduct one-to-one meetings with those
    key stakeholders that are not fully aware of the project scope. Just
    emailing copies of the plans is not sufficient. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    523] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. D - No action is required in this situation. Although PMI's Code of
    Ethics requires project managers to report illegal or unethical activity to
    the appropriate management, you have no evidence that there has been
    any wrongdoing in this situation. Therefore, reporting or investigating
    the procurement manager's new car purchase is unwarranted. [PMI Code
    of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

17. C - What-If Scenario Analysis is used to assess the feasibility of the
    project schedule under adverse conditions. This is an analysis of the
    question "What if the situation represented by scenario 'X' happens?" It
    is used in preparing contingency and response plans to mitigate the
    impact of adverse conditions. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 213] [Project
    Schedule Management]

18. B - The cost performance baseline is an authorized time-phased budget at
    completion (BAC). It is used to measure, monitor, and control overall
    cost performance on the project. In the earned value management
    technique, the cost performance baseline is referred to as the
    performance measurement baseline (PMB). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    254] [Project Cost Management]

19. D - This is likely to be a Cost-Plus-Award-Fee (CPAF) contract. In such
    a contract, the seller is reimbursed for all legitimate costs, but the fee is
    based on the satisfaction of certain broad subjective performance criteria
    defined in the contract. It is generally not subject to appeals. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 472] [Project Procurement Management]

20. B - Although there is no law restricting disposal, the material is still toxic
    and must not be disposed of improperly. Abandoning it or giving it to
    local recyclers may also result in improper disposal. PMI's Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct requires project managers to make
    decisions based on the interests of public safety and the environment.
    Failing to ensure proper disposal of toxic materials is a violation of this
    code. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]
21. B - Progressive elaboration applies when only a certain amount of
    information is available initially, and additional information is obtained
    as the project or phase progresses. It is the progressive detailing of the
    project management plan and relates more closely to the processes from
    the planning process group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 565] [Project
    Schedule Management]

22. B - As practitioners in the global project management community, it is
    our responsibility to report unethical or illegal conduct. Even if reporting
    such behavior may have negative consequences, we must still do so.
    [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

23. D - Since you are aware that your company lacks the necessary skills,
    you need to be truthful while bidding. Rather than outright refusing to do
    what your company management asks you to do, you should explain the
    reasons to them and ensure that all stakeholders involved are aware that
    this will be a stretch assignment. However, also explain to your
    management that it is best to tell the potential buyer that you and your
    company are willing to put in the necessary effort to make the project a
    success. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

24. A - The Manage Communications process goes beyond the distribution
    of relevant information and seeks to ensure that the information being
    communicated to project stakeholders has been appropriately generated,
    as well as received and understood. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 381]
    [Project Communications Management]

25. D - As a PMP, Eric must not behave in a manner that will mislead the
    buyer. Hence, given that there are still a sufficient number of days
    remaining before the RFP is due, it is his responsibility to wait for the
    current quarter results to be published and truthfully provide this
    information in the RFP. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]
26. C - The best choice is asking the procurement manager to lead the
    selection process and excusing yourself from the review. According to
    the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, project managers
    must disclose any potential conflict of interest situation to the
    appropriate stakeholders, who will determine if it is appropriate for the
    project manager to continue participating in the affected processes.
    Project managers must also act fairly towards others; removing the
    supplier from the list because of a possible conflict of interest on the part
    of the project manager is unfair to the vendor. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

27. D - The Fixed-Price with Economic Price Adjustment (FP-EPA) contract
    is used whenever the buyer-seller relationship spans across years. It is a
    fixed-price contract with a special provision allowing for predefined final
    adjustments to the contract price due to significantly changed economic
    conditions. It is intended to protect both the buyer and the seller from
    external conditions beyond their control. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    471] [Project Procurement Management]

28. B - Of the tools listed, the scatter diagram is used to study and identify
    the possible relationship between two variables. The others can be used
    for root cause analysis. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality
    Management]

29. D - Facilitated workshops bring key cross-functional stakeholders
    together to define product requirements. Because of their interactive
    nature, well-facilitated sessions lead to increased stakeholder consensus.
    This ensures that issues can be discovered and resolved more quickly
    than in other forums. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 145] [Project Scope
    Management]

30. C - If any stakeholder--resisting or supporting--identifies any issue, it
    must be addressed. The defects have already been identified and fixed.
    The scenario is talking about an action that would bring the future
    project performance in line with the approved quality requirements, this
    is a corrective action. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 96] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]

31. B - Problem solving involves treating conflict as a problem to be solved
    by examining alternatives. This requires a give-and-take attitude. In
    contrast, the other alternatives listed--directing, forcing and withdrawing
    --are more one-sided. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 349] [Project
    Resource Management]

32. B - Availability of budget and time is a key factor that determines the
    need for the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. A small project
    with a limited budget may decide to do away with this process if the
    project management team decides that quantitative statements about risk
    and impacts are not needed. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 429] [Project
    Risk Management]

33. D - When projects are performed for external customers, requirements
    for formal deliverable acceptance and how to address non-conforming
    deliverables are usually defined in the project agreements. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 489] [Project Procurement Management]

34. A - Training needs and strategies are captured and documented in the
    project's resource management plan. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 319]
    [Project Resource Management]

35. B - Notifying the project stakeholders immediately is the best choice.
    Unauthorized use of the intellectual property of others is unethical and is
    prohibited by the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Once
    the project stakeholders are notified of the situation, a plan forward can
    be developed. This plan could involve licensing the previously patented
    technology from the patent owner or reworking the design. However,
    this mitigation plan must involve input from the appropriate project
    stakeholders. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof.
    Responsibility]
36. A - Activity cost estimates are quantitative assessments of the probable
    costs required to finish project work. If included in project estimates,
    indirect costs should be included at the activity level or higher levels.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 246] [Project Cost Management]

37. C - The sufficiency model is not a valid model. The other choices are
    valid models used to analyze stakeholders. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages
    512, 513] [Project Stakeholder Management]

38. A - Use of voicemail is push communication. In this type of
    communication, information is distributed to specific recipients who
    need to know the information. However, this method does not certify that
    the information actually reached, or was received by, the intended
    audience. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 374] [Project Communications
    Management]

39. A - This type of testing is called destructive testing, and it is classified
    under appraisal costs. Along with other tests and inspections, it helps in
    assessing the quality of the product. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 282]
    [Project Quality Management]

40. A - The Monitor Risks process is performed throughout the project. The
    number of project risk reassessments scheduled depends on the progress
    of the project relative to its objectives. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 453]
    [Project Risk Management]

41. A - Manage Stakeholder Engagement is the process of communicating
    and working with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations,
    address issues as they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder
    involvement. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 523] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

42. B - Process Analysis is a tool and technique used in the Manage Quality
    process and not in the Define Scope process. The other choices are valid
    Product Analysis techniques used during the Define Scope process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 153] [Project Scope Management]

43. B - The forming phase is the phase where the team gets to know each
    other and learns about the project. Teams are usually on their "best
    behavior" and little tangible work gets accomplished. The project
    manager needs to guide the team and move them through this phase into
    the performing phase. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 338] [Project Resource
    Management]

44. B - Change requests can include preventive or corrective actions and
    defect repairs. Supportive action is not a valid choice. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 96]

45. B - Identifying new risks and analyzing, tracking, and monitoring
    existing project risks are done in the Monitor and Control Project Work
    process. This process also makes sure that the status of the risks is
    properly reported, and appropriate risk response plans are executed.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 107] [Project Integration Management]

46. A - The payoff for the strong demand scenario is $400M - $200M =
    $200M (since the initial investment is $200M). The payoff for the weak
    demand scenario is $150M - $200M = - $50M. Therefore, the EMV is
    computed as: (0.6 * 200) + (0.4 * -50), where 0.6 represents the 60%
    probability of the strong demand scenario and 0.4 represents the 40%
    probability of the weak demand scenario. 120 - 20 = 100. Therefore, the
    expected monetary value is $100M. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 435]
    [Project Risk Management]

47. A - Quality metrics are operational definitions that describe a project or
    product attribute in very specific terms. They also define how the quality
    control process will measure it. These metrics are outputs of the Plan
    Quality Management process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 287] [Project
    Quality Management]

48. B - Samples are collected for inspection during the Control Quality
    process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 303] [Project Quality Management]

49. B - Activities such as project performance analysis and tracking are done
    as part of the Monitor and Control Project Work process. This process
    involves tracking, reviewing and reporting progress to meet performance
    objectives. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 107] [Project Integration
    Management]

50. B - Contacting the manager once again will not help since you have
    already had a poor response. The best option is to try using management
    influence to obtain the resource's time for your project. Should all efforts
    to obtain the resource prove unsuccessful, alternatives include planning
    for an alternate resource or training another resource. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 330] [Project Resource Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Risk Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Risk Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project Risk
Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. Which of these is a valid negative risk response?

      A. Exploit

      B. Mitigate

      C. Enhance

      D. Share

2. Which of these is accurate regarding risk management?

      A. Organizations are not likely to perceive risk as a threat to project success.
      B. It has its origins in the uncertainty present in all projects.

      C. The attitudes of individuals and organizations must not be a factor
         affecting risk management.

      D. It is a passive activity in project management.

3. Anne is the project manager of a project. She has evaluated certain
   responses from prospective sellers and wants to select a contract model
   that will transfer risk to the seller. Which of the following should she
   select in order to achieve this?

      A. Time and Material contract

      B. Fixed price contract

      C. Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract

      D. Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee contract

4. Your project sponsor has asked you to present your project's high-level
   risk register to him in the next project update meeting. To create your
   high-level risk register, which of the following processes must be
   performed?

      A. Plan Risk Management

      B. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

      C. Identify Risks

      D. Monitor Risks

5. Which of these is an input to the Monitor Risks process?
      A. Risk audits

      B. Change requests

      C. Work performance information

      D. Work Performance Reports

6. Which of the following is true about risks?

      A. The risk register documents all the identified risks in detail.

      B. Risk impact should be considered, but probability of occurrence is not
         important.

      C. Risks always have negative impact and not positive.

      D. Risk Response Plan is another name for Risk Management Plan.

7. During which stage of risk planning are risks prioritized based on their
   relative probability and impact?

      A. Perform Qualitative risk analysis

      B. Identify Risks

      C. Perform Quantitative risk analysis

      D. Plan Risk Responses

8. If a project has a 60 percent chance of a $100,000 profit and a 40 percent
   chance of a $100,000 loss, the expected monetary value of the project is:

      A. $20,000 profit
      B. $40,000 loss

      C. $100,000 profit

      D. $60,000 loss

9. With high levels of uncertainty and unpredictability in a fast-paced and
   highly competitive global marketplace, where long-term scope is difficult
   to define, it is becoming even more important to have a __________ for
   effective adoption and tailoring of development practices to respond to the
   changing needs of the environment.

      A. Rigid management approach

      B. Predefined detailed scope

      C. Contextual framework

      D. Blackbox approach

10. At the beginning of the project, a project manager realized the technical
    expertise of the team was limited, a risk to the project. Midway through
    the project, the project manager decided that this was no longer a risk
    and considered it outdated. As part of which process would he do the risk
    reassessment?

      A. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

      B. Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

      C. Perform Risk Assessment

      D. Monitor Risks
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Risk Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Risk mitigation is a valid response to negative risks. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

2. B - Risk management does indeed have its origins in the uncertainty
   present in all projects. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 397-400] [Project Risk
   Management]

3. B - A fixed-price contract enables the buyer to transfer risk to the seller.
   [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 445, 471] [Project Risk Management]

4. C - A high-level risk register contains the identified risks only. The risk
   register is created during the Identify Risks process. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 409] [Project Risk Management]

5. D - Work Performance Reports are inputs to the Monitor Risks process.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 453] [Project Risk Management]

6. A - The risk register contains details of the identified risks. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 417] [Project Risk Management]

7. A - Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis assesses the impact and likelihood
   of identified risks. During this process, the risks are prioritized based on
   their relative probability and impact. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 419]
   [Project Risk Management]

8. A - EMV = Probability * Impact. 0.6 * $100,000 = $60,000. 0.4 *
   ($100,000) = ($40,000). $60,000 - $40,000 = $20,000 profit. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 435] [Project Risk Management]
9. C - With high levels of uncertainty and unpredictability in a fast-paced,
   highly competitive global marketplace where long term scope is difficult
   to define, it is becoming even more important to have a contextual
   framework for effective adoption and tailoring of development practices to
   respond to the changing needs of the environment. Traditional, predictive
   and rigid methods are not suitable for projects operating in an environment
   with a high degree of uncertainty. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 177]
   [Project Risk Management]

10. D - Risk reassessment is performed as part of the Monitor Risks process.
    Such project risk reassessments should be regularly scheduled and may
    result in the closure of outdated risks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 453]
    [Project Risk Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 15
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 15
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. A government agency has awarded your company a massive software
   project. This project has an early completion incentive, and your company
   has a policy of paying a bonus to the project manager if such an incentive
   is awarded. However, this particular government agency has a reputation
   for being extremely difficult to work with; there is a great deal of
   bureaucracy within this agency, and stonewalling and hostility toward
   contractors are common. The project manager will need to have excellent
   political skills to lead this project successfully. You have been asked to
   lead the project because of your expertise with this type of project.
   However, you have never worked within such a highly charged and
   political environment. What should you do?

      A. Decline the project citing lack of experience.
      B. Accept the project but disclose your lack of experience in this type of
         environment.

      C. Accept the project and request that a corporate liaison be assigned to your
         project.

      D. Accept the project.

2. As part of a strategy to handle negative risk, a project manager decided to
   adopt less complex processes, conduct more tests, and choose a more
   stable supplier. What strategy would this be classified as?

      A. Acceptance

      B. Transference

      C. Mitigation

      D. Avoidance

3. Bill is the project manager of an external project for a customer. The
   project is expected to take about a year to complete. Six months into the
   project, the customer informs Bill that he or she needs to scrap the project.
   During which of the following processes would procedures be developed
   to handle early termination of a project?

      A. Develop Project Charter

      B. Close Project or Phase

      C. Define Scope

      D. Monitor Risks

4. During a discussion with the quality department, Dave, a project manager,
  was told that as applied to projects, the terms "prevention" and
  "inspection" are synonymous. However, his understanding of the terms is
  different. What would you comment on this situation?

     A. The project manager is correct. Prevention is about keeping errors out of
        the process; inspection is about keeping errors out of the customer's
        hands.

     B. The project manager is correct. Inspection is about keeping errors out of
        the process; prevention is about keeping errors out of the customer's
        hands.

     C. The project manager is wrong. Both inspection and prevention are about
        keeping errors out of the customer's hands. They are used in different
        contexts.

     D. The project manager is wrong. Both inspection and prevention are about
        keeping errors out of the process. They are used in different contexts.

5. Mark is managing an airport construction project. He is currently
   identifying his project stakeholders, and he has compiled a long list of
   stakeholders already. Managing expectations of every project stakeholder
   is not practical. What should he do in this situation?

     A. Project stakeholders should be prioritized based on their influence and
        interest.

     B. Stakeholder analysis should be outsourced.

     C. Non-key stakeholders should be dropped from the stakeholder register.

     D. Stakeholder management processes should not be followed for such
        complex projects.

6. While preparing a resource management plan, a project manager
  designated one of the senior programmers on the team to make decisions
  on whether the quality of deliverables met the project's documented
  standards. Which of the following aspects of a resource management plan
  does this address?

      A. Competency

      B. Responsibility

      C. Authority

      D. Role

7. A project manager uses the precedence diagramming method (PDM) for
   constructing a project schedule network and creates a network diagram for
   the purpose. He decides to use the most common type of precedence
   relationship for all activities. Which of the following relationships would
   he use?

      A. Start-to-finish (SF)

      B. Finish-to-finish (FF)

      C. Start-to-start (SS)

      D. Finish-to-start (FS)

8. Sally, a project manager, was reconciling expenditure of funds with
   funding limits on the commitment of funds for the project. She found a
   large variance between the funding limits and planned expenditures. As a
   result, she decided to reschedule work to level out the rate of expenditures.
   This is:

      A. Funding limit reconciliation
      B. Funding limit constraints

      C. Funding limit expenditure

      D. Funding limit appropriation

9. A project manager used the services of a trained moderator during the
   Collect Requirements process. Which of the following is likely to have
   required the services of a trained moderator?

      A. Interviews

      B. Prototypes

      C. Questionnaires

      D. Focus groups

10. Jessica is managing an office refurbishment project. All the project
    stakeholders are identified and classified. The stakeholder engagement
    plan is also approved. Jessica is managing a project for the first time, and
    she is relying on the PMBOK guide as a reference to deliver an excellent
    project. Which of the following processes would provide guidance to
    Jessica regarding how to execute the approved stakeholder engagement
    plan?

      A. Monitor Stakeholder Engagement

      B. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

      C. Identify Stakeholders

      D. Plan Stakeholder Engagement

11. Kelly is part of a project management office (PMO). Her office is
   responsible for the centralized and coordinated management of 18
   projects. Each project has its own project manager. Which of the
   following will not typically be a responsibility of her PMO?

      A. Coaching, mentoring, training, and oversight

      B. Development of a detailed description of each project and the product it
         produces

      C. Managing shared resources across all the projects administered by the
         PMO

      D. Developing and managing project policies

12. Which of the following statements accurately describes how the
    completion of project scope and the completion of product scope are
    measured?

      A. The completion of project scope and product scope are both measured
         against the product requirements.

      B. The completion of project scope is measured against the project
         management plan, and the completion of product scope is measured
         against the product requirements.

      C. The completion of project scope is measured against the product
         requirements, and the completion of product scope is measured against the
         project management plan.

      D. The completion of project scope and product scope are both measured
         against the project management plan.

13. Bill and Jake are two team members in a project. They do not get along
    well and are constantly involved in verbal conflicts. The project manager
    understands the characteristics of conflict and the conflict management
    process and tries to resolve the situation. Which of the following is not a
    correct statement?

      A. Openness resolves conflict

      B. Conflict is natural and forces a search for alternatives

      C. Conflict is inevitable in a project environment.

      D. The project manager is not responsible for conflict management.

14. The Identify Risks process involves determining which risks may impact
    a project. It is considered an iterative process. What is the frequency of
    the iteration?

      A. Every month

      B. Every two weeks

      C. The frequency of iteration will vary based on the situation

      D. Every week

15. A new project manager has just taken over a project that is 50 percent
    complete. As part of the hand-over process, the outgoing project
    manager provided the new project manager with a list of stakeholders
    that needed to be managed. The list had been compiled at the start of the
    project. Which of the following is true about stakeholders?

      A. Stakeholder identification is usually performed when there are problems
         with the project

      B. Stakeholder identification needs to happen at the start of each new phase
         of a project
      C. Stakeholder identification is a continuous process and needs to happen all
         through the project

      D. Stakeholder identification needs to happen at the start of the project

16. A project manager manages a distributed team with team members
    located in five countries. Due to time zone differences, he cannot find a
    time that is acceptable to all team members. Which conflict resolution
    technique is best suited for this situation?

      A. Compromise

      B. Force

      C. Withdraw

      D. Avoid

17. Acceptance is a strategy adopted because it is not possible to eliminate
    all risks from a project. This strategy indicates that the project
    management team has decided not to change the project management
    plan to deal with a risk. What action does passive acceptance require?

      A. Passive acceptance is no longer adopted in projects and is a poor project
         management practice.

      B. Passive acceptance requires no action except to document the strategy and
         come up with a risk management strategy.

      C. Passive acceptance requires no action.

      D. Passive acceptance requires no proactive action except periodic review of
         the threat.

18. A buyer and seller set the rates for junior engineers, senior engineers,
    architects, and other predefined roles. In what type of contract would this
    be applicable?

      A. Fixed-price with economic price adjustment contract

      B. Fixed-price incentive contract

      C. Fixed-price contract

      D. Time and material contract

19. A project manager is estimating project costs and needs to decide
    whether the estimates will include direct costs only or include indirect
    costs, as well. In which of the following phases does this decision need
    to take place?

      A. Define Scope

      B. Estimate Costs

      C. Plan Expenses

      D. Determine Budget

20. After conducting a bidder conference, you receive an email from one of
    the bidders requesting additional information. The information was
    neither included in your request for proposal, nor did anyone ask for it
    during the bidder conference. You realize the answer to this question is
    critical to understanding the scope of the project. If the answer is not
    communicated to bidders, they cannot size their teams accurately or
    estimate the total duration of the project. The answer also greatly affects
    cost. However, the answer contains some proprietary information that, if
    disclosed to a competitor, may reveal the future product strategy of your
    company. Such a disclosure could be disastrous for a major product
    launch you are planning next year. You decide to send the answer to all
   the bidders, but you realize one of the bidders is also working closely
   with one of your competitors on a similar project. What should you do?

     A. Don't send this information in writing; instead, telephone each bidding
        company.

     B. Send this information to all bidders except the bidder working with your
        competitor.

     C. Send this information to only the supplier who requested it.

     D. Require all bidders to sign a nondisclosure agreement. You may then send
        the information to each company that signed the NDA.

21. During a project status meeting, a project manager presented sensitive
    information related to the project. However, this information was not
    intended to be available to the audience. Which of the following
    processes was done incorrectly, resulting in the project manager
    communicating sensitive information to the wrong audience?

     A. Monitor Communications

     B. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

     C. Plan Communications Management

     D. Identify Stakeholders

22. A project manager created a resource histogram. On the histogram, some
    bars extended beyond the maximum available hours. What does this
    usually signify?

     A. This means that the resources on those bars are being underused.

     B. This means that a resource optimization strategy needs to be applied.
      C. This means the resources are producing outputs at a rate faster than the
         average rate.

      D. This means that resources need to be reduced from the project.

23. A project manager needs team members that report to a functional
    manager. What technique is the project manager most likely to use to
    obtain these resources?

      A. Pre-assignment

      B. Authority

      C. Negotiation

      D. Coercion

24. Which of the following statements about project teams is incorrect?

      A. The project management team is usually a team external to the project
         team.

      B. The project management team is a subset of the project team.

      C. For smaller projects, the entire team can share the project management
         responsibilities.

      D. For smaller projects, the project manager can solely administer project
         management responsibilities.

25. You are just about to present your project's status to your company's
    executive team. Just as you are leaving your desk for the meeting, one of
    your resources hands you an updated report on the progress of a critical
    deliverable. As you are walking to the conference room, you review the
    report and notice there is an error in it. What do you do?
      A. Do not report on that part of the project

      B. Disclose that you have just discovered there is an error in some of the
         information you intended to present and only present the information that
         you know is true

      C. Cancel the meeting

      D. Present the information as-it-is and revise it in the meeting minutes,
         which will be sent after two days

26. Sheila is the project manager of a website development project. After a
    detailed discussion with the project management team, she decides to
    create an informal, broadly framed quality management plan. What
    would your comment on this be?

      A. This is incorrect. A quality management plan should be formal but
         broadly framed.

      B. This is incorrect. A quality management plan should be formal and highly
         detailed.

      C. This is fine. The project requirements determine the style and detail of the
         quality management plan.

      D. This is incorrect. A quality management plan should be informal and
         highly detailed.

27. A project manager was involved in preparation of the project charter for
    an external project. One of the inputs to the project charter was a
    statement of work (SOW). The SOW may have been received from the
    customer as part of any of the following except:

      A. As part of a request for information
      B. As part of the business case

      C. As part of a request for proposal

      D. As part of a contract

28. To define the logical relationship among dependencies accurately, a
    project manager is determining which ones require a lead or a lag. Which
    of the following correctly describes leads or lags?

      A. A lead allows a successor activity to be delayed.

      B. A lag directs a delay in the predecessor activity.

      C. A lag allows acceleration of the successor activity.

      D. A lead allows an acceleration of the successor activity.

29. Which of the following scenarios is likely to occur in a project?

      A. Cost and staffing levels are low at the start of the project.

      B. Stakeholders' influence on the project is lowest at the start of the project.

      C. Risk and uncertainty are lowest at the start of the project.

      D. Cost of changes are the highest at the start of the project.

30. Dina, the project manager of a hardware project, is performing a
    structured review of the procurement process. She would like to examine
    each document from the Plan Procurement Management process through
    the Control Procurements process to identify failures. What tool should
    Dina use?

      A. Procurement audits in the control procurements process
      B. Performance reports in the conduct procurements process

      C. Negotiated settlements in the control procurements process

      D. Procurement audits in the conduct procurements process

31. A project manager estimated that a project would require 4375 person-
    hours of effort. The project ended up using 6250 person-hours of effort.
    The difference between these two figures is a:

      A. Variance

      B. Control Limit

      C. Threshold

      D. Standard Deviation

32. Erica is managing a kitchen tools manufacturing project, which is
    intended to produce modern cooking ovens. This project is hugely
    important for the company as well as for Erica`s career. Although the
    project scope statement was well-defined and requirements were
    gathered from stakeholders in the planning phase, many design change
    requests have come in from customers during project execution. Which
    of the following tasks must Erica perform to avoid scope creep caused by
    uncontrollable changes?

      A. Perform validate scope process and process all changes through the plan
         risk responses process

      B. Perform integrated change control process and process all changes
         through the control quality process

      C. Perform scope control and process all changes through the integrated
         change control process
      D. Perform scope control and process all changes through the validate scope
         process

33. A project manager is considering risk in a project. When does risk come
    into play in a project?

      A. During the SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats)
         analysis

      B. During the Identify Risks phase

      C. As soon as the Plan Risk Management phase begins

      D. As soon as a project is conceived

34. The scope of work in a project could not be clearly defined. There was
    also a strong possibility that the scope would change during the course of
    the project. Which type of contract would suit this type of situation?

      A. Fixed-price with economic price adjustment contract

      B. Fixed-price contract

      C. Cost-reimbursable contract

      D. Fixed-price incentive contract

35. You are managing a project with a large multinational staff. Susan, one
    of the engineers, was originally asked to deliver her part of the work on
    October 19. Due to a change in the critical path, her deliverable will be
    needed two days sooner. However, as the new deadline is still two weeks
    away and she is ahead of schedule, you are confident her delivery will be
    on time. During a staff meeting, you learn from John, her functional
    manager, that Susan celebrates a religious holiday on October 17.
    However, he also tells you that Susan is not particularly religious; if
    pushed a bit and offered some incentive, she may forego celebrating this
    holiday and come to work. What should you do?

      A. Check whether one of her colleagues can share some of her workload this
         week

      B. Increase her project incentive if she agrees to deliver her presentation on
         the 17th

      C. Let the critical path remain the same

      D. Ask her boss to ask her to skip the holiday

36. Jackie is the project manager of a large project. During the Determine
    Budget process, she identifies that contingency reserves need to be set up
    for unplanned but potentially necessary changes that could result from
    realized risks identified in the risk register. Which of the following is
    true about reserves?

      A. Management Reserves are not a part of project cost baseline, but will be
         included in the total budget for the project

      B. Contingency Reserves are not a part of project cost baseline, but will be
         included in the total budget for the project

      C. Both the Management Reserves and the Contingency Reserves are
         part of project cost baseline, and they are also not included in the total
         budget for the project

      D. Both the Management Reserves and the Contingency Reserves are not
         part of project cost baseline, but they are included in the total budget for
         the project

37. You are meeting with your stakeholders to gather requirements for your
    project. You are well aware that requirements to be gathered include
   both product and project requirements. All the following tools can be
   used to gather, define, and analyze project requirements from
   stakeholders except:

     A. Surveys

     B. Focus Groups

     C. Decomposition

     D. Prototypes

38. A project manager is looking at a make-or-buy analysis as part of the
    Procurement Management process. What type of costs should the project
    manager consider for this analysis?

     A. Direct costs

     B. Indirect costs

     C. Out-of-pocket costs

     D. Both direct as well as indirect costs

39. Which of the following is not an input to the Conduct Procurements
    process?

     A. Proposal evaluation techniques

     B. Seller proposals

     C. Cost baseline

     D. Procurement management plan
40. During the execution of a project, a large number of defects were
    discovered. The project manager ensured that the issues, defect
    resolution, and action item results were logged into a defects database.
    What would the defect database be considered a part of?

      A. Expert Judgment

      B. Deliverables

      C. Change Requests

      D. Organizational Process Assets

41. The WBS structure can be created in a number of forms except which of
    the following?

      A. Using work packages as the second level of decomposition, with the
         project deliverables inserted at the third level

      B. Using major deliverables as the second level of decomposition

      C. Using phases of the project lifecycle as the second level of decomposition,
         with the product and project deliverables inserted at the third level

      D. Using subcomponents, which may be developed by organizations outside
         the project team, such as contracted work

42. A project manager is currently ensuring that the stakeholders clearly
    understand the project goals, objectives, benefits, and risks. This relates
    to which of the following processes?

      A. Control Stakeholder

      B. Identify Stakeholders
      C. Plan Communications Management

      D. Manage Stakeholder Engagement

43. Joe has been managing a project for Exton Oil Corp. This project
    involves redesigning filling stations across the state. The redesign
    involves new gas pumps, security cameras, convenience stores, and use
    of environmentally friendly materials in the construction. While the
    redesigning work proceeds, Joe's design engineer suggests a secondary
    alarm system for gas pumps to alert the attendant in case of a spill.
    Although this suggestion is not in the project requirements, Joe is
    impressed with the engineer's recommendation. What should be the next
    step for Joe with regard to the engineer's suggestion?

      A. Initiate the formal change control process to find the impact of his
         recommendation

      B. Approve his recommendation and allocate resources and funds

      C. Create an issue log to document the engineer`s suggestion for future use

      D. Reject his recommendation as it requires additional funding

44. Which of the following structures helps track project costs and can align
    with the organization's accounting system?

      A. Project breakdown structure (PBS)

      B. Matrix breakdown structure (MBS)

      C. Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)

      D. Organizational breakdown structure (OBS)

45. A first-time project manager is advised by an experienced project
   manager to plan for cost of quality. The first-time project manager is not
   sure which costs are included in the cost of quality. What would your
   advice be?

     A. Cost of quality only includes cost of nonconformance.

     B. Cost of quality includes cost of conformance and cost of nonconformance.

     C. Cost of quality only includes prevention costs and internal failure costs.

     D. Cost of quality only includes cost of conformance.

46. Miranda is an experienced project manager. As part of the Collect
    Requirements phase, she decides to use a group creativity technique.
    This technique is intended to enhance brainstorming with a voting
    process and can be used to rank the most useful ideas for further
    brainstorming or prioritization. Which of the following will she likely
    use?

     A. Normal group technique

     B. Minimal group technique

     C. Unanimous group technique

     D. Nominal group technique

47. In which of the following situations would it be better to avoid using
    Analogous Estimating?

     A. When the project team members have the needed expertise

     B. When an accurate estimate is required

     C. When a low value estimate is required
     D. When the previous activities are similar in fact and not just appearance

48. During the Collect Requirements process, a group of people were
    discussing multiple alternatives. One of the individuals in the group
    made the decision for the group. This method of reaching a group
    decision is termed:

     A. One Thinking Hat

     B. Autocratic

     C. Plurality

     D. Autonomy

49. Which of the following processes will determine the correctness of
    deliverables?

     A. Plan Deliverables

     B. Plan Quality Management

     C. Control Quality

     D. Manage Quality

50. All the monitoring and controlling processes and many of the executing
    processes can produce change requests as an output. Change requests
    may require corrective actions and preventive actions. Which of the
    following are normally affected by corrective and preventive actions?

     A. Defect repair

     B. Regressive baselines
C. The project baselines

D. The performance against baselines
PMP Lite Mock Exam 15
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Accept the position, but disclose your lack of experience with this type
   of environment. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct requires
   that project managers accept only those projects for which they have the
   appropriate qualifications and background. However, if the project
   stakeholders receive full disclosure and still give their consent, it is
   permissible to accept a stretch assignment. [PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. C - Actions such as adopting less complex processes, more testing, or
   choosing a more stable supplier would be considered mitigation. These
   actions reduce the probability and impact of risks. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

3. B - The Close Project or Phase process establishes the procedures to
   investigate and document the reasons for actions taken if a project is
   terminated before completion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 123] [Project
   Integration Management]

4. A - The project manager is correct. Prevention is about keeping errors out
   of the process, whereas inspection is about keeping errors out of the hands
   of the customer. This is an important distinction, which the project
   management team needs to be aware of. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 274]
   [Project Quality Management]

5. A - When the stakeholders list becomes unmanageable, the project
   stakeholders should be prioritized to ensure the efficient use of effort and
   time to manage their expectations. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 512]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. C - Authority is the best choice. Authority is the right to apply project
  resources and make decisions within the project. These decisions could
  include quality acceptance, selection of the method for completing an
  activity, and how to respond to project variances. [PMBOK 6th edition,
  Page 318] [Project Resource Management]

7. D - Finish-to-start (FS) is the most common type of precedence
   relationship. In contrast, the start-to-finish (SF) relationship is rarely used.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 190]

8. A - This is known as funding limit reconciliation. It can be accomplished
   by placing imposed date constraints for work into the project schedule.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 253] [Project Cost Management]

9. D - Focus groups bring together prequalified stakeholders and subject
   matter experts to learn about their expectations for, and attitudes toward, a
   proposed product, service or result. Typically, a trained moderator is
   employed to guide the group through an interactive discussion. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 142] [Project Scope Management]

10. B - The question is asking about the Stakeholder Management process
    from the executing process group. The Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    process executes the stakeholder engagement strategy developed during
    the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process. The Monitor Stakeholder
    Engagement process deals with making the necessary adjustments to the
    stakeholder engagement strategy. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 523]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. B - The primary function of a PMO is to support project managers in a
    variety of ways. This may include developing and managing project
    policies, coaching, mentoring, training, and oversight. This may also
    include management of resources that are shared across the projects.
    However, development of a detailed description of each project would be
    a responsibility of the project manager handling the project, not of the
    PMO. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 48]
12. B - The completion of project scope is measured against the project
    management plan, whereas the completion of product scope is measured
    against the product requirements. The work of the project results in
    delivery of the specified product scope. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 131]
    [Project Scope Management]

13. D - Project team members are initially responsible for resolution of their
    conflicts. If conflict escalates, the project manager should help resolve it.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 348] [Project Resource Management]

14. C - Identify Risks is an iterative process as risks become known or
    evolve. The frequency of iteration, and who participates in each cycle,
    will vary by the situation. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 411] [Project Risk
    Management]

15. C - Stakeholder identification is a continuous process and can be quite
    difficult. Failure to identify stakeholders can result in project overruns.
    The new project manager can use the list of stakeholders provided by the
    outgoing project manager as a starting point, but he or she will still need
    to perform his or her own analysis to identify stakeholders during the rest
    of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 507]

16. A - A compromise requires searching for options that bring some degree
    to satisfaction to all parties in order to temporarily or partially resolve the
    conflict. This would be the best way to handle the current situation, since
    time zone differences are not under anyone's control. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 349] [Project Resource Management]

17. D - Acceptance is a strategy adopted because it is not possible to
    eliminate all risks from a project. This strategy indicates that the project
    management team has decided not to change the project management
    plan to deal with a risk. Passive acceptance requires no action except
    performing periodic review of the threat. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    443] [Project Risk Management]
18. D - In time-and-materials contracts, the buyer and seller agree on unit
    labor rates and the actual cost of materials. Both parties agree on specific
    hourly rates for such categories as junior or senior engineers. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 472] [Project Procurement Management]

19. B - This is done in the Estimate Costs process. The project manager
    works in accordance with the organization's guidelines and decides
    whether the estimates will be limited to direct project costs only or
    whether the estimates will also include indirect costs. Indirect costs are
    those that cannot be traced to one specific project, and are usually
    allocated equitably over multiple projects. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    246] [Project Cost Management]

20. D - The best choice is to require all bidders to sign a non-disclosure
    agreement (NDA) before sending them this additional information, and
    then provide the additional information to each bidder that has signed an
    NDA. Project managers are required to act fairly and provide equal
    access to information to all authorized parties. Sending the information
    to only some of the bidding companies would represent a violation of the
    PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

21. C - Deciding what information is relevant to an audience is an activity
    done in the Plan Communications Management process. Improper
    communication planning will lead to problems such as delays in message
    delivery or communication of sensitive information to the wrong
    audience. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 366] [Project Communications
    Management]

22. B - If the bars in a resource histogram extend beyond the maximum
    available hours, it means that a resource optimization strategy needs to
    be applied, such as adding more resources or modifying the schedule.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 220] [Project Resource Management]

23. C - Staff assignments are negotiated on many projects. The project
    manager will negotiate with functional managers to ensure that the
    project receives competent staff in the required time frame. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 332] [Project Resource Management]

24. A - The project management team is a subset of the project team.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 86] [Project Resource Management]

25. B - Disclose that you have just discovered an error in some of the
    information you had planned to present, and only present information
    that you know to be accurate. Project managers are obligated to provide
    accurate and timely project information at all times, in accordance with
    the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. [PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. C - The quality management plan may be formal or informal, highly
    detailed or broadly framed. Its style and detail are determined by the
    requirements of the project as defined by the project management team.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 286] [Project Quality Management]

27. B - The statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of products
    or services to be delivered by the project. For an external project, the
    SOW may be received as part of a bid document such as the request for
    proposal, request for information, request for bid or as part of a contract.
    It is usually not part of the business case. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    477] [Project Integration Management]

28. D - To define the logical relationship among dependencies accurately,
    the project management team determines which ones require a lead or a
    lag. A lead allows an acceleration of the successor activity. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 192] [Project Schedule Management]

29. A - Cost and staffing levels are low at the start of the project. The other
    statements are incorrect. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 549] [Project
    Framework]
30. A - A procurement audit is a tool in the Control Procurements process.
    Procurement audits are carried out to identify successes and failures that
    warrant recognition. When this tool is used, all procurement processes
    are thoroughly checked, and corresponding documents are checked for
    problems. Therefore, the correct answer is procurement audits in the
    Control Procurements process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498]

31. A - Variance is a quantifiable deviation, departure, or divergence away
    from a known baseline of expected value. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    111] [Project Framework]

32. C - All scope changes must be controlled in a project through the Control
    Scope process. However, scope control must also ensure that all changes
    requested by customers go through the Perform Integrated Change
    Control process. This way, scope creep can be avoided, and project
    changes can be managed. Hence, Erica must perform scope control and
    process all changes through the Integrated Change Control process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 168]

33. D - Project risk exists in a project from the moment the project is
    conceived. The risks are identified as part of specific processes, but the
    risks always exist. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 397] [Project Risk
    Management]

34. C - A cost-reimbursable contract gives the project flexibility to redirect a
    seller whenever the scope of work cannot be precisely determined at the
    start of the project and needs to be altered, or when high risks may exist
    in the effort. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 472] [Project Procurement
    Management]

35. A - Checking to see if one of her colleagues could share some of her
    workload this week is the best choice. If another resource can assist with
    the completion of this task, Susan may celebrate the holiday without
    affecting the delivery of her work item. PMI's Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct mandates that project managers must respect the
   religious beliefs of others and must not use their position or expertise to
   influence the decisions or actions of others to benefit at their expense.
   [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. A - Management Reserves are not a part of the project cost baseline but
    will be included in the total budget for the project. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 252] [Project Cost Management]

37. C - Both product and project requirements are gathered from
    stakeholders during the Collect Requirements process. This effort is
    undertaken during project planning. Focus groups, surveys, and
    prototypes are some of the tools used to define and analyze requirements.
    Decomposition is used only to break down the work and not to gather
    requirements. Therefore, decomposition is the correct answer. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Pages 138, 158]

38. D - The make-or-buy analysis needs to be as comprehensive as possible.
    Hence, it should consider all possible costs, both direct and indirect.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 473] [Project Procurement Management]

39. A - Proposal evaluation techniques are the tools and techniques of the
    Conduct Procurement process. The other choices are the valid inputs to
    this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 482] [Project Procurement
    Management]

40. D - Issue and defect management databases are considered part of the
    organizational process assets. These databases typically contain
    historical issue and defect status, control information, issue and defect
    resolution, and action item results. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 39]
    [Project Framework]

41. A - The work packages are at the lowest level of a WBS. The other
    statements are correct regarding the structure of the WBS. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 159] [Project Scope Management]
42. D - The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process involves ensuring that
    the stakeholders clearly understand the project goals, objectives, benefits
    and risks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 524] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

43. A - Change requests should always be recorded in written form and
    entered in the change management system to determine the impact of the
    change on the scope, budget, schedule and quality. Thus, Joe must
    initiate the formal change control process. After approval from the
    change control board, Joe can allocate resources and funds to
    implementing the change. Hence, Joe must initiate the change first.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 113]

44. C - The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) provides the framework for
    the cost management plan. The WBS contains control accounts, which
    link directly to the performing organization's accounting system.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 239] [Project Cost Management]

45. B - Cost of quality (COQ) includes all costs related to quality
    management activities and quality issues incurred over the life of a
    product. It includes cost of conformance (prevention and appraisal costs)
    as well as cost of nonconformance (internal and external failure costs).
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 282, 283] [Project Quality Management]

46. D - Miranda likely intends to use the Nominal group technique. This
    enhances brainstorming with a voting process to rank the most useful
    ideas for further brainstorming or prioritization. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 144] [Project Scope Management]

47. B - Analogous estimating is typically less costly than other estimation
    techniques but also less accurate. It is most reliable when previous
    activities are similar in fact and the project team members have the
    needed expertise. This method should not be used when an accurate
    estimate is required. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200] [Project Schedule
    Management]
48. B - The method where a single individual makes the decision on behalf
    of a group is termed autocratic. Other group decision-making techniques
    are unanimity (everyone agrees on a course of action), majority (support
    from more than 50% of members), and plurality (the largest block
    decides even if a majority is not achieved). [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    144] [Project Scope Management]

49. C - An important goal of quality control is to determine the correctness
    of deliverables. The results of the execution of quality control processes
    are verified deliverables. These are then input to the Validate Scope
    process for formalized acceptance. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 298]
    [Project Quality Management]

50. D - Corrective and preventive actions do not normally affect the project
    baselines, only the performance against the baselines. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 96] [Project Integration Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 16
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 16
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You are a certified PMP, and the PMI has contacted you as part of an
   investigation it is conducting into allegations of improper conduct by your
   manager, who is also a PMP. A complaint has been filed stating your
   manager has received bribes related to a large procurement contract on
   another project. PMI has asked whether you could provide information
   regarding this situation. What should you do?

      A. Confront your manager

      B. Send PMI project documentation and emails related to the allegations to
         assist with their investigation

      C. Notify the appropriate management immediately
      D. Do nothing, citing a conflict of interest

2. As part of the Estimate Costs process, a project manager obtained access
   to certain commercially available databases to get resource cost rate
   information. Such published commercial information is considered what
   type of input?

      A. Enterprise environmental factor

      B. Historical information

      C. Organizational process asset

      D. HR Input

3. A project needed to monitor the technical performance of the project and
   capture data related to how many errors or defects had been identified and
   how many remained uncorrected. Which of the following techniques
   should the project use?

      A. Scatter diagram

      B. Flowchart

      C. Histogram

      D. Control chart

4. Which of the following is not an example of parametric estimating?

      A. Activity duration estimated based on the number of drawings multiplied
         by the number of labor hours per drawing.

      B. Activity duration estimated based on the number of labor hours per meter
         for cable installation.
      C. Activity duration estimated based on the square footage in construction.

      D. Activity duration estimated based on the actual duration of a similar,
         previous project.

5. Nancy's project has a large number of key positive and negative
   stakeholders. To ensure the project's success, it is essential to manage the
   influential negative stakeholders closely. Do the key positive stakeholders
   need to be managed, too?

      A. No; more attention needs to be given to the key negative stakeholders.

      B. The positive stakeholders need to be closely managed, as well, since
         stakeholders' needs and expectations change over time.

      C. Project stakeholders should not be classified as positive and negative
         stakeholders.

      D. Yes; positive stakeholders should be more closely managed than the
         negative stakeholders.

6. Which of the following is not an example of a work performance report?

      A. Status report

      B. Project charter

      C. Progress report

      D. Project dashboard

7. A project charter that formally authorized a project was created. The
   project charter documented the initial requirements to satisfy stakeholders'
   needs and expectations. How often should the project charter be revised?
      A. At the beginning, middle, and end of a project

      B. Once a month

      C. Project charter is usually not updated during the course of the project.

      D. As required by the PMO

8. Which of the following techniques focuses on identifying non-value-added
   activities in a project?

      A. Pareto charting

      B. Process analysis

      C. Root cause analysis

      D. Affinity diagrams

9. Procurement statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of the
   products or services to be delivered by the vendor. It usually references all
   the following except:

      A. The business case

      B. Product specifications

      C. Work location

      D. Performance requirements

10. Nancy's project is in execution. Nancy is currently planning to execute
    the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. She has gathered the
    project documents such as the issue log, the change log, the stakeholder
    register, the lessons learned register and the necessary organizational
   process assets. Which of the following is a key input to this process that
   is still missing from this list?

      A. Expert Judgment

      B. Communication Skills

      C. Change requests

      D. Project Management Plan

11. A project manager needed to shorten a project schedule and decided to
    employ crashing, a schedule compression technique. Which of the
    following activities would not be an example of crashing?

      A. Bringing in additional resources

      B. Reducing project scope

      C. Paying to expedite delivery activities

      D. Approving overtime

12. A project can be authorized by any of the following except:

      A. The project manager

      B. The PMO

      C. The sponsor

      D. The portfolio steering committee

13. You are working in a matrix project environment where functional
    managers have control over the resources. You are well aware that not
    acquiring the project team soon enough for your project could result in
    changes to the schedule, cost, and quality. To acquire the project team
    from functional managers, the best technique for you to use is:

      A. Pre-assignment

      B. Virtual teams

      C. Negotiations

      D. Acquisition

14. A first-time project manager created a Work Breakdown Structure
    (WBS) where the deliverables had different levels of decomposition.
    What would your comment on this be?

      A. This is incorrect. All deliverables need to have the same level of
         decomposition.

      B. This is incorrect. Only deliverables under different branches can have
         different levels of decomposition.

      C. This is fine. Different deliverables can have different levels of
         decomposition, depending on the work involved.

      D. This is fine. The focus of the WBS is not the deliverables but the tasks
         involved.

15. Stanley's project is in execution. Stanley has a monthly stakeholder
    update meeting scheduled in which he presents the project's progress and
    current issues to the key stakeholders. During the last stakeholder update
    meeting, the stakeholders requested Stanley to provide bi-weekly project
    updates instead of monthly updates. The communication management
    plan has been broadly framed, and it does not restrict Stanley from doing
    bi-weekly updates. What should Stanley do?
      A. Start providing bi-weekly updates instead of monthly updates

      B. Update the communication management plan prior to providing the bi-
         weekly updates

      C. Disregard the stakeholders' request and continue with the monthly updates

      D. Request that the stakeholders submit a change request

16. Decision tree analysis is used to calculate the average outcome when the
    future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. What are a
    decision node's inputs and outputs?

      A. Input: Cost of each decision; Output: Probability of occurrence

      B. Input: Cost of each decision; Output: Decision made

      C. Input: Scenario probability; Output: Expected Monetary Value (EMV)

      D. Input: Cost of each decision; Output: Payoff

17. Sensitivity analysis helps to determine which risks have the most
    potential impact on the project. A project manager prepared a display
    chart of sensitivity analysis for his project. The diagram contained a
    series of bars with the length of the bars corresponding to the risk impact
    on the project. The longer the bar, the greater was the risk presented.
    Such a chart is likely to be:

      A. An assessment diagram

      B. A triangular distribution

      C. A tornado diagram

      D. A funnel distribution
18. Which of the following is neither an input nor an output of the Direct and
    Manage Project Work process?

      A. Approved change requests

      B. Change requests

      C. Approved deliverables

      D. Deliverables

19. Which of the following is true about risks?

      A. A risk may have one or more causes, and, if it occurs, may have one or
         more effects.

      B. A risk usually has a single cause and, if it occurs, may have one or more
         effects.

      C. A risk usually has a single cause and, if it occurs, usually has a single
         effect.

      D. A risk usually has more than one cause, and if it occurs, usually has a
         single effect.

20. You have just taken over a project from another project manager about
    six months into a 12-month project. As you get to know the staff on the
    project, you become aware that five staff members are relatives of the
    previous project manager. What do you do?

      A. Notify your project stakeholders there is a possibility that nepotism was
         behind some of the staffing decisions made on your project

      B. Check recruitment records of all employees
      C. Report the HR manager to PMI

      D. Interview these five employees

21. A seller organization was executing work for a project under a contract.
    During the course of the project, a number of disputes arose over the
    scope and quality of the work. Which of the following is the preferred
    method of resolving these claims?

      A. Alternative dispute resolution (ADR)

      B. Claims court

      C. Appeals court

      D. Negotiation

22. Which of the following is incorrect regarding a bidders conference?

      A. Questions from each seller should be handled confidentially and not
         shared with other sellers.

      B. No bidders should receive preferential treatment, even if they are part of
         the company's existing list of approved suppliers.

      C. Bidder conferences should not involve individual face-to-face meetings.

      D. All prospective sellers should be allowed to have a common
         understanding of the procurement.

23. The Actual Cost (AC) is the total cost actually incurred and recorded in
    accomplishing work performed for an activity or work breakdown
    structure component. What is the upper limit for the AC?

      A. 50 percent over and above the Planned Value (PV)
      B. The Actual Cost (AC) is limited to the Planned Value (PV).

      C. 100 percent over and above the Planned Value (PV)

      D. There is no upper limit for the Actual Cost (AC).

24. You are the project manager of a project executing work under a contract
    signed with a buyer organization. Just after the project has started, you
    notice that the buyer organization had made a mistake in the financial
    terms, and your organization stands to benefit considerably from this
    oversight. What should your stance be?

      A. Do not take any action since a contract is a binding and legal document.

      B. Discuss with your management how you could gain a bonus due to the
         increased revenue your company stands to gain.

      C. Informally check with your counterpart in the buyer organization to see
         whether he or she noticed this error.

      D. Bring the error to the notice of the buyer organization and have an
         amendment made to the contract since this was in good faith.

25. You are managing a project to design microprocessor control systems.
    The design work was estimated to be complete in 3.5 months with seven
    milestones. The sixth milestone is the prototype to be transferred to
    manufacturing. All milestones before prototyping have been completed
    ahead of schedule, with the sixth one being delayed for four months
    because the prototype was sent back several times due to conflicts
    between departments. You are now planning to hold a meeting to review
    the design specifications and handle conflicts between design and
    manufacturing. Who is at fault?

      A. The scheduler
      B. The project manager

      C. The manufacturer

      D. The design engineer

26. Why are the approved change requests input to the Direct and Manage
    Project Work process?

      A. The project team may reject approved change requests during the Direct
         and Manage Project Work process.

      B. Approved change requests are implemented by the project team during the
         Direct and Manage Project Work process.

      C. The project team monitors approved change requests during the Direct
         and Manage Project Work process.

      D. The project team reviews approved change requests during the Direct and
         Manage Project Work process.

27. Sheila is a project manager who manages a global project. She has
    stakeholders located in various parts of the globe. Due to the nature of
    the project, she also has large volumes of information she needs to share
    with the recipients. What type of communication method should she
    prefer for this purpose?

      A. Pull communication

      B. Push communication

      C. Request-based communication

      D. Interactive communication
28. Rina and Gimo are the senior developers in a website development
    project. They have argued about the best web design product to use in
    developing the new website. As the project manager, you use a forcing
    approach to make a decision and reduce the conflict. What is the main
    characteristic of this approach?

      A. Forcing to close the project

      B. Highlighting areas of agreement rather than areas of disagreement

      C. Asserting one`s viewpoint at the expense of others

      D. Withdrawing from the actual conflict

29. Rick, a project manager, is updating the status of his project. Based on
    the performance indices, he expects the project to finish a month earlier
    than the planned finish date. However, he expects the project to exceed
    the budgeted costs. What can you say about the schedule performance
    index (SPI) of the project?

      A. The SPI is less than 1.0.

      B. The SPI equals the CPI.

      C. The SPI is greater than 1.0.

      D. The SPI is equal to 1.0.

30. A project team is currently focusing on Monitor Stakeholder
    Engagement process to reassess the project stakeholders' current
    engagement levels and to review the current stakeholder engagement
    strategy. Which of the following is an output of this process?

      A. Project documents updates
      B. Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix

      C. Work performance data

      D. Approved change requests

31. Variance Analysis is an important tool used in the Control Costs process.
    Which of the following statements regarding variances is correct?

      A. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to increase as
         more work is accomplished.

      B. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease as
         more work is accomplished.

      C. The percentage range of acceptable variances is high at the start of a
         project, tends to decrease in the middle of a project, and then tends to
         increase as the project nears completion.

      D. The percentage range of acceptable variances is a constant all through the
         project.

32. You are working in Lab-X, a laboratory experimental project to research
    the effect of a virus on human male bodies. This project needs local
    government approval for carrying out tests on living people. However,
    the local authorities informed you were informed it would take at least
    three weeks to obtain authorization for such approval because of the
    documents involved in the review and approval process. You consider
    this a risk to the project and would like to send the paperwork in advance
    to reduce the approval time to one week. Which of the following
    describes the risk response techniques being employed in this scenario?

      A. Risk mitigation

      B. Risk transfer
      C. Risk accept

      D. Risk avoid

33. Stakeholder analysis is an important         technique in the Identify
    Stakeholders process. One of the steps      involved is to identify the
    potential impact of each stakeholder         and classify him or her
    appropriately. Which of the following       is not a valid stakeholder
    categorization method?

      A. Salience model

      B. Tolerance model

      C. Power/interest grid

      D. Influence/impact grid

34. A key project in an organization has been ignored, due to high travel
    expenses associated with the movement of subject matter experts and
    other specialists across various project locations. Which of the following
    might allow such a project to be undertaken in a cost-efficient manner?

      A. Management sign-off

      B. Negotiation

      C. Virtual teams

      D. Co-location

35. Your company took over the management of a project from another
    company that went out of business. To minimize disruptions related to
    the transition, your company hired a number of the employees from the
    other company. One of these employees has delivered a 300-page
   document a week ahead of schedule. However, while walking past his
   desk, you notice that his computer is displaying a document with the
   logo of his former employer. You suspect that some of his work may
   have been based on documentation that is the property of the other
   company. What do you do?

     A. Report this to your project stakeholders immediately.

     B. Determine if any materials belonging to the other company have been
        copied.

     C. The copyright material is owned by the client, for whom you are working
        so this is not a copyright issue.

     D. Do nothing. Because the company is now out of business, no one now
        owns the copyright on that material.

36. A project manager is performing a set of processes in the Initiating
    Process Group. Which of the following is likely to be part of the
    Initiating Process Group?

     A. Develop Project Management Plan

     B. Define Scope

     C. Develop Project Charter

     D. Plan Quality Management

37. During the course of the project, the project management team developed
    a forecast for the estimate at completion (EAC) based on the project
    performance. Which of the following statements about EAC is correct?

     A. The EAC forecast based on the Bottom-up estimate to complete (ETC)
        requires a new estimate.
      B. The EAC forecast is best estimated using the estimate to complete (ETC)
         work performed considering both SPI and CPI factors.

      C. The EAC forecast is best estimated using the estimate to complete (ETC)
         work performed at the present CPI.

      D. The EAC forecast is best estimated using the estimate to complete (ETC)
         work performed at the budgeted rate.

38. Which of the following statements is correct?

      A. The buyer-seller relationship exists only between organizations external
         to the acquiring organization.

      B. The buyer-seller relationship exists only between organizations internal to
         the acquiring organization.

      C. The buyer-seller relationship exists at the top level on any one project, and
         between organizations internal to and external to the acquiring
         organization.

      D. The buyer-seller relationship may exist at many levels on any one project,
         and between organizations internal to and external to the acquiring
         organization.

39. Tracey is managing an ERP system implementation project. Which of
    the following tools can help her uncover a number of hidden process
    requirements during the Collect Requirements process?

      A. Observation

      B. Questionnaires

      C. Surveys
      D. Nominal group technique

40. Stakeholder identification is a continuous process. Which of the
    following statements about stakeholders is incorrect?

      A. Positive stakeholders benefit from the outcome of a project.

      B. A project manager needs to focus on the positive stakeholders since their
         needs are best served by the project.

      C. Overlooking negative stakeholders can result in an increased likelihood of
         failure.

      D. Stakeholders can have conflicting or differing objectives.

41. Which of the following is not an enterprise environmental factor
    influencing the Develop Project Management Plan process?

      A. Project management body of knowledge

      B. Governmental or industry standards

      C. Project Management Plan template

      D. Legal and regulatory requirements

42. A project manager in a seller organization discovered that certain
    deliverables had been delivered to the buyer without undergoing proper
    testing. Recalling the deliverables will result in a cost overrun on the
    project. What should the project manager do in such a case?

      A. Recall the deliverables even though there will be a cost overrun.

      B. Terminate the project.
      C. Approach management to obtain additional funding to handle the potential
         cost overrun.

      D. Wait for the procuring organization to get back with their list of defects in
         the deliverables.

43. The source selection criteria for all procurements in a project is
    developed during which of the following processes?

      A. Control Procurements

      B. Plan Procurement Management

      C. Conduct Procurements

      D. Monitor and Control Project Work

44. A project manager is estimating the project duration and finds that the
    only information available to him is a previous project that was quite
    different from the current one. However, some portions of the previous
    project were similar to the current one. Which of the following tools is
    the project manager likely to use to compare current project's activity
    durations with the similar previous activities?

      A. Analogous estimating

      B. Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)

      C. Three-point estimates

      D. Parametric estimating

45. During the Conduct Procurements process, the procuring organization
    found that there were significant differences in pricing by different
    sellers. What is the best course of action in such a scenario?
      A. Award the project to a supplier who is already on the procuring
         organization's preferred supplier list.

      B. Cancel the procurement activity.

      C. Investigate whether the procurement statement of work was defective or
         ambiguous.

      D. Award the project to the highest bidder.

46. Dave, a first-time project manager, was of the opinion that all training
    activities need to be planned. He discussed this with an experienced
    project manager who understood that some training was necessarily
    unplanned. Which of the following are good candidates for unplanned
    training?

      A. Training by observation, conversation, and project management appraisals

      B. Training by mentoring, on-the-job training, and online courses

      C. Training by conversation, coaching, and classroom training

      D. Training by mentoring, observation, and coaching

47. Which of the following is not an input to the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process?

      A. Approved Change Requests

      B. Consultants

      C. Project Management Plan

      D. Project files from prior projects
48. While analyzing the risks in a project, a project manager updated the risk
    register with risk urgency assessment ratings. In which process would
    this be done?

      A. Identify Risks

      B. Monitor Risks

      C. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

      D. Plan Risk Management

49. A project manager is considering various classification methods to share
    information among project stakeholders. Which of the following
    correctly classifies the different methods used?

      A. Pull communication--Meetings; Push communication--Newsletters;
         Interactive communication--E-learning repository

      B. Interactive communication--Meetings; Push communication--E-learning
         repository; Pull communication--Newsletters

      C. Push communication--Meetings; Pull communication--Newsletters;
         Interactive communication--E-learning repository

      D. Interactive   communication--Meetings;      Push     communication--
         Newsletters; Pull communication--E-learning repository

50. Which of the following roles in a project is most likely to be involved in
    negotiations on procurements during the Conduct Procurements phase?

      A. Procurement administrator

      B. Project coordinator
C. Project manager

D. Project sponsor
PMP Lite Mock Exam 16
Answer Key and Explanations
1. C - Notifying the appropriate management of the PMI investigation and
   their request for your assistance is the best choice. Sharing confidential
   information with an outside party without approval from your
   management is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
   Conduct. Once the appropriate management have been notified, they will
   let you know the best way to proceed with this investigation. [PMI Code
   of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. A - Such published commercial information is considered part of
   enterprise environmental factors that influence the Estimate Costs process.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 243] [Project Cost Management]

3. C - Histograms are bar charts that are used to graphically show numeric
   data. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 293] [Project Quality Management]

4. D - Estimated activity duration based on the actual duration of a previous
   similar project is an instance of analogous estimating. The other three
   choices are examples of parametric estimating. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   200] [Project Schedule Management]

5. B - It is just as important to manage the positive stakeholders as it is to
   manage the negative stakeholders. Stakeholders' expectations and interests
   change over time. In order to ensure the success of the project, the positive
   stakeholders should be managed closely to retain their support and
   commitment to the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 504-506] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]

6. B - The project charter is a high-level document that authorizes a project.
   It is not a work performance report. The other choices are valid examples
   of work performance reports. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 112] [Project
  Integration Management]

7. C - The project charter is a high-level document that authorizes a project.
   It documents a broad understanding of the project and does not need to be
   updated during the course of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 75]
   [Project Integration Management]

8. B - Process analysis examines problems experienced, constraints
   experienced, and non-value-added activities identified during process
   operation. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 292]

9. A - The procurement statement of work (SOW) does not usually reference
   the business case. The business case may contain cost sensitive
   information that may not be made available to a wider audience. The rest
   of the choices are valid components of a procurement statement of work.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 477] [Project Integration Management]

10. D - The missing input is the project management plan. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 523] [Project Stakeholder Management]

11. B - Schedule compression techniques such as crashing and fast tracking
    shorten the project schedule without changing the project scope.
    Approving overtime, bringing in additional resources and paying to
    expedite delivery activities are valid examples of crashing. Reducing
    project scope is not a valid example of crashing. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 215] [Project Schedule Management]

12. A - Projects are authorized by someone external to the project such as a
    project sponsor, project management office (PMO), or portfolio steering
    committee. A project manager does not authorize the project. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 77] [Project Integration Management]

13. C - Pre-assignment, virtual teams or negotiations as tools or techniques
    for acquiring project resources. However, negotiation is the tool used to
    acquire the project team from functional managers to ensure that the
    project receives appropriate staff in the required time frame. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 332]

14. C - This is acceptable. Deliverables need not all have the same level of
    decomposition. This will depend on the work involved and degree of
    control required. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 158] [Project Scope
    Management]

15. A - The key stakeholders' concerns and requests can never be
    disregarded. Since the communication management plan is flexible and it
    does not restrict Stanley from doing bi-weekly updates, Stanley must
    immediately accept the key stakeholders' request. Since this is not
    impacting the communication management plan, there is no need to go
    through the formal change control process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    389] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. B - Decision tree analysis is used to calculate the average outcome when
    the future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. In a decision
    node, the input is the cost of each decision and the output is a decision
    made. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 435] [Project Risk Management]

17. C - The chart is likely to be a tornado diagram. Tornado diagrams are
    useful for comparing relative importance and impact of variables that
    have a high degree of uncertainty to those that are more stable. The
    variables are positioned vertically, and the bars extend horizontally. The
    longest bar is at the top of the chart, and the shortest bar is at the bottom.
    This resembles the shape of a tornado; hence the name. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 434] [Project Risk Management]

18. C - Approved deliverables are neither an input nor an output of the
    Direct and Manage Project Work process. Approved or accepted
    deliverables are outputs of the Validate Scope process and are the inputs
    of the Close Project or Phase process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 90]
    [Project Integration Management]
19. A - A project risk is an uncertain event or condition whose occurrence
    may affect the objectives of the project. A risk may have one or many
    causes, and if it occurs, it may have one or more impacts. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 417] [Project Risk Management]

20. A - Notify your project stakeholders of the situation. Once they are
    aware of the circumstances, a plan of action can be developed. It is
    possible the stakeholders may already be aware of the situation and had
    actually approved the hiring of these resources. Therefore, you should
    involve your stakeholders to resolve this issue. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

21. D - When a buyer and seller enter into a dispute over the execution of
    work under the terms of a contract, negotiation is the preferred method of
    resolution of all claims and disputes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498]
    [Project Procurement Management]

22. A - A key objective of a bidders conference is to ensure that all bidders
    have the same level of understanding of the procurements. Hence, to be
    totally fair, buyers must ensure that all prospective sellers hear every
    question from any individual prospective seller and every answer from
    the buyer. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 487] [Project Procurement
    Management]

23. D - There is no limit to the Actual Cost (AC). Whatever is spent to
    achieve the Earned Value (EV) is measured as the Actual Cost.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 261] [Project Cost Management]

24. D - The ethical thing to do would be to bring this to the notice of the
    buyer organization and have an amendment made to the contract. [PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

25. B - The project manager is at fault for failing to mediate and resolve
    conflict and for failing to control the project schedule. The project
    manager is ultimately responsible for the project, and in accordance with
    the PMI Code of Ethics must take ownership and be accountable for his
    or her errors and omissions during all project phases. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. B - Approved change requests are implemented by the project team
    during the Direct and Manage Project Work process. The other choices
    are incorrect statements regarding the Direct and Manage Project Work
    process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 93] [Project Integration
    Management]

27. A - Pull communication is suited for this purpose. It is used for large
    volumes of information or for large audiences and requires the recipients
    to access communication content at their own discretion. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 374] [Project Communications Management]

28. C - Project managers must resolve conflicts as early as possible to
    improve productivity and generate positive working relationships.
    Forcing is a conflict resolution technique in which one's viewpoint is
    asserted at the expense of others. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 349]

29. C - A project that is ahead of schedule will have a SPI value greater than
    1.0, since it indicates that more work was completed than was planned.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 263] [Project Cost Management]

30. A - The Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix is a tool and
    technique of the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process while the
    work performance data is the input to this process. Change requests are
    produced during this process but are not approved during this process.
    The correct answer is project documents updates, which are the output of
    this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 530] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

31. B - Variances assess the magnitude of variation from the original cost
    baseline. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to
    decrease as more work is accomplished and the project nears completion.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 262] [Project Cost Management]

32. A - You want to reduce the delay in the approval process because delay
    in the approval process is likely to delay the project. Because this is a
    negative risk, the valid risk response strategies are avoid, transfer,
    mitigate or accept. Risk mitigation techniques can be used to reduce the
    probability and impact of negative risks rather than trying to repair the
    damage after the risk has occurred. In this case, you are reducing the
    approval time by sending paperwork early to avoid delays in the project.
    Hence, risk mitigation is the correct answer. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    443]

33. B - A tolerance model is not a valid classification model. The other three
    models are valid approaches, and classify stakeholders based on
    power/interest, influence/impact, or power/urgency and legitimacy as in
    the case of the salience model. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 512, 513]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

34. C - Virtual teams overcome the hurdle of high travel expenses by
    forming teams of people based in different geographical areas. It might
    appear that management sign-off or co-location may also permit the
    project to move forward. However, those approaches will not be as cost-
    efficient as virtual teams. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 340] [Project
    Resource Management]

35. B - Determine if any materials belonging to the other company have
    been copied. The fact that the other company has gone out of business
    does not necessarily mean that it no longer owns intellectual property.
    Once you know if materials from the other company have been used, you
    can develop a plan to move forward. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. C - The Initiating Process Group consists of those processes performed
    to define a new project or phase. The Develop Project Charter process is
    part of this group, and it creates the project charter that formally
    authorizes a project or a phase. The other choices listed are part of the
    Planning Process Group. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 25] [Project
    Integration Management]

37. A - The EAC forecast that is based on the bottom-up estimate to
    complete (ETC) requires a new estimate. There is no best method for
    EAC calculation as it varies from situation to situation. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 264] [Project Cost Management]

38. D - The buyer-seller relationship may exist at many levels on any one
    project, and between organizations internal to and external to the
    acquiring organization. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 461] [Project
    Procurement Management]

39. A - A hidden requirement is the one that the user or the customer fails to
    communicate or takes for granted. Hidden requirements can be identified
    by a "participant observer" who actually performs a process or procedure
    to experience how it is done. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 145] [Project
    Scope Management]

40. B - A project manager needs to take into consideration       all types of
    stakeholders, positive and negative. Focusing only           on positive
    stakeholders will increase the probability of failure of     the project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 504-506] [Project                   Stakeholder
    Management]

41. C - The project management plan template is an organizational process
    asset. The other choices are valid enterprise environmental factors that
    influence the Develop Project Management Plan process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 84] [Project Integration Management]

42. A - It is the project manager's primary responsibility to ensure that
    deliverables are tested and have gone through the process outlined in the
    project management plan. Hence, the project manager should recall the
    deliverables, even it involves a cost overrun. Approaching management
    may be the next step. Terminating the project is not called for, and it will
    be unethical to wait for the procuring organization to do their testing and
    find out the defects in deliverables. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

43. B - The source selection criteria is an output of the Plan Procurement
    Management process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 466] [Project
    Procurement Management]

44. A - Analogous duration estimating is used when there is limited
    information available about a project. This is especially true in the early
    phases of a project. In such instances, a previous similar project is used
    as a basis for estimating. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 200] [Project
    Schedule Management]

45. C - If there are significant differences in pricing by sellers, it usually
    indicates that either the procurement statement of work was defective or
    ambiguous or that the sellers misunderstood or failed to respond
    completely to the procurement statement of work. In such instances, an
    investigation needs to be launched to understand the reasons for the
    differences in pricing. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 479] [Project
    Procurement Management]

46. A - Unplanned training takes place in a number of ways that include
    observation, conversation, and project management appraisals conducted
    during the controlling process of managing the project's team. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 342] [Project Resource Management]

47. B - Project files from prior projects are a part of organizational process
    assets. Organizational process assets, the project management plan, and
    approved change requests are inputs to the Direct and Manage Project
    Work process. Consultants are used (to obtain Expert Judgement) as
    tools to manage the project work and are not an input to the process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 90]
48. C - Risk urgency information is updated to the Risk register during the
    Perform Qualitative Risks Analysis process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    427] [Project Risk Management]

49. D - Examples of interactive communication are meetings, phone calls,
    and video conferences. Examples of push communication are
    newsletters, memos, emails, and faxes. Examples of pull communication
    are intranet sites, and e-learning and knowledge repositories. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 374] [Project Communications Management]

50. A - The project manager, a team member or the project sponsor do not
    typically perform the role of lead negotiator on procurements. Due to the
    legal nature of the contractual relationship involved, a legal
    representative or a procurement administrator is involved. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 494] [Project Procurement Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Procurement Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Procurement Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project
Procurement Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. Which of these is not an input to the Control Procurements process?

      A. Agreements

      B. Change requests

      C. Work performance data

      D. Project management plan

2. Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Control
   Procurements process?

      A. Expert judgment
      B. Advertising

      C. Claims administration

      D. Inspection

3. You have received a proposal for an RFP that was sent to vendors. One of
   the vendors has proposed doing the project for $12,500. The cost for the
   project is $10,000, and their profit will be $2,500. Which type of contract
   is most suitable if the type of work is predictable and the requirements are
   well-defined and not likely to change?

      A. Cost Plus Fixed Fee

      B. Cost Plus Percentage of Cost

      C. Fixed price

      D. Cost Plus Incentive Fee

4. Your company requires that before you purchase any routers or switches
   for the data center you are building, you need to solicit quotes from three
   separate suppliers prior to submitting the purchase request to the finance
   department. This policy belongs to:

      A. Organizational Process Assets

      B. Enterprise Environmental Factors

      C. Procurement Management Knowledge Area

      D. Make-or-Buy Decision

5. If you are working on a project with constantly changing scope, which
   type of contract would work best when hiring an outside vendor to
  complete a portion of the work?

      A. Lump sum

      B. Cost-reimbursable

      C. Time and material

      D. Fixed price

6. Which of the following is accurate regarding agreements in Project
   Procurement Management?

      A. Agreements can never be terminated.

      B. Terms and conditions never include the seller's proposal.

      C. Agreements are informal documents.

      D. Agreements are legal documents between a buyer and a seller.

7. What is the purpose of a bidder conference?

      A. Awarding a contract to the most suitable vendor

      B. Pre-qualifying the potential sellers

      C. Ensuring all vendors have a clear understanding of the procurement

      D. Developing a comprehensive seller's list

8. Apart from the difference in the overall governance approach used for the
   projects performed under the predictive and adaptive lifecycles, the project
   manager should also be familiar with:

      A. The difference in the cost/benefit analysis techniques in both approaches.
      B. The tools and techniques used in both approaches.

      C. The difference in the quality standards in both approaches.

      D. The risk management processes used in both approaches.

9. Different types of contracts are appropriate for different types of
   purchases. Which of these is not one of the three broad categories of
   contracts?

      A. Cost-reimbursable

      B. Time and Material

      C. Fixed-price or lump sum

      D. Fixed assessment

10. You are building a mansion that will have copper roofs. The duration of
    the project will be approximately three years. You have built into the
    contract that, as the price of copper increases, your price increases as a
    percentage of the cost of the copper. However, all other costs are fixed.
    This is an example of what type of contract?

      A. Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment

      B. Fixed Price Incentive Fee

      C. Unit Price

      D. Time and Materials
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Procurement Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Change requests are not inputs to the Control Procurements process.
   The other choices are valid inputs to this process. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 492] [Project Procurement Management]

2. B - Advertising is a tool and technique of the Conduct Procurements
   process. The other choices are valid tools or techniques of the Control
   Procurements process. [PMBOK 6th edition, pages 482, 492] [Project
   Procurement Management]

3. C - Fixed-price contracts are most suitable if the type of work is
   predictable and the requirements are well defined and not likely to change.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 476] [Project Procurement Management]

4. A - Any type of corporate policy or formal procurement procedure is an
   organizational process asset. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 39] [Project
   Procurement Management]

5. B - Cost plus contracts are suitable when the work is evolving, likely to
   change, or not well defined.. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 476] [Project
   Procurement Management]

6. D - Agreements are legal and formal documents between buyers and
   sellers. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 489] [Project Procurement
   Management]

7. C - Bidder conferences are also called contractor conferences or vendor
   conferences. Their purpose is to provide all vendors with an understanding
   of the project requirements and to give all vendors equal time to get their
   questions answered. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 487] [Project Procurement
  Management]

8. B - The role of the project manager does not change bases on managing
   project using a predictive development life cycle or managing project in
   adaptive environments. However, to be successful in used adaptive
   approaches, the project manager will need to be familiar with the tools and
   techniques to understand and how to apply them effectively. [PMBOK 6th
   edition, Page 178] [Project Procurement Management]

9. D - Fixed-assessment is not a category of contracts. Other choices are
   valid contract types. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 471, 472] [Project
   Procurement Management]

10. A - Since the price increases are tied only to the rising costs of the
    copper, this is a fixed-price with economic price adjustment (FP-EPA)
    contract. This is common with multi-year contracts. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 471] [Project Procurement Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 17
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 17
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. You are working for a large project organization with several project
   managers working on 15 projects. All project managers submit their status
   reports at month's end. One of your fellow project managers, Jane, has
   reported an error in the past two months. From discussions with one of her
   project's team members who is also working on one of your projects, you
   realize Jane is deliberately misreporting the project's status to inflate her
   performance for the annual performance appraisal next month. The month-
   end review meeting is in two days, and you are preparing your own
   presentation for it. What should you say about her status report?

      A. Investigate and verify the blame before reporting the incorrect status to
         the appropriate management.

      B. Since there is no direct relationship between your project and hers, there is
        no need to intervene in this issue.

      C. Prepare a brief of what you have discussed with her team member and
         report the inconsistency in the meeting

      D. Send an email to her boss asking to check the contents of her report

2. You have presented a unique and verifiable product to your customers for
   their approval. Approval of this product may allow you to move on to your
   next phase. This unique and verifiable product is also known as:

      A. A plan

      B. A project

      C. A portfolio

      D. A deliverable

3. You are a senior project manager working for RETAMART, a retail
   shopping network that sells various consumer products. As part of the
   expansion plan approved by the board of directors, you are assigned as a
   project manager for a new plant. Due to transportation problems, the
   project has experienced delays; the Schedule Performance Index (SPI) is at
   0.6 and the Cost Performance Index (CPI) is at 0.7. However, you expect
   some improvements during the next few weeks, which may increase the
   SPI to 1.1 and the CPI to 0.9. Which of the following statements will be
   true if your anticipated changes materialize?

      A. The project will be overspent and behind schedule.

      B. The project will be on schedule and under budget.

      C. The project will be overspent but ahead of schedule.
      D. The project will be under budget but behind schedule.

4. You are in the middle of a risk assessment meeting with key stakeholders,
   customers and project team leaders. While identifying and assessing risks,
   you realize that two key stakeholders are overemphasizing the impact of a
   risk. What is the best step to take to avoid unfairness or bias when
   assessing risks?

      A. Implement assumptions analysis to explore the validity of assumptions

      B. Develop a risk response strategy to eliminate threats

      C. Engage a neutral facilitator to support the Perform Qualitative Risk
         Analysis process.

      D. Perform sensitivity analysis to establish which risks have the most impact
         on the project

5. You are in the process of collecting and disseminating performance
   information to the stakeholders in the project. You want to predict the
   future performance of the project based on the current information. This
   performance information includes status reports, current status of risks,
   and summary of changes approved in the period. Which of the following
   methods will help you in predicting the future performance of the project?

      A. Forecasts

      B. A Pareto chart

      C. A run chart

      D. A Work Breakdown Structure

6. There is a heavy demand for new houses in your city's expensive
   neighborhood. RECON, a construction company, has employed you as a
  project manager to assess the benefit of building new energy-efficient
  houses in that neighborhood, even though it takes more expensive
  technology to build such houses. You have started gathering data to
  perform a detailed payback analysis to submit a report to your
  management. Since the full financial impact of building energy-efficient
  houses is difficult to estimate, you would like to prepare a rough cost-
  benefit analysis and include it with the report. Which of the following
  describes the effort you are undertaking in this scenario?

      A. You are developing a business case to provide as an input to the Develop
         Project Charter process.

      B. You are developing a cost management plan to provide as an input to the
         Estimate Costs process.

      C. You are developing a risk management plan to provide as an input to the
         Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.

      D. You are developing a cost-benefit analysis to provide as an input to the
         Plan Risk Management process.

7. Jared is in the execution phase of a residential housing construction
   project. He has been informed of major scope changes from stakeholders
   in the middle of the project. These changes involve regulatory
   requirements from local authorities that may affect not only the scope but
   also the cost and duration of the project. What is the first step that Jared
   should take in considering these changes?

      A. Meet with the change control board to solicit some ideas on the new
         project plan

      B. Create a report detailing the impact of scope changes on project
         parameters such as cost, quality, and schedule

      C. Add new tasks to the project plan and assign resources to account for
        regulatory changes

      D. Escalate the scope changes to the sponsor and steering committee for their
         decision

8. You are working on an information technology project as a project
   manager to develop a shopping website for your customers. Some key
   stakeholders in the project suggested scope changes to improve the
   website's look and feel. Your team has analyzed the impact of these
   changes and presented the analysis to the Change Control Board (CCB)
   for approval. What should be your next step if the CCB accepts all
   proposed changes?

      A. Implement the change request and update stakeholders

      B. Review change control board decisions and inform stakeholders for their
         input

      C. Conduct a team status meeting to update the progress on change requests

      D. Revise cost estimates, schedule dates, resource requirements, and
         planning documents

9. Jane is worried about her project because many of her tasks are moving
   slowly, and two critical tasks may slip. She conducts a thorough resource
   analysis and finds out that there are five people who will be free next
   week. She would like to assign those people to finish her tasks early and
   prevent the project completion date from slipping. This is an example of:

      A. Management reserves

      B. Resource Leveling

      C. Crashing
      D. Fast tracking

10. Andrew is managing a construction project. He is using his
    communication, interpersonal and management skills to keep the key
    project stakeholders engaged with the project. Which of the following
    activities is not related to the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?

      A. Addressing and resolving issues

      B. Developing the stakeholder engagement plan

      C. Confirming the stakeholders' continued commitment

      D. Negotiating and communicating with the stakeholders

11. You are working on a waste management project that, upon completion,
    will be turned over to the local municipality for steady-state operation.
    Parking of trucks and other vehicles has become a serious problem
    because no parking area was allotted to you on the main dumping site.
    As a result, your trucks are parked on nearby roadsides. One of the fleet
    supervisors informs you that close to the main site, there is a large tract
    of land a local charity owns. Many locals park their cars on this tract of
    land. What should you do?

      A. Since the piece of land is already used as parking, you can park your
         trucks over there.

      B. Don't park the trucks on that piece of land because it will be a violation of
         other's property rights.

      C. Check the local parking laws.

      D. Ask the supervisor to get contact information of the local charity.

12. In a textile manufacturing project, a team divided the project work into
    35 work packages and assigned a few work packages to the design
    department for review. After the review, the manager of the design
    department requested that the team further divide the work packages into
    more manageable work components for estimating and scheduling
    resources. Which of the following techniques should the team use to
    satisfy the manager's request?

      A. Decomposition

      B. The parametric estimating

      C. The precedence diagramming method

      D. The bottom-up estimating

13. You are working as a project manager for MALTEX, an IT organization
    having a projectized organization structure. You have recently started
    managing a project that involves stakeholders from within and outside
    your organization. The stakeholders external to your organization are
    highly critical since the project negatively affects their interests. You are
    making serious efforts to gather their expectations and influence levels
    early in the project to ensure their voice is heard and proper
    communication needs can be planned in the project's future phases. The
    outcome of your effort can be documented in:

      A. The stakeholder engagement plan

      B. The project scope document

      C. The risk register

      D. The stakeholder communication plan

14. You have managed a federal highway construction project, which is
    intended to improve transportation between north and south regions of
   the country. In the execution phase, you received many complaints from
   stakeholders, including the highway transportation agency. At least half
   these complaints were regarding the quality of the micro texture of the
   road, and the nonconformance to the quality levels incorporated in the
   project quality management plan. So far, you have successfully fixed all
   the reported issues, but you are concerned by this recurrent event. What
   should you do to avoid future similar issues?

      A. Initiate a defect repair to repair the road or completely pave a new road

      B. Initiate a preventive action to reduce the probability of negative
         consequences associated with the poor quality of the road

      C. Initiate a change request to update the project quality management plan

      D. Initiate a corrective action to bring the future quality of the road in line
         with the project management plan

15. During a key stakeholders' update meeting, George's project was
    challenged. The project is currently in the executing phase. One of the
    key stakeholders claimed the project no longer makes any business
    sense. What must George do next?

      A. Update the issue log and request that the stakeholder provide more details

      B. Request the project sponsor to intervene

      C. Prematurely terminate the project

      D. Redo the business case for the project

16. To communicate with stakeholders on the resolved issues and the issues
    that are hard to resolve, you use an issue log in your project. Since you
    assign an owner for every issue and resolve it by working on it, your
    stakeholders actively support all your efforts in managing the project.
    This method of actively resolving issues and reducing risks to the project
    is known as:

      A. Quality management

      B. Scope Management

      C. Communications management

      D. Stakeholder management

17. You have been assigned as the project manager for a software
    development project. You are currently communicating with
    stakeholders and addressing their issues and expectations. Which of the
    following documents are inputs to this effort?

      A. The Issue log, Project charter, and Configuration management system

      B. The stakeholder engagement plan, communications management plan, and
         the change log

      C. The Project risk register, Work performance information, and Accepted
         deliverables

      D. Business case, change requests, and control charts

18. Changes in projects are inevitable. Therefore, project managers must
    develop or use a system to manage and control changes. There are four
    types of changes that need to be controlled in a project: Project changes,
    deliverable changes, process changes, and baseline changes. The impact
    of each of these changes must be evaluated, and approved or rejected
    changes must be communicated to all stakeholders, as and when
    required. Which of the following helps control these changes?

      A. Configuration control and Control chart
      B. Configuration control and Change control

      C. Control chart and Cost control

      D. Change control and Control chart

19. Two of your expert team members have been in a heated argument over
    the use of a new software product for your research project. Recently,
    you noticed that the argument, instead of increasing creativity, is causing
    conflict between the team members. To prevent the conflict from
    escalating, you want to resolve it by open dialogue and evaluating
    alternatives. All the following statements about conflict are false except:

      A. Scarce resources cannot be a source of a conflict.

      B. Conflict is inevitable in a project environment.

      C. Personal work style cannot be a source of a conflict.

      D. Reducing the amount of conflict is not desirable.

20. As you examine a list of job candidates for your project, you find that
    your cousin is one of the three shortlisted candidates. You know that she
    was desperately looking for a job. After reviewing the three resumes, you
    will send them to the electronics engineer for a technical interview. From
    your review of these resumes, you see that all three shortlisted candidates
    have similar qualifications and experiences. What should you do?

      A. To avoid conflict of interest, ignore your cousin's resume but forward the
         other two resumes.

      B. Forward all three resumes.

      C. Call your cousin and conduct an informal interview yourself before
         forwarding the resumes.
      D. Consult your boss before forwarding the resumes for interview.

21. The customer requests a change to the project that would increase the
    project risk. Which of the following should you do first?

      A. Talk to the customer about the impact of the change

      B. Change the risk management plan

      C. Include the expected monetary value of the risk in the new cost estimate

      D. Analyze the change`s impact of the change with the team

22. Some tools or techniques can be used across various project processes to
    plan, execute, or control the characteristics of project elements. Which of
    the following is used as a tool in both the Control Quality and Plan
    Quality Management processes?

      A. Expert Judgment

      B. Meetings

      C. Design for X

      D. Audits

23. In an underground highway construction project, the project stakeholders
    have suggested many changes to the project scope. You had already
    defined the cost baseline in your project, and you would like to revisit
    the baseline to see how these changes might affect the overall cost of the
    project. You start an impact analysis to determine the impact and inform
    the concerned stakeholders of all approved changes and the
    corresponding costs. You perform these activities in which process?

      A. Control Scope
      B. Monitor Risks

      C. Control Costs

      D. Monitor Communications

24. Which of the following documents the formal or informal assessments of
    the project team's effectiveness?

      A. Team Performance Assessments

      B. Project Performance Appraisals

      C. Observations

      D. Conversations

25. You have recently joined a new company as a project manager. While
    reviewing the procurement plans for a project you will be taking over,
    you see that the company is considering using one of the most expensive
    manufacturers to provide certain equipment required for the project. At
    your previous employer, you had used a different supplier for the same
    equipment and had paid significantly less. Without telling your boss, you
    now call that supplier for a quote. Have you violated the rule of keeping
    proprietary information confidential?

      A. Maybe. You need to talk to your boss first.

      B. No. There is no harm in sharing the information with your current
         employer, because you are no longer working for your old employer.

      C. Yes. The supply source is proprietary information, and you should not
         contact the supplier.

      D. You have not violated any rule.
26. Which of the following statements about the planned value, the earned
    value, the schedule variance, and the cost variance of a project is false?

      A. The cost variance is the difference between the earned value and the
         actual cost.

      B. The schedule variance is the difference between the earned value and the
         planned value.

      C. The earned value is the value of work to be completed in terms of the
         approved budget.

      D. The planned value is the budget authorized for the work to be performed.

27. You are working as a project manager for a wind-powered vehicle
    manufacturing project which is in its planning phase. You carefully
    gathered all your requirements from your key stakeholders and prepared
    a system requirements specification and project requirements
    specification. While presenting your specifications to the project team,
    an enthusiastic project team member started talking about the duration
    estimates for each activity. Which of the following statements indicates
    your response to your team member?

      A. WBS creation and Schedule development must be done after estimating
         durations.

      B. Schedule development and Costs estimation must be done before
         estimating durations.

      C. Scope definition, WBS creation, Quality planning, and Communication
         planning must be done before estimating durations.

      D. Scope definition, WBS creation, Activity definition, and Activity
         sequencing must be done before estimating durations.
28. Rosanne is an experienced project manager working on a pharmaceutical
    project. This project involves two large vendors supplying chemical
    products with specific compositions for preparing drugs. While
    reviewing documents to see how a seller is performing, she notices the
    seller did not meet some of the contractual terms. Since it is a first-time
    violation, she would like to initiate a corrective action to bring the
    seller's performance in line with the statement of work. Which of the
    following are not outputs of Rosanne's effort?

      A. Work performance data and approved change requests

      B. Work performance information and change requests

      C. Change requests and Organizational process assets update

      D. Change requests and Project management plan updates

29. The Project Charter defines the high level scope and objectives of a
    project. Which of the following is not a correct statement about inputs to
    the Project Charter?

      A. Government or industry standards cannot be used as an input to develop a
         project charter.

      B. The project's business case is an input to the Develop Project Charter
         process.

      C. Organizational process assets are input to the Develop Project Charter
         process.

      D. When projects are executed for external customers, a contract or an
         agreement is used as an input to the charter.

30. Nancy's project is 80 percent complete. Which of the following project
    documents is least likely to be updated during the Monitor Stakeholder
    Engagement process performed at this stage?

      A. Project charter

      B. Risk register

      C. Stakeholder register

      D. Issue log

31. Close Project or Phase is the process of completing and concluding all
    activities across all process groups to officially close the project. Which
    of the following activities is not performed during this process?

      A. Actions required to transfer completed products to operations

      B. Actions required to archive project information

      C. Actions required to audit project success or failure

      D. Actions required to accept the deliverables

32. Which of the following activities fall under the planning process group
    but not under project schedule management?

      A. Estimating activity durations

      B. Developing the Schedule Management Plan

      C. Identification of various activities to produce the project deliverables

      D. Developing a detailed description of the project and product being
         developed

33. James has been managing a hotel construction project on a busy street.
   He is in the process of estimating activity durations for building walls,
   and he calculates the most likely estimate as 15 days. If prefabricated
   material is used, it would take no more than 12 days to finish the work.
   The work may be delayed and could take up to 18 days if less
   experienced construction workers build the walls. What is the expected
   duration of building walls using the three-point estimate?

      A. 12 days

      B. 11 days

      C. 16 days

      D. 15 days

34. Rodney is in the process of preparing the project performance report for
    the team meeting. He is expecting many questions from his stakeholders
    on the budget and schedule. He calculates the following values: Budget
    at Completion (BAC) = $22,000, Earned Value (EV) = $13,000, Planned
    Value (PV) = $14,000, Actual cost (AC) = $15,000. What is the Estimate
    at Completion (EAC) for the project, if the work is performed at the
    budgeted rate?

      A. $24,000

      B. $36,000

      C. $22,500

      D. $37,000

35. You are reviewing the responses to an RFP your company issued. You
    realize that a key requirement was not included in the RFP. However,
    one of the bidders included that requirement in the response. What is the
    best course of action?
      A. Award the contract to that bidder

      B. Revise and reissue the RFP

      C. Select the bid that included the requirement

      D. Cancel the RFP

36. Many organizations favor fixed-price contracts because the buyer's risk
    is minimized by such contracts. However, to minimize the seller's risk,
    which of the following is crucial for a fixed price contract?

      A. The buyer must precisely specify the number of resources to be used for
         procurement.

      B. The buyer must precisely specify the service or product to be procured.

      C. The buyer must precisely specify the time for completing the contract.

      D. The buyer must precisely specify the price of the contract.

37. Which of the following is not an effective influencing technique?

      A. Withdrawing from conflicts

      B. Using a flexible interpersonal style

      C. Leading by example

      D. Clarifying how decisions will be made

38. The project manager of a long-term project to develop a new medical
    device waits until the later phase where the deliverables are more clearly
    defined before adding those details to the WBS. This is an example of:
      A. Poor planning

      B. Balanced planning

      C. Deferred planning

      D. Rolling Wave planning

39. Control charts are used to determine the stability of a process. Which of
    the following best describes the range of the control limits applied on a
    control chart?

      A. The control limits are determined using design for X.

      B. The control limits are determined using statistical calculations.

      C. The control limits are provided by the customer.

      D. The control limits are based on cost tolerance.

40. You are just starting on a project as project manager. The project sponsor
    asks you for weekly status updates by email and monthly project status
    meetings to review the project's progress. These requirements are
    documented in the:

      A. Scope statement

      B. Communications management plan

      C. Project charter

      D. Organizational plan

41. Cindy has been working in a manufacturing project as a project manager.
    This project is intended to produce high-quality semiconductors to use in
   computers. Since semiconductors are produced from silicon wafers, she
   contracted a company to provide silicon wafers to the project on an
   ongoing basis. For unknown reasons, the contractor provided low-quality
   wafers to the project, compromising the electrical performance of the
   semiconductors. Overwhelmed by complaints from the computer
   division, Cindy is now obligated to correct the manufacturing defects to
   avoid future liabilities. In this scenario, the costs Cindy incurred are:

      A. External failure costs or Cost of nonconformance

      B. Appraisal costs or Cost of nonconformance

      C. Prevention costs or Cost of conformance

      D. Internal failure costs or Cost of conformance

42. As an independent consultant, you are working with a project manager of
    a spacecraft parts manufacturing project to ensure that the team complies
    with organizational quality policies and procedures. Since parts made in
    this project must be of high precision and accuracy, you are documenting
    shortcomings within the processes and procedures to improve the quality
    for customer acceptance. Which of the following best represents the
    project management activity you are doing?

      A. Statistical sampling

      B. Quality audits

      C. Quality control

      D. Inspection

43. You have been managing a research project to create genetically
    modified fruits using genetic engineering techniques. Since many legal
    issues are involved in this process, you created contingency allowances
   by using various quantitative analysis methods to account for cost
   uncertainty. You have just concluded a brainstorming session with your
   team in the execution phase to monitor risks that have developed in the
   project over the past few weeks and to establish new risk response plans.
   What should you do if you want to allocate more contingency reserves to
   account for new risks?

      A. Perform the reserve analysis to compare the amount of contingency
         reserves remaining to the amount of risk remaining

      B. Perform Monte Carlo analysis to compare the amount of contingency
         reserves remaining to the amount of risk remaining

      C. Perform the variance and trend analysis to compare planned results to the
         actual results

      D. Perform the quantitative risk analysis to determine the outstanding risks

44. In a small office construction project, the following activities are
    scheduled in sequence. i) Digging and pouring footings: five days. ii)
    Working on the slab and pouring: three days. iii) Framing the floor: five
    days. iv) Wall framing: four days. v) Roof framing: six days. vi)
    Insulation and drywall: seven days. vii) Interior doors and trim: three
    days. viii) Hardware and fixtures: two days. What is the minimum time
    to complete the project if all activities are on a critical path except
    activity viii, and activity iii is delayed by one day?

      A. 32 days

      B. 33 days

      C. 34 days

      D. 35 days
45. During the execution of a project, the project manager discovers the
    project's stakeholder register is no longer accurate. What should the
    project manager do?

      A. The project is in execution, the stakeholder register cannot be updated at
         this stage.

      B. A change request should be issued.

      C. The project is in execution, the Identify Stakeholders process cannot be
         carried out at this stage.

      D. Review the stakeholder register and carry out the Identify Stakeholders
         process.

46. In a ship design project, a project manager is in the process of
    negotiating with a consulting company to ensure that the project receives
    certified and specialized consultants for creating the hull design. The
    project manager wants to make certain that the consultants will be able to
    work until their assignments are completed. He is using all his
    negotiation skills and interpersonal skills to get competent staff on time.
    Based on the scenario described above, the project manager is engaged
    in:

      A. Acquire Resources process

      B. Resource Leveling process

      C. Plan Resource Management process

      D. Manage Team process

47. The Stakeholder Committee has a report that shows zero schedule
    variance. However, the first milestone in the project was missed, which
    will cause a delay in the project. Which of the following was not
    reported correctly?

      A. Resource management plan

      B. Risk analysis

      C. Critical path status

      D. Communications plan variance

48. The organization's safety and health policy, ethics policy, project policy,
    and quality policy can be used by a project to influence its success. All
    these policies are a part of:

      A. Organizational process assets

      B. The project management plan

      C. Enterprise environmental factors

      D. Historical databases

49. Velvet is working for a chemical industry, and her management proposed
    two different projects to manufacture benzene for commercial use. After
    doing financial analysis, the financial advisor provided her with the
    following statistics about the projects: Project 1: 60 percent probability
    of success with a profit of $500,000 and 20 percent probability of failure
    with a loss of $200,000. Project 2: 30 percent probability of success with
    a profit of $300,000 and 30 percent probability of failure with a loss of
    $400,000. Based on the information above, Velvet should choose:

      A. Either project 1 or project 2

      B. Neither project 1 nor project 2
      C. Project 2

      D. Project 1

50. You are managing a highly complex drug manufacturing project, and
    your sponsor is highly motivated and influential. You are optimistic
    about the outcome of the project; however, you are unsure about the
    project approval requirements that measure the project's success. You
    would like to document the name of the person who signs off on the
    project and the criteria that constitute the project's success. Which of the
    following documents should you use first to incorporate project approval
    requirements?

      A. The scope document

      B. The project charter

      C. The approval requirement plan

      D. The project management plan
PMP Lite Mock Exam 17
Answer Key and Explanations
1. A - Investigate and verify the blame before reporting the incorrect status to
   the appropriate management. Project managers are required by PMI's Code
   of Ethics to provide truthful and accurate information, and to report errors
   and omissions of others to the appropriate management. [PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. D - A unique and verifiable product produced in each phase or at the end
   of the project is known as a deliverable. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 4]
   [Project Integration Management]

3. C - The cost performance index below 1 indicates that the project is over
   budget, and the schedule performance index above 1 indicates that the
   project is ahead of schedule. If all of your anticipated changes happen to
   be true, the project will be overspent but ahead of schedule because the
   schedule performance index will be greater than 1. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 263]

4. C - Engaging a neutral facilitator to support the Perform Qualitative Risk
   Analysis process should help address bias. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   420] [Project Risk Management]

5. A - Forecasts are estimates or predictions of conditions and events in the
   project's future based on information and knowledge available at the time
   of the forecast. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 264]

6. A - An organization's business need may arise due to advances in
   technology, a demand from the market or a legal requirement. The
   business need and cost-benefit analysis are documented in a business case.
   A business case determines whether the project is worth the investment.
   Payback analysis is also part of a business case. The business case and
  other documents are used as an input to the Develop Project Charter
  process. Hence, you are making efforts to build a business case to input to
  the Develop Project Charter process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 77]
  [Project Integration Management]

7. B - Any scope changes in a project must go through the Integrated Change
   Control process to determine the impact on project parameters such as
   cost, quality and schedule. The changes must then be presented to the
   Change Control Board for their review. Then, all approved changes must
   be planned, and resources must be allocated. Therefore, the first step for
   Jared is to create a report detailing the impact of scope changes on project
   parameters such as cost, quality and schedule. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   115] [Project Integration Management]

8. D - Approved change requests require changes to cost estimates, resource
   requirements, schedule dates and activity sequences. You should
   incorporate these revisions first before asking your team to implement the
   changes. Stakeholders can be updated after making the changes.
   Therefore, your first step is revising the estimates and baselines. [PMBOK
   6th edition, Page 120] [Project Integration Management]

9. C - Adding more resources to scheduled tasks in order to compress the
   task durations is called crashing. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 215] [Project
   Schedule Management]

10. B - The stakeholder engagement plan is developed during the Plan
    Stakeholder Engagement process. However, the stakeholder engagement
    plan might get updated during the Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 516, 529] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

11. D - You must not use someone's property without permission, even if
    others are doing the same thing. The best option is to call the charity and
    ask for their permission. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]
12. A - The manager requested the team to divide the work packages into
    more manageable components for estimating the resources. The Define
    Activities process is used to divide the work packages into more
    manageable activities for estimating, scheduling, and executing the
    project work. Decomposition is the technique used during this process to
    divide the work packages into activities. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 185]
    [Project Schedule Management]

13. A - The stakeholder engagement plan is a component of the project
    management plan and identifies the management strategies required to
    effectively engage stakeholders. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 522]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

14. B - There is no need to update the quality management plan since the
    problem is with the workmanship and not with the quality management
    plan. The scenario is asking for an action that will ensure future
    compliance, i.e. a preventive action. Note that since all of the reported
    defects have been fixed, there is no need for any corrective action or
    defect repair at this stage. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 96] [Project
    Integration Management]

15. A - All key stakeholders' concerns must be addressed. George must first
    understand these concerns and determine the root cause before taking
    any action. He must request the objecting stakeholder to provide further
    details so that he can analyze the situation. Taking immediate action
    without understanding the problem and determining the root cause is
    poor project management. Finally, this issue must be recorded in the
    issue log. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 96] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]

16. D - Actively working with project stakeholders and resolving their issues
    relate to project stakeholder management. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages
    504-506] [Project Stakeholder Management]

17. B - Communicating with stakeholders to address their issues is done
    during the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. The stakeholder
    engagement plan, communications management plan and the change log
    are some of the inputs of this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 523]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

18. B - Configuration control is focused on the specification of both the
    processes and deliverables, whereas change control is focused on project
    changes and the product baselines. A configuration control process and
    change control system must be implemented to handle all those changes.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 115] [Project Integration Management]

19. B - Conflict is inevitable in a project environment. The other statements
    are incorrect. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 348] [Project Resource
    Management]

20. B - Send all three candidates' resumes. Since all the candidates have
    similar profiles, all three deserve a full chance of evaluation. Because
    you have not shortlisted the resumes nor will you be the interviewer or
    make the final decision, there is no question of discrimination, partiality
    or conflict of interest. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]

21. D - Your first step is to assess the impact of the change with the team.
    Then you can determine possible options, after which you can meet with
    management. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 115]

22. B - "Meetings" is a tool and technique common to both the Plan Quality
    Management and Control Quality processes. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
    272] [Project Quality Management]

23. C - The Control Costs process involves many activities, such as
    influencing the factors that change the cost baseline, managing the
    changes, and informing stakeholders of approved changes and
    corresponding costs. Since you are in the process of managing the cost
    changes and informing the stakeholders about them, you are in the
    Control Costs process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 257] [Project Cost
    Management]

24. A - Team Performance Assessments document the formal or informal
    assessments of the project team's effectiveness. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 343] [Project Resource Management]

25. D - No rule has been violated as you have not disclosed any proprietary
    or confidential information. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. C - Earned value is the value of the work already completed. This value
    is often expressed in terms of the approved budget assigned to the work
    completed. The earned value is measured against the performance
    measurement baseline. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 261] [Project Cost
    Management]

27. D - Estimating activity durations is done during the planning phase of a
    project. Since you have just developed the requirements, the scope must
    be defined and the WBS must be created immediately. Based on the
    WBS, activities must be defined and sequenced. After sequencing,
    resources and duration for each activity must be estimated. Therefore,
    explain to your team member which activities must be done before
    estimating durations: Scope definition, WBS creation, activity definition,
    and activity sequencing. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 129, 173] [Project
    Schedule Management]

28. A - Evaluating the performance of the seller is done during the Control
    Procurements process. If the contractual terms are not met by the seller, a
    corrective action can be initiated. If there are severe violations, the
    contract can be terminated based on the language used in the contract.
    Work performance information, change requests, project management
    plan updates, project document updates and organizational process
    updates are the outputs of this process. Work performance data and
    approved change requests are inputs to this process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 492] [Project Procurement Management]

29. A - Government or industry standards are part of enterprise
    environmental factors and are used as inputs to the Develop Project
    Charter process. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 78] [Project Integration
    Management]

30. A - The project charter is least likely to get updated during the project
    execution. Rest of the choices are project documents that do get updated
    during the Monitor Stakeholder Engagement process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 536] [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. D - Actions required to transfer completed products to operations,
    actions required to archive project information, and actions required to
    audit project success or failure are carried out in the Close Project or
    Phase process. However, actions required to accept the completed
    deliverables are executed in the Validate Scope process. The completed
    deliverables are then transferred to the Close Project or Phase process.
    Therefore, actions required to accept the deliverables are not done in the
    Close Project or Phase process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 123, 163]
    [Project Integration Management]

32. D - Developing a detailed description of the project and of the product
    being developed is done during the Define Scope process. This is a
    planning activity; however, it falls under project scope management.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Pages 150, 173] [Project Scope Management]

33. D - If the engineer is correct, the optimistic estimate can be taken as 12
    days. The pessimistic estimate is still 18 days and the most likely
    estimate is 15 days. Using the PERT or the three-point technique, the
    expected activity duration is calculated using the formula Te = (To + Tm
    + Tp)/3, where Te is the estimated duration, To is the optimistic
    duration, Tm is the most likely duration and Tp is the pessimistic
    duration. Hence, Te = (12 + 15 +18)/3 = 15 days. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 201] [Project Schedule Management]
34. A - If the project work is performed at the budgeted rate, the Estimate at
    Completion can be computed using the formula EAC = AC + (BAC -
    EV). Substituting all these values in the expression, EAC = $15,000 +
    ($22,000 - $13,000) = $24,000. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 267] [Project
    Cost Management]

35. B - Revise and reissue the RFP. It is in the best interest of both the
    bidders and the project to use an accurate requirements list to develop
    procurement plans. Moreover, PMI's Code of Ethics prohibits project
    managers from intentionally providing incorrect information. [PMI Code
    of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

36. B - In a fixed-price contract, the buyer must precisely specify the product
    or service to be procured. Any changes in the contract may involve
    additional cost to the buyer. Therefore, buyers must be careful while
    preparing the statement of work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 471]
    [Project Procurement Management]

37. A - Withdrawing from a conflict may temporarily alleviate the conflict,
    but it cannot influence the team members. The other choices are effective
    team influencing techniques. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 349]

38. D - Decomposition may not be possible for a deliverable or subproject
    that will be accomplished far into the future. The project management
    team usually waits until the deliverable or subproject is clarified before
    adding those details to the WBS. This technique is referred to as rolling
    wave planning. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 185]

39. B - The control limits are determined using statistical calculations.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 304] [Project Quality Management]

40. B - As part of communications planning, stakeholder communication
    requirements are gathered and documented in the communications
    management plan. This forms part of the project management plan.
    [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 377]
41. A - In this scenario, Cindy is performing warranty work to correct
    manufacturing defects. These defects are identified by external
    customers, and the costs are known as external failure costs. These costs
    are also known as costs of nonconformance because the product did not
    meet the quality requirements. The cost of nonconformance is a part of
    the cost of quality. Therefore, Cindy is incurring external failure costs or
    costs of nonconformance. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 283] [Project
    Quality Management]

42. B - Ensuring that the project team complies with organizational quality
    policies and procedures is done in the Manage Quality process. Quality
    audits are one such technique. A structured review is performed by
    independent consultants or contractors to identify all shortcomings in
    carrying out quality policies and procedures. These efforts should be
    used later to improve product quality and reduce the cost of quality.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 294] [Project Quality Management]

43. A - Many risks may develop over the course of any project. Project
    managers must monitor those risks and plan risk responses. The reserve
    analysis is used as a tool in the Monitor Risks process. This technique is
    used to compare the amount of contingency reserves remaining to the
    amount of risk remaining throughout the execution of the project. Hence,
    you must conduct a reserve analysis first to decide on the contingency
    allowances. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 456] [Project Risk Management]

44. C - A critical path has a zero total float. This means that any delay in the
    critical path activity delays the project finish date. In other words, the
    critical path gives the minimum time required to complete a project. In
    this case, adding the durations for all critical path activities gives the
    minimum time required as 33 days. If activity iii is delayed by one day,
    then the minimum time required to complete the project will also be
    delayed by one day, so the minimum time becomes 34 days. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 210] [Project Schedule Management]

45. D - The Identify Stakeholders process is an iterative process. During any
    stage of the project, if the stakeholder register is found to be out of date,
    it must be updated. The stakeholder register is not a part of any of the
    project's baselines. Updating the stakeholder register does not require
    issuing a change request. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 507]

46. A - Negotiation skills are used by project managers throughout the
    project. In this scenario, the project manager is negotiating with vendors
    to get talented consultants in sufficient number within the scheduled
    time. This process ensures the availability of scarce resources during
    critical phases of the project. This effort is done during the Acquire
    Resources process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 328] [Project Resource
    Management]

47. C - The critical path is the sequence of schedule activities that
    determines the duration of the project. A project can have zero or
    positive schedule variance and yet still risk missing its deadline for
    completion. For example, this could happen if some of the future non-
    critical tasks have been completed ahead of schedule, but some of the
    tasks on the critical path have been delayed. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page
    210]

48. A - Organizational process assets can be used to influence a project's
    success. Organizational standards and policies such as safety and health
    policy, ethics policy, quality policy, and project management policy are a
    part of the organizational process assets. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 39]
    [Project Framework]

49. D - Profit or loss from a project = (Expected profit * probability of
    profit) - (Expected loss * probability of loss). For Project 1, the profit or
    loss = (500000*0.6 - 200000*0.2) = 300000 - 40000 = $260,000 profit.
    For Project 2, the profit or loss = (300000*0.3 - 400000*0.3) = 90000 -
    120000 = ($30,000) = $30,000 loss. Hence, Velvet should select Project
    1, which can yield a profit. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 435] [Project
    Risk Management]
50. B - Project approval requirements must be documented early in the
    project during the initiation phase. These requirements show the
    requisites for project success, the names of persons signing off on the
    project and deliverable requirements. Since the project charter is created
    in the initiation phase of the project, the project manager must include
    these requirements in the charter. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 81]
    [Project Integration Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Stakeholder Management
Practice Questions
Test Name: Knowledge Area Test: Project Stakeholder Management
Total Questions: 10
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 7 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 15 Minutes


Test Description
This practice quiz specifically targets your knowledge of the Project
Stakeholder Management knowledge area.


Test Questions
1. Anthony is currently managing a bridge construction project. The project
   is in the execution phase. During the planning phase of the project,
   Anthony developed a comprehensive stakeholder engagement plan for the
   project. However, the frequency of plan review has not yet been defined.
   How often should Anthony review the stakeholder engagement plan?

     A. On a monthly basis

     B. The stakeholder engagement plan cannot be reviewed during the
        execution of the project.

     C. On a weekly basis

     D. On a regular basis; Anthony needs to decide the frequency.
2. Jim is managing a road network design project for a government agency.
   He is currently performing the Plan Stakeholder Engagement process for
   the project. Which of the following documents will provide the list of
   project stakeholders to Jim for this process?

      A. Organizational process assets

      B. Enterprise environmental factors

      C. Stakeholder register

      D. Project management plan

3. Gordon is currently developing his project`s stakeholder engagement
   strategy. All enterprise environmental factors should be considered during
   this process. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors
   should receive particular attention during this process?

      A. Project templates

      B. Lessons learned from past similar projects

      C. Commercial databases

      D. The organization`s culture and political climate

4. Daniel is the project manager for a factory construction project. Daniel has
   recently joined this organization and is not fully aware of the
   organization`s culture and structure. In order to manage his project
   stakeholders, Daniel has to understand them better. Which of the following
   can provide Daniel some historical information regarding stakeholder
   engagement on previous projects?

      A. Project management plan
      B. Enterprise environmental factors

      C. Organizational process assets

      D. Project charter

5. Project Stakeholder Management is focused on engaging project
   stakeholders with the project. What is the objective of keeping the project
   stakeholders engaged with the project?

      A. To manage their expectations so that the project objectives are achieved

      B. Using consistent project management methodology across organizational
         projects

      C. To motivate the project team members

      D. To demotivate the negative stakeholders

6. Christine is managing a healthcare software development project. At a
   PMI conference, she met George, who is the project manager at a
   competing organization. George, a PMP, has managed many successful
   healthcare-related software development projects. If George shares his
   stakeholder management experience with Christine, will that be
   considered expert judgment?

      A. No! George is a project manager at a competitor organization.

      B. Yes! All participants at a PMI conference are experts.

      C. Yes! George is an expert in managing such projects.

      D. No! This would be an example of expert opinion and not expert judgment.

7. Sandra is managing a new supersonic aircraft design project. This is a
   massive project, and its success is hugely important for her organization.
  For such mission-critical projects, which of the following is the most
  desirable engagement level for all major stakeholders?

      A. Resistant stakeholders

      B. Leading stakeholders

      C. Neutral stakeholders

      D. Supportive stakeholders

8. Jennifer has recently been asked to manage an office refurbishment
   project. She finds out that the chief financial officer of the company is
   resisting the project. The chief financial officer is a key project
   stakeholder. What must Jennifer do first?

      A. Seek expert judgment from the project initiator

      B. Seek support from the project sponsor to force project decisions

      C. Conduct a team meeting to discuss this issue

      D. Analyze options that might change or influence the chief financial
         officer`s perception

9. Greg's project is in the initiating stage. The sponsor of the project has
   asked Greg to present a list of the identified project stakeholders at the
   next project update meeting. The sponsor has also asked Greg to present
   the project stakeholders' current and desired engagement levels so they
   can brainstorm on the stakeholder engagement strategy. Which of the
   following is a presentation tool that can help Greg summarize all this
   information in a tabular format?

      A. Communications management plan

      B. Stakeholder register
     C. Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix

     D. Stakeholder engagement plan

10. Diana is managing the development of a mobile phone application. Half
    the project work has been completed. Diana is currently reviewing her
    stakeholder engagement plan. She finds that some of the resisting
    stakeholders have now become supportive. How should Diana update her
    stakeholder engagement plan?

     A. Do not update the stakeholder engagement plan at this stage since things
        are getting better.

     B. Transfer these stakeholders to the project supporters group, and for these
        stakeholders, adopt the stakeholder engagement strategy defined for the
        project supporters.

     C. For these stakeholders, continue with the defined resisting stakeholder
        engagement strategy since this strategy has produced positive results so
        far.

     D. Transfer these stakeholders to the project supporters group but continue
        with the defined resisting stakeholder engagement strategy with these
        stakeholders.
Knowledge Area Quiz
Project Stakeholder Management
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - As projects progress, project stakeholders and their interests, needs,
   expectations and engagement levels may change. The project manager
   should review the stakeholder engagement plan regularly. The frequency
   of review should be defined by the project manager if it was not imposed
   by top management. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 516] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

2. C - The stakeholder register, an output of the Identify Stakeholders
   process, documents all of the identified project stakeholders and related
   information. The stakeholder register is an input to the Plan Stakeholder
   Engagement process, and it will provide the necessary information to Jim.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 519] [Project Stakeholder Management]

3. D - The lessons learned and the project templates are not enterprise
   environmental factors, but organizational process assets. The commercial
   databases can provide only very limited information to develop the
   stakeholder engagement plan. During the Plan Stakeholder Engagement
   process, the organization's culture and political climate are of particular
   importance. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 519] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

4. C - The project charter and the project management plan do not document
   lessons learned from previous similar projects. Lessons learned are stored
   in the organization's process assets library. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   520] [Project Stakeholder Management]

5. A - The core objective for stakeholder engagement management is to
   ensure that the project stakeholders are kept satisfied and that their
   expectations are being met throughout the course of the project. Keeping
  the project team members motivated and using a consistent project
  management methodology are generic objectives of project management.
  [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 504] [Project Stakeholder Management]

6. C - George is giving an expert opinion; this is analogous to expert
   judgment. A PMP-certified project manager from a competitor would not
   normally give false information. This can be considered expert judgment
   since George has managed many similar projects. [PMBOK 6th edition,
   Page 79] [Project Stakeholder Management]

7. D - In fact, for any project it would be ideal if all of the key stakeholders
   were supportive. This would help ensure smooth project progress and
   timely resolution of issues. In practice, this is often unachievable;
   nevertheless, it is the most desirable state for all major stakeholders. On
   the other hand, if all key stakeholders assume a leading role, this could
   lead to serious and substantial conflicts. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 521]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]

8. D - In this scenario, the chief financial officer is a resistant key
   stakeholder. The chief financial officer must be turned into a project
   supporter in order to ensure success. Any of the given choices could be the
   solution to this problem. However, Jennifer should first identify all of the
   available options and analyze them before selecting the best option.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 521] [Project Stakeholder Management]

9. C - Both the communications and stakeholder management plans are
   detailed textual documents. They are not presentation tools. On the other
   hand, both the stakeholder register and the stakeholders engagement
   assessment matrix contain the required information. However, the
   stakeholders engagement assessment is the best tool to be selected in this
   situation since it presents the information required by the project sponsor
   in a tabular format. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 521] [Project Stakeholder
   Management]

10. B - The stakeholder engagement plan should be reviewed regularly.
Since some of the resistant project stakeholders have now become
project supporters, this implies that the current stakeholder classification
in the stakeholder engagement plan is no longer accurate. These
stakeholders should now be transferred to the project supporters group,
and going forward the stakeholder engagement strategy defined for
project supporters should be adopted for these stakeholders. Although
the stakeholder engagement strategy for the resisting stakeholders has
delivered impressive results, it should only be applied to the current
resistant stakeholders. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 521] [Project
Stakeholder Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 18
Practice Questions
Test Name: PMP Lite Mock Exam 18
Total Questions: 50
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 35 (70.00%)
Time Allowed: 60 Minutes


Test Description
This is a cumulative PMP Mock Exam which can be used as a benchmark for
your PMP aptitude. This practice test includes questions from all PMBOK
knowledge areas, including the five basic project management process
groups.


Test Questions
1. To assist with the selection of a supplier for a large procurement on your
   project, you have hired a consultant. The consultant has prepared an
   independent estimate to be used as a benchmark while reviewing bids on
   the RFP. The independent estimate is confidential and is not shared with
   any bidders. When the sealed bids are opened, you discover that only one
   supplier has submitted a quote lower than the independent estimate. All
   other quotes are 45 percent to 70 percent higher than the benchmark.
   While discussing this development with members of the project team, you
   learn a distant relative of the consultant owns the company with the lowest
   bids. What is the best course of action?

      A. Confirm the lowest bidder has understood the requirements and award
         them the contract
      B. Since one of the suppliers knows more than others, you must disclose the
         independent estimate to all others to be fair

      C. Disqualify the lowest bidder

      D. Review the RFP specifications and requirements

2. For many procurement items, the procuring organization can either
   prepare its own cost estimates or have an outside professional estimator
   prepare a cost estimate. This estimate serves as a:

      A. True estimate

      B. Expected-cost estimate

      C. Benchmark estimate

      D. Accurate estimate

3. Marvin has worked for a retail company as a project manager. With his
   positive thinking and strong managerial skills, he turned many potentially
   disastrous projects into successes. Because of his expertise, his employer's
   senior executives offered him a group project manager position for a
   newly started environmental project. However, Marvin learned that, in his
   newly assigned project, he might have to offer bribes to obtain government
   licenses. What should Marvin do in such a situation?

      A. Reject the offer because project managers should not engage in an
         unethical conduct

      B. Accept the offer because project managers must obey their higher-ups

      C. Accept the position and offer bribes because project managers must
         complete projects on time and within budget
      D. Investigate to find out if it is customary to offer bribes in that part of the
         country

4. Which of the following is not an example of soft skills?

      A. Team skills

      B. Intelligence quotient

      C. Influencing

      D. Negotiation

5. Julia is managing a complex industrial process reengineering project. She
   has identified all her key project stakeholders and has conducted
   individual interviews with them to identify other project stakeholders, as
   well. However, Julia is still not satisfied with her project's stakeholders
   list; she believes there may be more key external stakeholders missing
   from the list. What can help Julia in this situation?

      A. Use stakeholder register templates from the organizational process assets

      B. Conduct more meetings with the key stakeholders

      C. Get over her fear and finalize the project stakeholder register

      D. Seek expert judgment from subject matter experts

6. You are in the final phase of a low-cost car manufacturing project. This
   project has successfully delivered a low-cost car that runs on batteries.
   However, to close this project and avoid auditing from government
   authorities, it must demonstrably comply with many administrative
   standards. Since your organization possesses experts who know closing
   procedures and standards, you want to use them to close this project. This
   effort is an instance of:
     A. Using enterprise environmental factors in closing the project

     B. Using expert judgment in closing the project

     C. Using organizational process assets in closing the project

     D. Poor project management practice

7. Nancy is engaged in the construction of three office buildings. Although
   the construction sites are in various places, she has managed each team
   efficiently to complete the work on time and within budget. Which of the
   following statements describes the effort Nancy is doing?

     A. Construction of each building is an operational work because it is
        repetitive in nature.

     B. The building construction is considered neither a project nor operational
        work.

     C. Construction of all three buildings is considered one project.

     D. Construction of each building is a project because each building is
        separate in nature.

8. There are several communication methods used to share and distribute
   information to stakeholders, team members, and management. Which of
   the following communication methods is used when you notify the public
   about environmental effects from your project after implementation by
   posting reports on the project's website?

     A. Pull communication

     B. Interactive communication

     C. Informal communication
      D. Push communication

9. Lesley is managing a software development project for the World Climate
   Control Organization. Since her team members are dispersed across the
   globe, she would like to set up online conferences in the next two months
   to let everyone in her project know what is going on and what their roles
   are within the project. She wants to use these conferences as team
   development activities to learn and exchange information in the project.
   To schedule such activities, which of the following should she use to keep
   track of the availability of team members?

      A. Project charter

      B. Resource calendars

      C. Responsibility assignment matrix

      D. Project staff assignments

10. Bill is managing a healthcare software development project using state-
    of-the-art technology. Stakeholder management is crucial for the
    project's success. Stakeholder involvement and influence are significant.
    During which of the following project stages will stakeholder
    management be most challenging for Bill?

      A. Early during the project execution

      B. Toward the end of the project execution

      C. Toward the closure of the project

      D. Halfway through the project execution

11. Which of the following statements about the management of risks in a
    project is incorrect?
     A. The effect of various risks on project scope, cost, and quality is
        numerically analyzed in the perform quantitative risk analysis process.

     B. Positive risks are mitigated during the plan risk responses process.

     C. Stakeholder analysis is performed during the plan risk management
        process.

     D. Risk report is produced during the perform quantitative risk analysis
        process.

12. A program management office (PMO) chose you to write a purchase
    order because of your expertise in business writing. You learned the
    PMO has already selected a seller for a software product and would like
    to award the procurement contract to the selected seller as a purchase
    order, which you must prepare. In this scenario, the PMO is
    administering:

     A. The monitor stakeholder engagement process

     B. The control procurements process

     C. The plan procurement management process

     D. The conduct procurements process

13. Which of the following is not a Project Schedule Management process?

     A. Source Activities

     B. Estimate Activity Durations

     C. Define Activities

     D. Sequence Activities
14. Shawn is in the execution phase of his project. He is getting unexpected
    requests from his stakeholders about the project's progress. Shawn can
    use all the following to respond to their requests except:

      A. Communications management plan

      B. Business case

      C. Organizational process assets

      D. Work performance reports

15. Tom is managing a software development project. The buyer of the
    product is an external entity. During the project's execution, Tom finds
    that a new operations manager was hired in the customer organization.
    The new manager is now a key stakeholder. Which of the following
    documents is least likely to be updated because of the addition of this
    new stakeholder?

      A. Stakeholder register

      B. Risk register

      C. Stakeholder engagement plan

      D. Issue log

16. Your drug manufacturing project requires the synthesis of many
    pharmaceutical chemicals to produce an active ingredient for a drug. You
    are managing a contractor to supply all these chemicals. Recent quality
    testing of the drugs raised concerns over the quality of the chemicals
    supplied by the contractor. Which of the following must be your first
    action to ensure that the contractor is meeting all contractual obligations?

      A. Escalate this issue to the sponsor and submit all drug testing reports
      B. Reject all poor quality drugs and penalize the contractor

      C. Convene a meeting with stakeholders and communicate the findings

      D. Carry out audits and inspections to verify compliance in the seller's
         deliverables

17. A project manager is spending most of the project funding in the current
    phase of the project. The manager is also managing various resources in
    the project. What is the stakeholder influence on the project now
    compared to earlier phases?

      A. Cannot be determined

      B. More

      C. Less

      D. Same

18. Lucy has to brief her key project stakeholders on the recent approved
    changes to the project scope. Which of the following project documents
    will provide essential input to Lucy for preparing her presentation?

      A. Change request form

      B. Change control procedures

      C. Change log

      D. Issue management procedures

19. Organizations evaluate whether to buy products or make the items
    themselves. Which of the following is not a factor that influences make-
    or-buy decisions:
      A. Core capabilities of the organization

      B. Value delivered by vendors meeting the need

      C. Total duration of the project

      D. Risk associated with meeting the need in a cost-effective manner

20. Analysis of project spending against project budget and calculation of
    the percentage complete of tasks currently underway are examples of:

      A. Control Chart

      B. PERT analysis

      C. Performance reviews

      D. Expert judgment

21. Nancy can bid on two projects. Project A has a 50 percent return on
    investment while Project B has a 20 percent return on investment.
    Project A's scope of work is complex, and Nancy's organization does
    not have the necessary skills and experience to do this project. However,
    Project B's scope of work falls within the strengths of Nancy's
    organization. Which project must Nancy bid on?

      A. None as this is a conflict of interest situation

      B. Both since the overall profit will be higher

      C. Project A since the return on investment is the highest

      D. Project B since the organization has the required skills

22. Debbie, an IT project manager, is in the planning phase of a shopping
    website development project. A junior project manager, who has worked
    under her authority, started developing procedures for maintaining the
    integrity of cost and schedule performance baselines in the project.
    Where should the junior project manager store these procedures?

      A. In the project resource management plan

      B. In the project scope statement

      C. In the project management plan

      D. In the project communications management plan

23. To reduce delivery delays and process downtime, your organization has
    recognized a need to replace their legacy manufacturing system with a
    modern software application. Your IT director anticipates a project to
    fulfill this business need; however, he warns that the new project's
    budget cannot exceed $75,000 due to shortages in the department budget.
    He also indicates that no additional staff will be allocated to this project
    other than the existing IT staff. If you become the project manager, you
    would document these initial project conditions as:

      A. Project assumptions

      B. Business case

      C. Project constraints

      D. Enterprise environmental factors

24. Which of the following is an output of the Create WBS process?

      A. Scope baseline

      B. Project scope statement
      C. Decomposition

      D. Requirements documentation

25. You have just received notice that the organization you have worked for
    as a project manager has gone bankrupt. All employees have 72 hours'
    notice of termination. What is the best course of action for the two
    projects you are managing?

      A. Follow company directives

      B. Conduct a project closeout meeting

      C. Leave the office today

      D. Raise a claim for and on behalf of all the employees and contractors who
         were participating in the project

26. Jen works as a project manager for the National Weather Agency. She is
    managing a project designed to assess the effect of climate change on
    northern mountains. The initial study established a two months' delay for
    the testing equipment to reach mountains due to road construction.
    However, a recent assessment has indicated a significantly shorter delay
    because of rapid progress in construction. To deal with the shorter delay,
    which of the following steps should Jen take next?

      A. Distribute the information

      B. Conduct a stakeholder meeting

      C. Create a new project plan

      D. Update the risk register

27. The method used in the Manage Quality process to identify the factors
    that may influence specific characteristics of a product under
    development is:

      A. The forecasting technique

      B. The control chart

      C. The statistical sampling

      D. Design for X

28. A team member in your project is constantly providing incomplete
    deliverables and not performing well. What should you do first?

      A. Discuss the issue with the team member in private

      B. Discuss the issue with the team member in the presence of the project
         sponsor

      C. Discuss the issue with the team member in the presence of other team
         members

      D. Discuss the issue with the team member in the presence of the company's
         HR manager

29. Dana works for a federal agency that manages mission critical projects.
    As a project manager, she is responsible for all communication needs in
    her data center project, which has started recently. This project involves
    many stakeholders, customers, external vendors, and team members.
    Since conflicts are inevitable in such a massive project, she has decided
    to provide her project team the details of the issue escalation process,
    including the names of the chain of command to refer issues to that
    cannot be resolved at a lower level. Where must Dana document the
    escalation process?
      A. The project charter

      B. The communications management plan

      C. The issue log

      D. The project scope document

30. Bill is managing a website development project. He has recently received
    feedback from one of the key project stakeholders. The feedback is
    positive overall, but it contains some recommendations. After analyzing
    the recommendations, Bill accepts them, gets them approved, and
    incorporates them into the project management plan. The
    recommendations were then implemented and the new ideas were found
    to be successful. What needs to be done with this feedback now?

      A. Discard it since it is no longer required

      B. Publish it on the corporate intranet

      C. Add it to the organizational process assets

      D. Send it back to the stakeholder

31. The project you are working on has received an invoice from a vendor
    for US$17,500. However, your team believes the correct total due is
    US$15,300. When you notify the vendor, the vendor still insists on
    US$17,500. What is the best course of action now?

      A. Pay $15,300

      B. Negotiate with the vendor

      C. File a lawsuit
      D. Pay $17,500

32. Project costs are estimated for all project activities and are aggregated to
    establish a cost baseline. Which of the following statements about the
    cost baseline is not true?

      A. The project cost performance is measured against the cost baseline.

      B. The cost baseline is an output of the determine budget process.

      C. The cost baseline includes all authorized budgets, including management
         reserves.

      D. The cost baseline is in the form of an `S' curve.

33. The RACI chart is an example of a responsibility assignment matrix
    (RAM). The letters R and C in "RACI" stand for:

      A. Responsible and consult

      B. Resource and consultant

      C. Responsible and categorize

      D. Resource and consult

34. _______________ is the authorized budget for the work scheduled to be
    completed on an activity or WBS component.

      A. Planned Value

      B. Earned Value

      C. Midpoint cost
      D. Interim cost

35. You are managing a project for a customer that has just gone bankrupt
    and is subject to liquidation proceedings. There are several outstanding
    invoices this customer has not paid to your company. What should you
    do now?

      A. Go into alternate dispute resolution

      B. Do nothing

      C. Contact the appropriate management at your company for advice how to
         proceed

      D. Send the invoices to the bankruptcy attorneys

36. You are in a meeting with your senior manager, who is helping you to
    organize and manage a team of IT people from diverse backgrounds.
    While you are discussing the creativity and breakthrough performance
    your team is demonstrating now, your senior manager indicates that your
    team has moved from the storming to the performing stage. Which of the
    following describes the characteristics of the performing stage?

      A. In the performing stage, the team completes the work and disbands as a
         project team.

      B. In the performing stage, the team function as a well organized unit and
         resolve issues effectively.

      C. In the performing stage, the team members are not collaborative.

      D. In the performing stage, the team starts to work together and adjust their
         behavior.

37. No matter how good you are in communicating, information distribution
    to stakeholders as planned is a challenging task. Many tools and
    techniques are used during the Manage Communications process except:

      A. Project reporting

      B. Work performance reports

      C. Communication technologies

      D. Communication skills

38. Mary is a project manager for an infrastructure upgrade project in a
    government agency. She realized recently that a critical scheduled task
    exceeded its deadline, and the stakeholders are aware of it. The resource
    manager has permitted Mary to use three more resources to work on and
    complete the delayed task. Although the three additional resources prove
    helpful, Mary is still concerned about the task because:

      A. Allocating more resources may result in rework

      B. Allocating more resources may shorten the duration but results in
         increased risk or cost

      C. Resources may need training to complete the task

      D. Allocating more resources needs stakeholders approval

39. All the following are tools of the Control Schedule process except:

      A. Parametric estimating

      B. Critical Path Method

      C. Schedule compression
      D. Leads and lags

40. You are working with your customers on completing deliverables in your
    electronic parts manufacturing project. Since these parts will be exported
    to other countries, they will need more testing before your customers
    accept them. In this scenario, which of the following statements about
    the completed deliverables is correct?

      A. Completed deliverables not accepted by customers must be forwarded to
         the close project or phase process.

      B. Deliverables formally accepted by customers must be moved to
         organizational process assets.

      C. Deliverables formally accepted by customers are forwarded to the validate
         scope process.

      D. Completed deliverables not accepted by customers must require a change
         request for defect repair.

41. You are managing a heavy equipment manufacturing project that
    involves many mechanical, electrical, and IT staff. Your team prepared a
    schedule network diagram using duration estimates with dependencies
    and constraints. Your team also calculated the critical path for the project
    using late and early values. Today, your project office has indicated to
    you that some of the resources you had planned for the project will be
    unavailable. To deal with this, you explore the possibility of modifying
    the schedule to account for limited resources. What is your best possible
    step in such a situation?

      A. Recalculate critical path after applying the resource constraints

      B. Perform Resource Leveling to account for limited resources

      C. Use crashing or fast tracking to level resources across the project
      D. Apply leads and lags to develop a viable schedule

42. You are working as a project manager for a high-yield crop development
    project. Data from the weather agency shows an unfavorable weather
    pattern for the next few months. As a senior project manager, you want
    to assess the schedule's feasibility under adverse conditions and provide
    some insights to your team. That way, your team can prepare some
    reserves and plan risk responses if unfavorable conditions exist during
    execution. Which of the following techniques should you use to simulate
    risks and other sources of uncertainty to calculate possible schedule
    outcomes?

      A. Pareto charts

      B. Variance analysis

      C. Crashing

      D. Monte Carlo analysis

43. All the following activities are performed in the Close Project or Phase
    process except:

      A. Activities that fulfill the exit criteria of the project

      B. Sending the deliverables to the customer for acceptance

      C. Activities that are needed to transfer the completed products to operations

      D. Documenting the reasons for terminating the projects early

44. Your project team has recently identified a risk in the software
    development project and decided not to change the project management
    plan to deal with the risk. The risk response strategy that your team used
    in this scenario is an example of:
      A. Mitigate

      B. Transfer

      C. Avoid

      D. Acceptance

45. Which of the following is neither an input to nor an output of the
    Develop Project Charter process?

      A. A project charter

      B. Expert Judgment

      C. A business case

      D. Benefits management plan

46. Which document defines how the project is to be executed, monitored,
    controlled, and closed?

      A. Project scope

      B. Project charter

      C. Project management information system

      D. Project management plan

47. You just completed the first phase of a multi-phase project. You have
    calculated earned value measurements and found that the current CPI is
    0.79 and the current SPI is 0.98. Your next phase plan should focus first
    on which element of the project:
      A. Quality

      B. Resources

      C. Schedule

      D. Cost

48. A project manager has just started planning his project. If he has only
    limited information about the project, he should use the following
    technique to estimate the duration for each activity using historical data
    from a similar project:

      A. Four-point estimating

      B. Three-point estimating

      C. Analogous estimating

      D. Parametric estimating

49. You are in the Validate Scope process of your electronic goods
    manufacturing project. While reviewing some products, you have
    noticed that the tolerance for one product is 0.01 percent less than what
    was listed in the requirements documentation. This deviation may not be
    a problem for the customers, and it may not impair the product's
    operation. What is your best immediate action in such a situation?

      A. Notify the stakeholders about the deviation

      B. Change the project management plan to allow for small deviation

      C. Reject all products and restart the project

      D. Discuss with your team about the quality testing
50. You have recently taken over a troubled automobile project, which has
    gone out of control. The project team missed many deadlines, and
    stakeholders were displeased with the project's progress. As an
    experienced project manager, your first priority is to align the schedule
    with the project plan. You would like to use what-if scenario analysis to
    see how various factors affected the project schedule so you can develop
    a plan to reduce the impact of adverse conditions on the project schedule
    in the future. What would be your next course of action be, once you
    determine the factors that created schedule overruns?

      A. Prepare a resource breakdown structure to identify resources used

      B. Update activity lists to incorporate new activities into the schedule

      C. Generate change requests for a corrective action

      D. Develop project schedule network diagrams to determine the total slack
PMP Lite Mock Exam 18
Answer Key and Explanations
1. D - Review the RFP requirements and specifications. Such a wide range of
   quotes indicates that there may be elements that are not stated clearly or
   correctly. Because there is no evidence of collusion between the consultant
   and the lowest bidder, the RFP review is the best choice. [PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

2. C - This serves as a benchmark estimate. Significant differences in
   estimates can be an indication that either the procurement statement of
   work was deficient or the prospective sellers misunderstood or failed to
   respond fully to the procurement statement of work. [PMBOK 6th Edition,
   Page 479]

3. A - Project managers must adhere to the code of ethics and professional
   conduct. They must maintain fairness and honesty. Since the new job
   requires some illegal and unethical activities, Marvin must reject the offer.
   [PMI code of Ethics and Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

4. B - Intelligence quotient (IQ) is an assessment of an individual's
   intelligence. This is not a soft skill. Soft skills are an individual's
   interpersonal skills. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 357] [Project Resource
   Management]

5. D - The stakeholder register template does not contain stakeholders
   information; it only helps the project manager produce the project's
   stakeholder register. If Julia is not satisfied with the list, she needs to
   identify more stakeholders until she is satisfied. Interviewing the identified
   key stakeholders again might not resolve the issue. The best option is to
   seek an expert's opinion. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 511] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
6. B - Projects are closed during the Close Project or Phase process. One of
   the tools which can be used in this process is expert judgment. Expert
   judgment can be obtained from consultants or industry experts. These
   experts can help ensure compliance with all project standards when
   projects are closed. In this scenario, you would want to use experts from
   your own organization in closing the project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page
   126] [Project Integration Management]

7. D - Projects are temporary and unique, whereas operational work is
   repetitive. Since Nancy is working to construct three unique buildings, and
   each has a definite beginning and a definite end, each effort is considered
   as a project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 4] [Project Framework]

8. A - Push communication is used to send information to specific recipients
   who need to know. Push communication is done using letters, faxes,
   memos, etc. Pull communication is used for large volumes of information.
   The methods for this type of communication include internet sites and
   blogs. Since you want to notify the general public about environmental
   effects by posting reports on the project's website, this is an example of
   pull communication methods. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 374] [Project
   Communications Management]

9. B - Resource calendars track the availability of team members for team
   development activities. The responsibility assignment matrix describes the
   responsibilities assigned to various team members. Project staff
   assignments give details of individual assignments, and project
   organization charts display team members and their reporting
   relationships. The project charter does not supply any of that information.
   Hence, Lesley must use resource calendars to know that information.
   [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 323] [Project Resource Management]

10. A - Stakeholders' influence is highest during the early stages of the
    project and lowest towards the end of the project. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 549] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11. B - Risk mitigation is a negative risk response strategy; it is not
    applicable to positive risks. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 443] [Project
    Risk Management]

12. D - In the Conduct Procurements process, sellers are selected and
    procurement contracts are awarded to them. Contracts can be awarded in
    the form of a purchase order. Since the PMO selected you to write the
    purchase order, it is in the process of conducting procurements.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 482] [Project Procurement Management]

13. A - The Project Schedule Management processes include Plan Schedule
    Management, Define Activities, Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity
    Durations, Develop Schedule, and Control Schedule. [PMBOK 6th
    Edition, Page 173]

14. B - Since Shawn is in the execution phase and stakeholders are
    requesting project information, he must respond through the Manage
    Communications process. The communications management plan,
    organizational process assets and work performance reports are inputs to
    this process. Shawn can use any of these documents to respond to their
    requests. The project's business case is not of much help at this stage.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 379] [Project Communications Management]

15. D - The stakeholder register must be updated since a new project
    stakeholder has joined the project. Changes to the stakeholder
    engagement plan might also be required to ensure that the new key
    stakeholder is properly engaged with the project. Addition of a new key
    stakeholder might bring some additional uncertainty to the project; this
    should be recorded in the risk register. The issue log is least likely to be
    updated in this case since no new issue has emerged. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 96] [Project Stakeholder Management]

16. D - Since the drug testing raised doubts over the chemicals supplied by
    the contractor, you must ensure that the contractor is satisfying quality
    requirements by inspecting and auditing the seller's deliverables.
    Auditing can also include seller's personnel. All other actions, including
    meeting with the sponsor and stakeholders, can be performed later if the
    seller is not meeting contractual requirements. Therefore, your first
    action should be to perform audits and inspections to verify compliance
    of the seller's deliverables. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498] [Project
    Procurement Management]

17. C - Since the project manager is spending most of the money and
    managing resources, he or she is currently in the execution phase of the
    project. Spending levels reach a maximum in the execution phase.
    Stakeholder influences on the project decrease over the life of the
    project. Hence, stakeholder influence is now less than in previous phases.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 549] [Project Framework]

18. C - The change control procedure and the issue management procedure
    are organizational process assets. They do not document the details of
    the recently approved project changes. Lucy can find all the essential
    inputs for her presentation in the project change log. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 120]

19. C - A make-or-buy analysis results in a decision as to whether particular
    work can best be accomplished by the project team or needs to be
    outsourced. The total duration of the project does not (and should not)
    influence this analysis. The other choices are rational considerations
    during this analysis. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 479] [Project
    Procurement Management]

20. C - Performance reviews compare performance over time and funds
    needed to complete the work in progress. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page
    712]

21. D - Nancy must not bid on Project A since her organization lacks the
    required skills and experience. This leaves her with only Project B to bid
    on. Project managers are mandated by the PMI's code of ethics and
    professional conduct to accept only those assignments that are consistent
    with their background, experience, skills and qualifications. [PMI Code
    of Ethics & Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

22. C - The baselines change only when a change request is generated. A
    project management plan documents the procedures for making changes
    to performance baselines. These baselines include scope, cost and
    schedule baselines. Therefore, the junior project manager must store
    these procedures in the project management plan. [PMBOK 6th edition,
    Page 88] [Project Integration Management]

23. C - A project constraint is a limiting factor that affects the execution of
    the project. Budget and staffing restrictions in this case are examples of
    project constraints. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 701] [Project Integration
    Management]

24. A - The scope baseline is an output of the Create WBS process. The
    other choices are either inputs or tools and techniques of the process.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 156] [Project Scope Management]

25. A - Follow all company directives. The organization's management is
    responsible for developing these directives, which may include specific
    instructions on closing out work in progress. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

26. D - The delays are considered risks to the project. In this scenario, the
    reassessment indicated a decline in the risk (delay time) compared to the
    initial risk identification. The risk reassessment is performed in the
    Monitor Risks process, and the outcome of the risk reassessment updates
    the risk register. Therefore, Jen must take steps to update the risk
    register. Other steps can be taken after updating the risk register.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 458] [Project Risk Management]

27. D - Design for X is a set of technical guidelines that may be applied
    during the design of a product for the optimization of a specific aspect of
    the design. DfX can control or even improve the product's final
    characteristics. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 295] [Project Quality
    Management]

28. A - Discuss the issue with the team member in private. Conflicts should
    be first addressed in private, using a direct and collaborative approach.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 348] [Project Resource Management]

29. B - The issue escalation process must be documented during the planning
    phase of a project. Issues that cannot be resolved at a lower level can be
    escalated up the chain of command within a stipulated time frame. This
    information is part of the communications management plan. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 377] [Project Communications Management]

30. C - The feedback must not be discarded. Successful ideas and
    implemented recommendations need to be stored in the organizational
    process assets library during the Manage Project Knowledge process.
    Sending it back to the stakeholder does not make any sense. There is no
    restriction in publishing it, but updating the organizational process assets
    should be the project manager's priority. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 105]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

31. B - Negotiate with the vendor. Making a unilateral decision is counter to
    the PMI Code of Ethics, which mandates good faith negotiations. Failing
    to negotiate will not be in the best interest of either the project or the
    vendor. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 498; PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]

32. C - The project cost baseline includes all authorized budgets excluding
    management reserves. Management reserves are not included to measure
    the cost performance of a project. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 248]
    [Project Cost Management]

33. A - The responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) describes the
    relationship between resources and work packages. An RACI chart is an
    example of a RAM. The letters in "RACI" stand for Responsible,
    Accountable, Consult, and Inform. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 317]
    [Project Resource Management]

34. A - Planned Value is the budgeted cost of the work scheduled to be
    completed on an activity or WBS component up to a given point in time.
    [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 261]

35. C - You are responsible for finding the right way to handle this situation.
    Contact your management for advice on how to proceed. Your company
    may already have plans in place for this scenario; if not, they will
    develop a path forward. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]

36. B - There are five stages of team development: Forming, Storming,
    Norming, Performing and Adjourning. In the Forming stage, the team
    members work independently. In the Storming stage, the team begins to
    understand the project work. In the Norming stage, the team begins to
    learn from one another. In the Performing stage, they work as a well-
    organized unit and reach maximum performance. In the Adjourning
    stage, the team completes the work. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 338]
    [Project Resource Management]

37. B - The work performance reports are inputs to the Manage
    Communications process. The other choices are the valid tools and
    techniques of the Manage Communications process. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 379] [Project Communications Management]

38. B - To meet schedule constraints, schedule compression techniques are
    used to reduce the schedule's duration. Crashing and fast tracking are
    two such techniques. Crashing involves allocation of more resources to
    reduce the duration. Crashing always does not produce a desirable result
    and may result in increased risk. Providing training is not a problem from
    the project manager's point of view. Stakeholders' approval is not
    required when resources are not allocated. Therefore, Mary's concern is
    only about increased risk or cost due to allocation of more resources to
    the task. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 215] [Project Schedule
    Management]

39. A - Leads and lags, schedule compression and critical path method are
    tools in the Control Schedule process. Parametric estimating is not a tool
    of this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 222] [Project Schedule
    Management]

40. D - Validate Scope is the process of formalizing the acceptance of
    finished deliverables. In this process, stakeholders or customers give
    formal acceptance of the completed deliverables. The accepted
    deliverables are forwarded to the Close Project or Phase process. If there
    are any completed deliverables that they do not accept, a change request
    for defect repair must be initiated. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 166]
    [Project Scope Management]

41. A - The critical path method is used to prepare a schedule network
    diagram. A network diagram is prepared initially, and the critical path is
    then calculated. Availability of resources is entered, and a resource-
    limited schedule is prepared. Hence, recalculating the critical path using
    the critical path method after applying the resource constraints is the next
    best step. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 210] [Project Schedule
    Management]

42. D - Modeling techniques are used to prepare a schedule under various
    scenarios. These techniques help assess the feasibility of the project
    schedule if adverse conditions exist. The Monte Carlo technique employs
    simulation to calculate multiple project durations, each with a different
    set of activity assumptions using a probability distribution. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 213] [Project Schedule Management]

43. B - Sending the deliverables to the customer for acceptance is an activity
    of the Validate Scope process. The other choices are activities related to
    the Close Project or Phase process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 123]
    [Project Integration Management]
44. D - When risks cannot be handled or managed in a project, it is advisable
    to accept them. In this scenario, your team is unable to devise a suitable
    response strategy. Hence, risk acceptance is the correct strategy to
    employ. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 443] [Project Risk Management]

45. B - A project statement of work and a business case are inputs to the
    Develop Project Charter process. A project charter is an output of the
    Develop Project Charter process. Expert judgement is a tool and
    technique of this process. [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 75] [Project
    Integration Management]

46. D - The project management plan defines how the project is executed,
    monitored, controlled, and closed. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 83]

47. D - A Schedule Performance Index (SPI) of less than one indicates that
    less work has completed than planned, and a Cost Performance Index
    (CPI) of less than one indicates a cost overrun for the work completed. In
    this scenario, the cost overrun is more severe than the schedule delay.
    Therefore, you should focus on reducing the cost of the project.
    [PMBOK 6th edition, Page 263] [Project Cost Management]

48. C - When there is a limited amount of information available about a
    project, analogous estimating is used to estimate the activity durations.
    This estimating technique uses parameters such as budget, complexity
    and size from previous projects to estimate the duration. [PMBOK 6th
    edition, Page 200] [Project Schedule Management]

49. A - When you find a defective product, you must notify stakeholders
    immediately even if the deviation may not affect customers. As a project
    manager, you must maintain honesty and should not hide facts. After
    notifying the stakeholders, the project manager must discuss the issue
    with the team and change the project management plan based on the
    stakeholders' inputs. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct]
    [Prof. Responsibility]
50. C - You are in the process of determining the status of the project
    schedule and investigating the factors that caused schedule changes.
    From this scenario, you are currently in the Control Schedule process.
    What-if analysis is used in the Control Schedule process to see how
    various factors influence the schedule. One output of this process is to
    generate change requests to correct the schedule. Hence, you should
    generate a change request for the required corrective action. [PMBOK
    6th edition, Page 229] [Project Schedule Management]
PMP Focus Area Test: Professional and Social
Responsibility
Practice Questions
Test Name: Focus Area Test - Professional and Social Responsibility
Total Questions: 30
Correct Answers Needed to Pass: 24 (80.00%)
Time Allowed: 30 Minutes


Test Description
This practice test focuses specifically on your knowledge of Professional and
Social Responsibility, applied across all domains and Knowledge Areas.


Test Questions
1. You just initiated a project to establish windmills in a developing country.
   To celebrate the initiation of the project, the customers arranged a party in
   which a key customer offered valuables to you and all your project team
   members with a request to complete the project sooner than the actual
   finish date. What should you do?

      A. Accept the offer and agree to finish the project early

      B. Reject the offer because it violates the code of ethics and professional
         conduct

      C. Accept the offer but refuse to complete the project early

      D. Reject the offer and do not communicate with that customer
2. You overlooked a high-level risk in an insurance project and failed to
   document it in the project charter. If the risk shows up during the planning
   phase, what should be your response as a project manager?

      A. Take the responsibility and evaluate the impact

      B. Call a customer meeting to inform them that risk has occurred

      C. Refer to the sponsor for advice

      D. Develop the risk response plan and communicate to the team

3. You have recently started working as a project manager for a public school
   construction project. Your analysis shows that the cost estimate for the
   project seems to be unreasonable, and it could take at least 25 percent
   more funding to complete the project. What should you do if your sponsor
   wants to undertake the project with another project manager in case you
   refuse to accept it?

      A. Conduct a customer focus meeting to explain the facts

      B. Resign from the project and let the sponsor assign a new project manager

      C. Submit detailed facts to the supervisor supporting your argument

      D. Continue with the project and document the limited budget as a constraint

4. You have recently started working as a project manager for a health
   insurance portal development project. The project sponsor tells you that
   due to the critical nature of the project, the work must start immediately
   and complete in two weeks. Based on the instructions, you have started
   documenting significant constraints and assumptions to perform the
   project feasibility study. What should you do if you can prepare only the
   high-level feasibility study in the given time frame?
      A. Conduct the stakeholder meeting to evaluate other options

      B. Refer this issue to the sponsor and explain the need for more detailed
         study

      C. Submit the high level study and start making plans to prepare the charter

      D. Submit the high level study and schedule a detailed study in the planning
         phase

5. Danny is working as a project manager for a company that provides
   outsourcing services to banks. Recently, he sent a proposal to a local bank
   in response to a bid for a data warehouse project for which his company
   lacks expertise. Although his company lacks expertise, it has had a good
   working relationship with the bank in all its other projects. Which of the
   following statements is correct considering the proposal Danny submitted?

      A. Danny has not violated the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.

      B. Danny has violated the company policy but not the PMI code

      C. Danny has violated the procurement code but not the PMI code

      D. Danny has violated the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.

6. In a software development project, Debby, the project manager, completed
   development of a charter and identification of stakeholders. Debby has
   collected proprietary information from vendors during the planning
   process. What should Debby do when a functional manager from the same
   organization wants to see this information?

      A. Deny the request as the manager is not part of the project

      B. Accept the request as the manager belongs to the same organization
      C. Deny the request to protect the confidentiality of the information

      D. Accept the request but caution the manager to maintain confidentiality

7. You are responsible for developing high-level risks, assumptions, and
   constraints for your project. You meet with experts in your organization
   and document various risks in the project. However, in reviewing
   historical data from a previous project, you notice a significant additional
   risk to your project, one that no one else is aware of. What should you do
   to continue the project?

      A. Do not document the risk since it is based on past data

      B. Document it but make it a low-level risk

      C. Document it and make it a high-level risk

      D. Do not document the risk since nobody knows about it

8. You are using the one-on-one interview technique to gather high-level
   risks, assumptions, and constraints in an infrastructure development
   project to set up a bank. During the interview process, a key stakeholder
   tells you that the project might fail due to lack of support from local
   people. What should you do in this situation?

      A. Escalate the stakeholder's comments to the sponsor for his advice

      B. Investigate the reasons behind the stakeholder's comments

      C. Document the stakeholder's comments and continue with the project

      D. Ignore the stakeholder's comments and continue with the project

9. You have started a project to establish a railroad between two neighboring
   cities. The state agency that sponsors this project is heavily committed to
  completing this project on time and within budget. In support of the
  agency's commitment, you have completed the charter and started
  identifying stakeholders who would support the project. You would like to
  gather as many stakeholders as possible and move on to the planning
  phase. What should a project manager do while identifying stakeholders in
  a project?

      A. Notify the negative stakeholders to talk to the sponsor

      B. Identify positive stakeholders and eliminate negative stakeholders to
         gather maximum support for the project

      C. Identify positive stakeholders and ask negative stakeholders to leave the
         project

      D. Identify both the positive and negative stakeholders and address their
         concerns

10. During a three-year construction project, due to a shortage of resources, a
    project manager has decided to develop a partial work breakdown
    structure (WBS) in the beginning of the planning phase. The WBS will
    be expanded as more information becomes known in the near term. What
    should the project manager do if a key resource criticizes his or her
    decision to develop the partial WBS?

      A. Ignore the resource's comments

      B. Remove the resource from the project

      C. Redevelop the complete work breakdown structure for all three years

      D. Explain to the resource about the Rolling Wave planning

11. You are using parametric estimating techniques to estimate costs for
    each activity and the total budget in your project. However, a project
   manager colleague tells you to bump up each estimate by 20 percent to
   account for any unknown risks, and then submit that as a total budget to
   the customers. What should you do?

      A. Do not inflate the estimate

      B. Inform the customer and then inflate the estimate

      C. Inflate the estimate first and inform the customer

      D. Inflate the estimate but do not inform the customer

12. Two of your team members are constantly arguing with each other about
    work assignments. Due to their attitude, the project is delayed, and
    pressure is building on other team members. What should you do?

      A. Issue a memo

      B. Meet with them to understand their concerns

      C. Inform the concerned functional manager

      D. Replace the team members

13. In an IT project, after several brainstorming sessions with customers,
    Kurt established various project deliverables. Two weeks later, while
    reviewing the plan, Kurt identifies two similar deliverables and decides
    to merge them into a single deliverable. What should Kurt do next?

      A. Merge the deliverables and inform the customer

      B. Submit the need to merge to the customer

      C. Merge the deliverables but do not inform the customer
      D. Merge the deliverables but do not update the project management plan

14. The management of a retail business unit has just assigned Mario to
    compare multiple projects and select the best project that will produce
    the most value for the unit. Although Mario has worked as a project
    manager for a long time, he has only a limited understanding of project
    selection methods. What should be the first course of action from Mario
    in this scenario?

      A. Select the best project with whatever knowledge he possesses

      B. Refuse to take the assignment

      C. Obtain an expert's judgment to help select the project

      D. Inform the management about lack of knowledge on project selection
         methods

15. A company hires you to work as a project manager in a foreign country.
    You discover that you must pay kickbacks to the officials there to get
    licenses for your project. What should you do?

      A. Offer kickbacks but inform your management

      B. Resign from the project

      C. Offer kickbacks but document them in the project cost management plan

      D. Refuse to pay kickbacks

16. Jack is currently identifying stakeholders in his automobile project.
    While talking to his senior manager, Jack learns that one of the key
    stakeholders, whom he identified in his project, is so influential that he
    or she cancelled an IT project before it moved into the planning phase.
    What should Jack do with such influential stakeholders?
      A. Get an approval from sponsor to eliminate him or her from the project

      B. Involve this person from the beginning of the project and manage them
         closely

      C. Provide limited access to project information compared to other
         stakeholders

      D. Provide more access to project information compared to other
         stakeholders

17. While conducting interviews for a project manager position, you notice
    that your classmate is one of the prospective candidates. What should
    you do immediately?

      A. Encourage your classmate by offering some tips

      B. Resign from the interview panel

      C. Remove your classmate from the list

      D. Inform the interview panel of the relationship

18. One of your team leaders informs you that a team member criticizes him
    constantly about the allocation of tasks. The team leader also asserts that
    this team member is also responsible for the delay of many tasks, leading
    to delays in the project schedule. What action should you take as a
    project manager?

      A. Conduct a meeting with the sponsor, team leader, and the team member

      B. Approach the team member and understand his point of view

      C. Replace the team member
      D. Direct your team leader to issue a memo

19. What should you do as a senior project manager if the PMP certification
    claimed by a recently recruited project manager does not appear in the
    PMI website?

      A. Advise your new recruit to complete his certification

      B. Report to the PMI

      C. Report to the sponsor

      D. Request more information from the new recruit

20. You have recently taken over a project from a PMP-certified project
    manager who was removed from the project due to incompetence and
    lack of skills. When you happen to meet him outside your building, he
    starts rebuking you for taking his project. He even goes so far as to
    suggest that your religion played a part in your selection by the
    management. What should you do first?

      A. Report to the customer

      B. Do nothing

      C. Report to the police

      D. Report to Project Management Institute (PMI)

21. In a manufacturing project, you have requested bids to procure stainless-
    steel products. However, your sponsor insists that you conduct bidder
    conferences before selecting sellers. What mandatory standard in the
    PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is met by conducting
    bidder conferences?
      A. Honesty

      B. Respect

      C. Responsibility

      D. Fairness

22. In a software development project, you are having joint application
    development (JAD) sessions to collect product requirements from
    stakeholders. Which of the following mandatory standards in the PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is met by having JAD sessions
    while gathering requirements?

      A. Honesty

      B. Fairness

      C. Responsibility

      D. Respect

23. A functional manager in your organization has recently filed a complaint
    against a junior project manager regarding his project management
    certification. The functional manager claims that the PMP certification
    claimed by the junior project manager is invalid and needs to be checked.
    What should be your response as a senior project manager?

      A. Report to PMI

      B. Suspend the junior project manager

      C. Ask your project manager to provide evidence for his/her PMP
         certification
     D. Ask your functional manager to provide evidence for his argument

24. While conducting a brainstorming session to identify stakeholders, a
    process manager disagrees with you on a decision you made regarding
    the influence and impact of each stakeholder on the project. He even
    makes some comments against you in front of other stakeholders. As a
    senior project manager, what should be your immediate response?

     A. Do nothing in the meeting but later escalate this issue to the sponsor

     B. Take the help of other stakeholders and present your argument

     C. Propose an immediate meeting between the two of you to resolve the
        differences

     D. Remove the process manager from the project

25. You have found you do not yet have an accurate estimate of the number
    and skill levels of resources needed for the scheduled activity Build
    Racks for Data Center. You need this estimate for presentation to your
    Human Resources department later in the week. You have decided to
    decompose the Build Racks for Data Center activity into smaller
    components such as take equipment out of box, review equipment for
    completeness, build frame, and install rails. Then you plan to estimate
    the resources for each smaller component and combine those estimates
    into an aggregate. This is an example of:

     A. Aggregate Estimating

     B. Alternative Analysis

     C. Bottom-up Estimating

     D. Rolling Wave Estimating
26. You are a senior project management practitioner. You have been given
    a chemical manufacturing project that could potentially contaminate the
    groundwater in the neighboring residential community. After detailed
    analysis, you learn that the impact could be severe in the long run. If the
    sponsor of the project wants to complete this project as soon as possible,
    you must:

      A. Undertake the project but not inform the residents

      B. Refuse to take up the project

      C. Support the sponsor

      D. Undertake the project but inform the residents

27. You are working on a software development project in which specialized
    resources are required to perform some tasks. You estimate these
    resources are necessary during the project's executing phase. However,
    your estimation fails to account for these resources are available for only
    limited hours in the executing phase. What should you do to make
    schedule changes to deal with the limited availability?

      A. Communicate to customers and update the baseline

      B. Update the project schedule

      C. Update the schedule baseline

      D. Perform an impact analysis

28. A project manager has completed identification of stakeholders and has
    started planning for a flow instruments installation project in a hospital.
    While developing the project management plan, a team member states
    that a stakeholder in the X-ray department is missing from the
    stakeholder list. Which of the following would be the best response from
   the project manager?

      A. Authenticate the information from the team member

      B. Include and involve the stakeholder immediately

      C. It is too late to involve a stakeholder in the planning, so ignore the
         stakeholder

      D. Wait until the execution phase to involve the new stakeholder

29. While using facilitated sessions to gather high-level business
    requirements for a software development project, one of your customers
    proposes a requirement that may not be technologically possible to meet.
    If the customer insists on the requirement, what should you do first?

      A. You should not document the requirement

      B. You should document the requirement and include it as a risk

      C. You should listen to the customer and understand his viewpoint

      D. You should document the requirement to meet customer expectations

30. You have just started leading a World Bank healthcare development
    project in a developing country in which it is customary to offer lunch
    when a project is initiated. Although your team members are willing to
    accept the offer, you decide to refuse the offer since you know the PMI's
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct does not allow you to accept
    gifts. Which of the following statements about your decision is correct?

      A. Your decision is wrong because you should obey the norms and customs
         of others as long as you do not favor them.

      B. Your decision is correct because you are engaging yourself in unethical
  behavior by accepting the lunch.

C. Your decision is correct because you are following the PMI's Code of
   Ethics and Professional Conduct.

D. Your decision is wrong because conduct rules only apply to local projects,
   not international projects.
PMP Focus Area Test: Professional and Social
Responsibility
Answer Key and Explanations
1. B - Since the stakeholder made a request by offering gifts, you should
   refuse the offer. The PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
   suggests that a project manager should never engage in unfairness.
   Favoring one or more customers by taking gifts is not allowed. Thus, you
   should reject the offer because it violates the Code of Ethics and
   Professional Conduct. Not communicating with one customer could impair
   relationships with other customers. If it is customary in that country to
   offer gifts, you might accept them without agreeing to the customer's
   request. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof.
   Responsibility]

2. A - According to the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
   project managers must take ownership of the decisions they make or fail to
   make. Thus, you should take responsibility and evaluate the impact first. A
   risk response plan should be developed only after evaluating the impact.
   Calling a customer meeting cannot deal with the risk. You should escalate
   it to the sponsor only if the risk is beyond your control. [PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

3. C - Project managers have the responsibility to present truthful and
   accurate information regarding costs, schedules, and resources. Submit the
   facts that substantiate your argument. If your argument is valid, then the
   sponsor might agree with you. Talking to customers is not appropriate.
   Continuing the project might cause it to fail. It is inappropriate to resign
   from the project without presenting the facts. [PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

4. B - Developing a detailed feasibility study is essential to initiate a project.
   If efforts are not made initially to determine whether the project is worth
  the required investment, it could result in project failure. It is also the
  responsibility of the project manager to provide accurate and complete
  information about the feasibility of any project. Thus, you must escalate
  the issue to the sponsor and explain the need for a more detailed study.
  Since the project initiation depends on the feasibility of the project, the
  report cannot be prepared in the project planning phase. Conducting
  stakeholder meeting is an invalid choice because the stakeholders have not
  yet been selected to conduct a meeting. [PMI Code of Ethics and
  Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

5. D - One of the mandatory standards for a project manager is to behave
   responsibly and bid on only those projects for which the project manager's
   employer has expertise and skills. Since Danny bid on a project for which
   his company lacks expertise, he violated the PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Conduct. There is no procurement code in project
   management. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof.
   Responsibility]

6. C - It is the responsibility of the project manager to maintain
   confidentiality of protected or proprietary information. A project manager
   should provide such confidential information only to the sponsor and to
   the vendor evaluation committee or whoever is involved in the evaluation.
   He or she must not provide this information to any other employees within
   the organization or within the project. [PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

7. C - As a project manager, you have a responsibility to disclose accurate
   information to all project stakeholders honestly. Project managers must not
   disseminate false or misleading information. Thus, you must document it
   as a high-level risk. Even though the risk is based on past data, it must be
   documented because the risks could also be identified from the past data.
   Documenting it as a low-level risk would be a misleading act, and a
   project manager must not do that. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
   Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]
8. B - You must document the comments from the stakeholder. However,
   you should not continue the project until you also understand his or her
   rationale. The sponsor might ask you to look into it, so escalating the
   stakeholder's comments to the sponsor may not yield anything. Ignoring
   the stakeholder's comments is not advisable. Thus, the correct step is to
   investigate the reasons behind the stakeholder's comments. [PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

9. D - Project stakeholders are people, organizations, or groups whose
   interests are positively or negatively impacted by the project. A project
   manager must identify both the positive and negative stakeholders for
   successful completion of the project. Eliminating the negative stakeholders
   or keeping them away from the project will jeopardize the objectives of
   the project and may cause the project to fail. One of the mandatory
   standards for a project manager is to show fairness and disclose potential
   conflicts of interest to stakeholders. He or she should escalate issues to the
   sponsor only when he or she fails in influencing negative stakeholders.
   Thus, the correct answer is to identify both the positive and negative
   stakeholders and address their concerns. [PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

10. D - One of the mandatory standards for a project manager is to show
    respect to others by holding them in high regard. A project manager must
    respect others' viewpoints. A project manager need not develop a
    complete WBS during the initial stages of planning. In long projects, the
    WBS can be developed partially and can be extended as more details
    become known later; this approach is known as rolling wave planning.
    The project manager should explain rolling wave planning to the
    resource. Ignoring the resource's comments or removing the resource are
    not appropriate responses. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 185 and PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

11. A - Honesty is a mandatory standard for project managers. Project
    managers are required to provide accurate information to customers
    regarding budget, resources, and risks. Unknown risks can be dealt with
    by using reserves. Deliberately inflating budget or schedule values or
    making misleading or false statements is against the PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Conduct. Hence, the best course of action here is to not
    inflate the estimate. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

12. B - One of the mandatory standards in the PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct is respect. A project manager must listen to others'
    points of view and understand them. Hence, you must meet with the
    team members first to understand their concerns. If the problem
    continues, you may issue a memo or even replace the team members if
    necessary. Talking to the functional manager may not resolve the
    problem as the team members are managed by you in your project.
    [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 348 and PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Responsibility] [Project Resource Management]

13. B - The customer must be notified about any changes made to
    deliverables because acceptance of deliverables is key to a successful
    project. It is the responsibility of the project manager to notify
    appropriate stakeholders before making changes. Kurt must submit the
    proposed merge to the customer. Once the customer accepts the change,
    Kurt can merge the deliverables and notify the customer that this has
    been done. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

14. D - The management has just assigned Mario to select the best project.
    One of the mandatory standards for practitioners of project management
    is honesty. Therefore, Mario should tell the management about his lack
    of knowledge of project selection methods. Attempting to select the
    project without expert knowledge could create problems later. Refusing
    the assignment is not an appropriate action. Management may suggest
    soliciting expert judgment for selecting the project, but informing the
    management is the first step to take, and it is up to management to decide
    what to do next. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility]
    [Prof. Responsibility]
15. D - Offering kickbacks is against the PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct. Resigning from the project is not an appropriate
    action. Thus, you must refuse to pay kickbacks. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

16. B - All stakeholders must be identified as early as possible in the project.
    The stakeholders can be positive or negative. They must be classified
    based on their influence, interest, expectations, and importance. A
    project manager must not hide information. He or she must provide equal
    access to all stakeholders who are authorized to have that information.
    Thus, Jack must involve the influential stakeholders from the beginning
    of the project and manage them closely. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Responsibility] [Project Stakeholder Management]

17. D - As a project manager, you have a responsibility to disclose to the
    interview panel that interviewing your classmate could represent a
    potential conflict of interest. It is up to the panel to decide on the best
    course of action, which might include excusing you from the interview
    process. Therefore, your first step is to inform the interview panel of the
    relationship. Offering tips to your classmate would violate the fairness
    standard of the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct. Removing
    your classmate is not appropriate. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

18. B - A project manager should manage such a conflict by directly
    approaching the team member who caused the conflict. According to the
    PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, a project manager must
    be responsible and show respect. He or she must listen to others'
    viewpoints, seeking to understand them before making a decision.
    Neither replacing the team member nor issuing a memo is an appropriate
    action. Involving the sponsor in team issues is not an appropriate action
    either, unless the issues are beyond the project manager's control.
    [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 348 and PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Responsibility] [Project Resource Management]
19. D - A project manager must bring alleged unethical activities or
    violations of the code of conduct to PMI's attention. False certification
    claims must be reported to PMI. In this case, it is not yet confirmed that
    the recruit has made a false claim; try to get clarification from him. If
    you confirm that he has made a false claim, you can report this to both
    the PMI and the sponsor. Thus, the best answer in this situation is to
    request more information. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

20. D - All project managers who are PMP-certified must uphold the PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. They must behave well in their
    profession. All alleged violations should be brought to the PMI's
    attention. PMI takes disciplinary actions against individuals who
    knowingly make false allegations against other project managers. Thus,
    you must report this situation to PMI first. If your life is threatened, then
    you must report that to the police and the management. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

21. D - Bidder conferences or vendor conferences are used to provide a clear
    understanding of the procurement process to all prospective sellers. This
    process ensures that the mandatory standard of fairness is followed in the
    bidding process. Fairness in this case means making opportunities
    equally available to all qualified candidates. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page
    487 and PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Project
    Procurement Management]

22. B - Fairness is one of the mandatory standards in the PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Conduct. Fairness means not showing favoritism or
    prejudice. The JAD sessions build trust among the customers and
    reconcile stakeholder differences since they give equal opportunity to all
    stakeholders. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 145 and PMI Code of Ethics
    and Professional Responsibility] [Project Scope Management]

23. D - One of the mandatory standards in the PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct is respect. A project manager must listen to others'
    points of view and understand them. However, before asking the junior
    project manager for evidence of his or her PMP certification, you must
    ask your functional manager to provide evidence to support his or her
    allegations. You can suspend the junior project manager or report him or
    her to PMI if there is sufficient evidence of his or her guilt. [PMI Code
    of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

24. C - The PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct requires you to
    conduct yourself in a professional manner even when it is not
    reciprocated. Therefore, you must not start arguing with the process
    manager. Removing the process manager will only worsen the situation.
    You must directly approach those persons with whom you have a
    conflict or disagreement--the process manager in this case. Propose an
    immediate meeting with him or her to resolve your differences.
    Escalating this issue will not resolve your differences. [PMBOK 6th
    Edition, Page 348 and PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Responsibility] [Project Resource Management]

25. C - Breaking down the scheduled activity into smaller components and
    then combining the estimates for each smaller activity is an example of
    bottom-up estimating. [PMBOK 6th Edition, Page 324]

26. B - All project management practitioners must follow the PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct. One of the aspirational standards that a
    project manager must follow is responsibility. Project managers must
    make decisions based on the best interests of society, public safety, and
    the environment. They must not undertake projects that are harmful to
    the public interest. Therefore, the best option in this situation is to refuse
    to take on the project, now that you know of its potentially harmful
    environmental effects. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]

27. D - A project manager must be responsible and must communicate
    truthful information to customers. However, a project manager must
    perform an impact analysis before getting approval from the customer
    and making changes. Thus, the correct choice here is to perform an
    impact analysis. The schedule and schedule baseline should be updated
    after analyzing the impact and getting customer approval. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Project Schedule Management]

28. A - One aspect of responsibility for a project manager is to take
    ownership of decisions made. A project manager is responsible for
    identifying all stakeholders as early as possible in the project. A missing
    stakeholder could jeopardize the objectives of the project. However, the
    project manager must first authenticate the information from the team
    member before involving the stakeholder. Thus, this is the best choice of
    action for the project manager in this situation. [PMBOK 6th Edition,
    Pages 504-506 and PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]

29. C - A project manager must communicate honestly and openly with the
    customer. When a customer insists on specific requirements, a project
    manager should listen to him or her and understand his or her point of
    view. Then, the project manager must gather facts and explain
    convincingly to the customer why he or she is right or wrong. Project
    managers should neither accept nor deny critical requests from the
    customer until they have sufficient factual information. Thus, in this
    situation, you should first listen to the customer and understand his
    viewpoint. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibility] [Prof.
    Responsibility]

30. A - Although the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct does not
    allow gift-taking, project managers should respect the norms and
    customs of others as long as they do not show favoritism based on those
    norms. Therefore, in this situation, your decision is incorrect because you
    should respect the norms and customs of others as long as you do not
    favor them. The PMI code of conduct applies to both local and
    international projects. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Responsibility] [Prof. Responsibility]
PMP FORMULA CHEAT SHEET
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Exam Taking Tips
PMP Exam Facts
* There are 200 total multiple choice questions which make up the PMP
  exam
* 25 randomly placed "pretest questions" are included, and do not count
  towards the pass/fail determination
* Students have 4 hours to complete the exam
* Only correct answers count, and a passing score is determined by "sound
  psychometric analysis". This scoring method indicates that scores reflect
  the difficulty of the questions answered.
* Students may bring blank "scratch" paper with which to draft responses,
  such as for formula-based exam questions.

Before the Exam
* Visit the exam location before your exam date so that you are familiar with
  the address and commute time, especially if you are a nervous test taker.
* Be prepared to fully utilize your blank "scratch" paper in the exam. This
  means that you have committed important formulas, concepts, and key facts
  to memory; and you are able to apply them to a blank sheet of paper in less
  than five minutes.
* Alleviate exam stress and anxiety by taking practice exams that attune you
  to the pace, subject matter, and difficulty of the real exam.
* On the night before the exam, reduce your study time to one hour or less
  and get extra sleep. The reduced study time and extra rest will allow your
  brain to better process the information it has absorbed during earlier, more
  intense, study sessions.

Taking the Exam
* IMPORTANT: Bring your PMI authorization letter, as well as two forms of
  ID, to the exam center.
* At the beginning of the PMP exam, use your scratch paper to "download"
  all of the formulas, concepts, and key facts you have committed to memory.
  To save time, perform this activity immediately after the initial computer
  tutorial which allots 15 minutes.
* Approach each question from PMI's perspective, not your own experience,
  even if the most correct response seems contrary to your "on-the-job"
  knowledge.
* Plan your breaks during the exam. A recommended break pattern during the
  PMP exam is to stand up and stretch after every 50 questions.
* Smile as you take the exam. It has been proven that smiling alleviates stress
  and boosts confidence during exceptionally difficult tasks. Use deep
  breathing techniques to further relax.
* If you have exam time remaining, review the questions you "marked for
  review". Use all the exam time you have until each question has been
  reviewed twice.

The PMP exam is a multiple choice test that asks one to recognize correct
answers among a set of four options. The extra options that are not the correct
answer are called the "distracters"; and their purpose, unsurprisingly, is to
distract the test taker from the actual correct answer among the bunch.

Students usually consider multiple choice exams as much easier than other
types of exams; this is not necessarily true with the PMP exam. Among these
reasons are:

     * Most multiple choice exams ask for simple, factual information; unlike the
       PMP exam which often requires the student to apply knowledge and make
       a best judgment.
     * The majority of multiple choice exams involve a large quantity of different
       questions - so even if you get a few incorrect, it's still okay. The PMP
       exam covers a broad set of material, often times in greater depth than other
       certification exams.

Regardless of whether or not multiple choice testing is more forgiving; in
reality, one must study immensely because of the sheer volume of
information that is covered.

Although four hours may seem like more than enough time for a multiple
choice exam, when faced with 200 questions, time management is one of the
most crucial factors in succeeding and doing well. You should always try and
answer all of the questions you are confident about first, and then go back
about to those items you are not sure about afterwards. Always read carefully
through the entire test as well, and do your best to not leave any question
blank upon submission- even if you do not readily know the answer.

Many people do very well with reading through each question and not
looking at the options before trying to answer. This way, they can steer clear
(usually) of being fooled by one of the "distracter" options or get into a tug-
of-war between two choices that both have a good chance of being the actual
answer.

Never assume that "all of the above" or "none of the above" answers are the
actual choice. Many times they are, but in recent years they have been used
much more frequently as distracter options on standardized tests. Typically
this is done in an effort to get people to stop believing the myth that they are
always the correct answer.

You should be careful of negative answers as well. These answers contain
words such as "none", "not", "neither", and the like. Despite often times
being very confusing, if you read these types of questions and answers
carefully, then you should be able to piece together which is the correct
answer. Just take your time!

Never try to overanalyze a question, or try and think about how the test givers
are trying to lead astray potential test takers. Keep it simple and stay with
what you know.

If you ever narrow down a question to two possible answers, then try and
slow down your thinking and think about how the two different
options/answers differ. Look at the question again and try to apply how this
difference between the two potential answers relates to the question. If you
are convinced there is literally no difference between the two potential
answers (you'll more than likely be wrong in assuming this), then take
another look at the answers that you've already eliminated. Perhaps one of
them is actually the correct one and you'd made a previously unforeseen
mistake.

On occasion, over-generalizations are used within response options to
mislead test takers. To help guard against this, always be wary of
responses/answers that use absolute words like "always", or "never". These
are less likely to actually be the answer than phrases like "probably" or
"usually" are. Funny or witty responses are also, most of the time, incorrect -
so steer clear of those as much as possible.

Although you should always take each question individually, "none of the
above" answers are usually less likely to be the correct selection than "all of
the above" is. Keep this in mind with the understanding that it is not an
absolute rule, and should be analyzed on a case-by-case (or "question-by-
question") basis.

Looking for grammatical errors can also be a huge clue. If the stem ends with
an indefinite article such as "an" then you'll probably do well to look for an
answer that begins with a vowel instead of a consonant. Also, the longest
response is also oftentimes the correct one, since whoever wrote the question
item may have tended to load the answer with qualifying adjectives or
phrases in an effort to make it correct.

Again though, always deal with these on a question-by-question basis,
because you could very easily be getting a question where this does not
apply.

Verbal associations are oftentimes critical because a response may repeat a
key word that was in the question. Always be on the alert for this. Playing the
old Sesame Street game "Which of these things is not like the other" is also a
very solid strategy, if a bit preschool. Sometimes many of a question's
distracters will be very similar to try to trick you into thinking that one choice
is related to the other. The answer very well could be completely unrelated
however, so stay alert.
Just because you have finished a practice test, be aware that you are not done
working. After you have graded your test with all of the necessary
corrections, review it and try to recognize what happened in the answers that
you got wrong. Did you simply not know the qualifying correct information?
Perhaps you were led astray by a solid distracter answer? Going back through
your corrected test will give you a leg up on your next one by revealing your
tendencies as to what you may be vulnerable with, in terms of multiple
choice tests.

It may be a lot of extra work, but in the long run, going through your
corrected multiple choice tests will work wonders for you in preparation for
the real exam. See if you perhaps misread the question or even missed it
because you were unprepared. Think of it like instant replays in professional
sports. You are going back and looking at what you did on the big stage in
the past so you can help fix and remedy any errors that could pose problems
for you on the real exam.
