                          PMP Exam Prep--Questions, Answers & Explanations, 2013
                          Edition

                          PMP Exam Prep: Questions, Answers & Explanations, 2013 Edition

                          by Christopher Scordo

                          SSI Logic (c) 2013 Citation



                          Recommend?




PMP Exam Prep--Questions, Answers & Explanations, 2013 Edition
Christopher Scordo,
PMP, ITIL




Professional. Measurable. Realistic.

Copyrighted Material

(c) Copyright 2013 by SSI Logic.

Printed and bound in the United States of America. All rights reserved. No part of this
book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, or incorporated into any information retrieval system, electronic or
mechanical, without the written permission of the copyright owner.

Edition 2013.

Although the author and publisher of this work have made every effort to ensure
accuracy and completeness of content entered in this book, we assume no
responsibility for errors, inaccuracies, omissions, or inconsistencies included herein.
Any similarities of people, places, or organizations are completely unintentional.

Published by SSI Logic

Looking for more PMP exam prep tools?
Visit us at www.PMPerfect.com

ISBN 10: 1489521577

ISBN 13:

9781489521576

All inquiries should be addressed via email to:
support@ssilogic.com

or by mail post to:
SSI Solutions, INC
340 S Lemon Ave #9038
Walnut, CA 91789

"PMI", "PMP", "PgMP", "CAPM", and "PMBOK Guide" are registered marks of
Project Management Institute, Inc.
Introduction Welcome

Chapter List
Table of Contents

   PMP Exam Prep--Questions, Answers & Explanations, 2013 Edition

   Introduction

   Welcome

   PMP Exam Overview

   Practice Exams and Quizzes

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 1 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   Knowledge Area Quiz Project Management Framework Practice Questions--Answer Key
   and Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 2 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   Knowledge Area Quiz Project Integration Management Practice Questions--Answer Key
   and Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 3 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   Knowledge Area Quiz Project Scope Management Practice Questions--Answer Key and
   Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 4 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   Knowledge Area Quiz Project Time Management Practice Questions--Answer Key and
   Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 5 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 6 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   Knowledge Area Quiz Project Cost Management Practice Questions--Answer Key and
   Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 7 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 8 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

   Knowledge Area Quiz Project Quality Management Practice Questions--Answer Key and
   Explanations

   PMP Lite Mock Exam 9 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations
PMP Lite Mock Exam 10 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Knowledge Area Quiz Project Human Resource Management Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 11 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 12 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Knowledge Area Quiz Project Communications Management Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 13 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 14 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Knowledge Area Quiz Project Risk Management Practice Questions--Answer Key and
Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 15 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 16 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Knowledge Area Quiz Project Procurement Management Practice Questions--Answer
Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 17 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Lite Mock Exam 18 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Knowledge Area Quiz Project Stakeholder Management Practice Questions--Answer Key
and Explanations

PMP Focus Area Test - Professional and Social Responsibility Practice Questions--
                      Answer Key and Explanations

PMP Formula Cheat Sheet

PMP Formulas

Additional Resources

Exam Taking Tips
Welcome


Thank you for selecting SSI Logic's PMP(R) Exam Prep - Questions, Answers, and
Explanations for your PMP study needs. The goal of this book is to provide
condensed mock exams and practice tests which allow you to become comfortable
with the pace, subject matter, and difficulty of the PMP exam.

The content in this book is designed to optimize the time you spend studying in
multiple ways.

   1. Practice exams in this book are condensed to be completed in one hour;
      allowing you to balance your time between practice tests and offline study.
   2. Passing score requirements in this book are slightly higher than the real exam;
      allowing you to naturally adjust to a higher test score requirement.
   3. Practice exams included in this book cover the entire scope of the PMP exam,
      while shorter quizzes focus only on specific Knowledge Areas outlined in the
      PMBOK(R) Guide.

The practice exam content in this book is structured into two general types of exam
preparation:

       "Lite" Mock Exams, which allow you to test your knowledge across
       condensed versions of the PMP exam; designed to be completed within one
       hour.
       Knowledge Area Quizzes, which reflect brief practice tests focused on specific
       Knowledge Areas outlined in the PMBOK(R) Guide designed to be completed in
       15 minutes.

We wish you the best of luck in your pursuit to become a certified PMP.

PMP Exam Updates as of July 31, 2013

This book reflects the updated version of the PMP exam put into place worldwide
starting July 31st, 2013. While many refinements have been applied to the material to
be tested on, a new Knowledge Area, Project Stakeholder Management, represents
one of the more significant additions students should be aware of. Please note: The
PMBOK(R) Guide - Fifth Edition is the definitive reference text for the PMP
certification exam.

To accommodate the updated exam format, this book has been revised extensively so
that exam updates are taken into account. All mock exams have been revised to align
with the updated exam format, and a dedicated "Focus Area Test" has been added
specifically for Project Stakeholder Management. Further, an additional focus on
Project Stakeholder Management exists appropriately throughout the baseline practice
exams in this book.
PMP Exam Overview

The PMP practice questions in this book reflect the PMP exam version updated July
31, 2013; and based on the content contained within the PMBOK(R) Guide - Fifth
Edition.

About the Project Management Professional (PMP)
Certification
The PMP certification is managed by the Project Management Institute (PMI(R)) and
reflects the PMI's project management processes as published in the PMBOK(R) Guide.
Since 1984, the PMP certification has become one of the most sought after
internationally recognized management credentials available. The average salary of a
PMP certified manager is 14% higher than individuals without the PMP certification.

The PMP certification is a globally recognized credential, and individuals are
encouraged to remain active via PMI's Continuing Certification Requirements
(CCRs). Only individuals who maintain active PMP credentials may refer to
themselves as Project Management Professionals. Individuals do not need to be a
member of PMI to earn a PMP credential.

The minimum requirements in attaining the PMP certification:

       Education: At a minimum, A high school diploma is required
       Project management experience
          o 36 months and 4500 hours of professional experience for individuals
               with a Bachelor's degree or global equivalent (within the past 8 years)
          o 60 months and 7500 hours of professional experience for individuals
               without a Bachelor's degree or equivalent (within the past 8 years)
       Project Management Education: 35 contact hours of formal education
       Ethics: Agree to PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
       Pass the PMP Exam
The Ten Knowledge Areas of the PMBOK(R) Guide
The ten knowledge areas outlined in the PMBOK(R) Guide and covered by the PMP
exam are listed below.

        Project Integration Management
        Project Scope Management
        Project Time Management
        Project Cost Management
        Project Quality Management
        Project Human Resource Management
        Project Communications Management
        Project Risk Management
        Project Procurement Management
        Project Stakeholder Management

Additionally, the PMP practice exam content in this book include questions on the
overall Project Management Framework and Professional Responsibility; reflecting
the real PMP exam.

The nine knowledge areas contain a total of 47 processes which are applied to five
basic process groups. These five basic process groups, or "domains", are common
across all projects and listed below along with the percentage of questions one should
expect on the PMP exam:

   1.   Initiating (13%)
   2.   Planning (24%)
   3.   Executing (30%)
   4.   Controlling and Monitoring (25%)
   5.   Closing (8%)

Chapter List
Chapter 3: PMP Lite Mock Exam 1 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 4: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Management Framework Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 5: PMP Lite Mock Exam 2 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 6: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Integration Management Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 7: PMP Lite Mock Exam 3 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 8: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Scope Management Practice Questions--Answer
Key and Explanations

Chapter 9: PMP Lite Mock Exam 4 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations
Chapter 10: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Time Management Practice Questions--Answer
Key and Explanations

Chapter 11: PMP Lite Mock Exam 5 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 12: PMP Lite Mock Exam 6 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 13: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Cost Management Practice Questions--Answer
Key and Explanations

Chapter 14: PMP Lite Mock Exam 7 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 15: PMP Lite Mock Exam 8 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 16: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Quality Management Practice Questions--Answer
Key and Explanations

Chapter 17: PMP Lite Mock Exam 9 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 18: PMP Lite Mock Exam 10 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 19: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Human Resource Management Practice
Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 20: PMP Lite Mock Exam 11 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 21: PMP Lite Mock Exam 12 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 22: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Communications Management Practice
Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 23: PMP Lite Mock Exam 13 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 24: PMP Lite Mock Exam 14 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 25: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Risk Management Practice Questions--Answer
Key and Explanations

Chapter 26: PMP Lite Mock Exam 15 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 27: PMP Lite Mock Exam 16 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 28: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Procurement Management Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 29: PMP Lite Mock Exam 17 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 30: PMP Lite Mock Exam 18 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 31: Knowledge Area Quiz: Project Stakeholder Management Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

Chapter 32: PMP Focus Area Test: Professional and Social Responsibility Practice
Questions--Answer Key and Explanations
Exam 1 Test Questions
1. Daniel is managing the development of an ecommerce website for his
   organization. Daniel enjoys coercive powers and has assigned Julie, a
   project team member, to facilitate the team meetings. During any team
   meeting, Julie must?

       A. Influence team members to support the project manager's decisions
       B. Support the team members to challenge the project manager's
          decisions
       C. Negotiate with team members to achieve the project objectives
       D. Remain neutral and facilitate the meetings

2. You are a consulting project manager and have been contracted by an
   investment bank to run a large information technology project that is
   expected to last 15 months. During the Direct and Manage Project Work
   process, you discover that several regulatory requirements have not been
   addressed in the project management plan. Failure to meet these
   requirements could result in legal action against the company. However,
   implementing the technology to comply with these regulations exceeds the
   budget and scope of the project, and could result in the cancellation of the
   project. What should you do?

       A. Submit a change request to incorporate the missed requirements to
          the project's scope.
       B. Do not do anything as these requirements are not a part of the scope
          baseline.
       C. Request additional funds to implement these requirements.
       D. This is a classical example of scope creep and such requirements
          must be ignored.

3. A fundamentally functional organization creates a special project team to
   handle a critical project. This team has many of the characteristics of a
   project team in a project organization and has a Project manager dedicated
   to the project. Such an organization would be called:

       A.   A projectized organization
       B.   A functional organization.
       C.   A strong matrix organization
       D.   A composite organization

4. As you are creating the Activity List, which technique is recommended for
   subdividing the project into smaller components called activities?

       A.   Decomposition
       B.   Rolling Wave Planning
       C.   Expert judgment
       D.   Deconstruction
5. Linda has been assigned to establish a PMO in her organization. Linda
   believes that this project cannot be successful unless all of the key project
   stakeholders support the project. She also believes that she needs to pay
   special attention on stakeholder management to ensure success of this
   project. As the first step, she needs to develop her stakeholder register.
   Which of the following processes must be started by Linda to produce the
   project stakeholder register?

        A.   Plan Stakeholder Management
        B.   Control Stakeholder Engagement
        C.   Identify Stakeholders
        D.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement

6. The Create WBS process identifies the deliverables at the __________ level
   in the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).

        A.   Lowest
        B.   Any
        C.   Tenth
        D.   Highest

7. What is the primary risk with including reserves or contingency allowances
   in your cost estimate?

        A.   Cancelling your project
        B.   Understating the cost estimate
        C.   Overstating the cost estimate
        D.   Tracking the funds

8. Which of the following statements most accurately describes a project
   scenario?

        A. Changes in project scope during the initial phases of the project are
           very expensive.
        B. The influence of the stakeholders is the same all through the project.
        C. Staffing peaks up during the execution phase of a project.
        D. The next phase of a project should never start until the deliverables
           for the previous phase have been completely reviewed and
           approved.

9. Which of the following is not an organizational process asset that is used
   during the Plan Human Resource Management process?

        A.   Template for organizational charts
        B.   Template for position descriptions
        C.   Standardized role descriptions
        D.   Standardized stakeholder list

10. With the establishment of a PMO in an organization, the project
    management jargon is being adopted by the employees. However, few
    people are still struggling with the project management terminologies. One
    of the most common confusion is the difference between a project
    stakeholder and a key stakeholder. Who are the key stakeholders?

        A.   Individuals, groups or organizations in a decision making position.
        B.   Individuals, groups or organizations actively involved in the project.
        C.   Individuals, groups or organizations affected by the project.
        D.   Individuals, groups or organizations carrying out the project work.

11. Perform Integrated Change Control includes several configuration
    management activities. Which of the following is not part of Perform
    Integrated Change Control?

        A.   Change request
        B.   Configuration Verification
        C.   Configuration Status Accounting
        D.   Configuration Identification

12. After brainstorming potential project risks, what is the recommended
    method for prioritizing these risks and their mitigation plans?

        A.   RACI chart
        B.   Control chart
        C.   Fishbone Diagram
        D.   Probability and impact matrix

13. If you are influencing factors that create changes to the cost of the project,
    which process are you using?

        A.   Negotiate Costs
        B.   Estimate Costs
        C.   Control Costs
        D.   Determine Budget

14. 14.) If you are requesting a vendor quote for a defined scope, what is the
    recommended contract type?

        A.   Fixed price
        B.   Commission
        C.   Cost reimbursable
        D.   Time and materials

15. 15.) All of the following are interpersonal skills EXCEPT:

        A. Resisting to change
        B. Building trust
        C. Resolving conflict
       D. Active listening

16. 16.) What is the logical sequence of the Project Scope Management
    processes?

       A. Create WBS, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Validate Scope,
          and Control Scope
       B. Define Scope, Collect Requirements, Create WBS, Validate Scope,
          and Control Scope
       C. Plan Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope,
          Create WBS, Validate Scope, and Control Scope
       D. Plan Scope Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope,
          Validate Scope, Create WBS, and Control Scope

17. The most detailed level of the WBS is called the _______________ .

       A.   WBS element
       B.   Work package
       C.   Project scope
       D.   Deliverable

18. Which of the following is a hierarchical representation of project risks?

       A.   Risk Register
       B.   Risk Mitigation
       C.   Risk categories
       D.   Risk Breakdown Structure

19. Which of the following is a tool or technique used in the Monitor and
    Control Project Work process?

       A.   Expert judgment
       B.   Rejected change requests
       C.   Earned value technique
       D.   Change control tools

20. A large network hardware upgrade project was scheduled to take place over
    a weekend. During the course of the implementation, several previously
    unidentified dependencies for additional materials were discovered. The
    project manager gave approval for the tech staff doing the implementation
    procure with corporate credit cards several hundred dollars worth of
    additional equipment required to complete the implementation. However
    these additional expenses caused the project to exceed its budget. How
    should the project manager handle this?

       A. Ask the IT Director to cover those expenses from his budget.
       B. Advise the staff to submit expense reports for the purchases.
          Because the cost is relatively small, it can be categorized as
          miscellaneous purchases that are not associated with the project.
        C. Notify the project stakeholders immediately of the additional
           expenses incurred and follow project and or company procedures
           for budget variances.
        D. Do nothing- that's what reserves are for.

21. During the Plan Procurement Management phase, the make-or-
    ____analysis must be completed. This technique prompts the project team
    to determine the source of their item.

        A.   lease
        B.   buy
        C.   find
        D.   ignore

22. Which of these precedence relationships is least commonly used in
    Precedence Diagramming Method?

        A.   Start to Start
        B.   Finish to Finish
        C.   Finish to Start
        D.   Start to Finish

23. A RACI chart is an example of a _________________.

        A.   Network
        B.   Flowchart
        C.   Responsibility assignment matrix
        D.   Hierarchical-type organization chart

24. If the project's current total earned value (EV) is $100,000 and the actual
    amount spent (AC) is $95,000, what is the cost variance of the project?

        A.   The cost variance is 1.05
        B.   The cost variance is 5,000
        C.   The cost variance is 0.95
        D.   The cost variance is -5,000

25. Your company has temporarily assigned you to serve as a project manager
    at a company location outside your home country. While meeting with a
    vendor your first day on the job, you are presented with a gift. The
    corporate policy at the headquarters in your home country prohibits
    employees from accepting these types of gifts. However, as you are new to
    this location, you believe- but are not sure-that the local policy, as well as
    local custom may differ. How should you respond?

        A. Provide a gift of similar value to the vendor at your next meeting.
        B. Accept the gift but do not tell anyone.
        C. Respectfully tell the vendor you are not sure of corporate policy,
           and will need to ask your management before you can accept gifts
           of any size.
        D. Accept the gift this time, but ask your manager about the local
           policy afterwards.

26. If you are writing a proposal for additional funding, which communication
    style should you choose?

        A.   formal and horizontal
        B.   formal and vertical
        C.   informal and vertical
        D.   informal and horizontal

27. If you want a group of experts to identify project risks, but also want
    unbiased data, what is an appropriate technique to use?

        A.   Interviewing
        B.   Delphi technique
        C.   Assumption analysis
        D.   Brainstorming

28. If you are working on a project with constantly changing scope, which
    contract type would work best when hiring an outside vendor to complete a
    portion of the work?

        A.   Cost reimbursable
        B.   Lump sum
        C.   Time and material
        D.   Fixed price

29. Which process of integrative project management documents the actions
    necessary to define, prepare, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary plans
    into a project management plan?

        A.   Direct and Manage Project Work
        B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
        C.   Develop Project Charter
        D.   Develop Project Management Plan

30. Mary is currently focusing on controlling the key stakeholder engagement
    on her project. The project management plan is an essential input to this
    process. Which of the following components of the project management
    plan is least likely to be utilized during this process?

        A.   Stakeholder communication needs and expectations
        B.   Project management processes selected for the project
        C.   Change management process
        D.   Human resource requirements

31. A project manager scheduled a review at the end of a phase, with the
    objective of obtaining authorization to close the current project phase and
    initiate the next phase. Which of the following is an incorrect way of
    describing this review?

        A.   Phase gate
        B.   Phase planning
        C.   Kill point
        D.   Stage gate

32. If you are measuring the quality of items in a sample on a pass/fail basis,
    what is that called?

        A.   Attribute sampling
        B.   Biased sampling
        C.   Variable sampling
        D.   Stratified sampling

33. The Requirements Traceability Matrix helps in tracing all of the following
    except:

        A.   Requirements to project objectives
        B.   Requirements to project scope
        C.   Requirements to test strategy
        D.   Requirements to project risk

34. Which of the following should you NOT use as an input into creating the
    WBS structure?

        A.   Bill of Material (BOM)
        B.   Project scope statement
        C.   Organizational process assets
        D.   Requirements documentation

35. You are on the vendor selection committee for a large IT project that you
    will be managing for your company. Your friend works for a company that
    is planning to bid on the project. During a social dinner, the friend tells his
    job is on the line if his company does not win the contract. What should you
    do?

        A. Notify the project stakeholders that you have social ties with one of
           the vendors, and excuse yourself from the selection committee.
        B. Tell the friend you will do what you can, but don't actually act on
           this.
        C. Don't mention your relationship to anyone involved with the project,
           but push for the friend's company during the selection process.
        D. This is simply networking. Let the project stakeholders know you
           have a social connection to the vendor and recommend they get the
           business.
36. Which term best describes the Identify Risks process?

       A.   Finite
       B.   Redundant
       C.   Iterative
       D.   Inconsequential

37. During the Plan Risk Management process, assigning ___________ will
    help you and the project team identify all important risks and work more
    effectively during the identification process.

       A.   risk factors
       B.   blame
       C.   risk mitigation plans
       D.   risk categories

38. Which of these processes is NOT a project time management process?

       A.   Create WBS
       B.   Develop Schedule
       C.   Define Activities
       D.   Sequence Activities

39. The technique most commonly used by project management software
    packages to construct a project schedule network diagram is:

       A.   Activity-On-Node (AON)
       B.   Finish-to-Start (FS)
       C.   Activity-In-Node (AIN)
       D.   Node-On-Activity (NOA)

40. Which of the following defines the total scope of the project and represents
    the work specified in the current approved project scope statement?

       A.   Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
       B.   Bill of Material (BOM)
       C.   Project Charter
       D.   Requirements Breakdown Structure (RBS)

41. If you are creating a new WBS for your project, what should you consider
    to save time during the creation process?

       A.   Delegate the WBS creation since it is not an important process
       B.   Skip the WBS process
       C.   Use a previous WBS from a similar project as a template
       D.   Create a less detailed WBS

42. Which of these precedence relationships is most commonly used in
    Precedence Diagramming Method?

       A.   Finish to Start
       B.   Start to Finish
       C.   Start to Start
       D.   Finish to Finish

43. You are the project manager in your organization. You have very little
    authority over the projects you manage, and you are mainly engaged in
    project coordination activities. You are currently struggling with obtaining
    the required human resources for your project during the Acquire Project
    Team process. Who you need to negotiate with to obtain these resources?

       A.   The functional managers
       B.   The project sponsor
       C.   The customer
       D.   Your line manager

44. A good quality audit should be:

       A.   structured and independent
       B.   informal and independent
       C.   informal and internal
       D.   structured and internal

45. What is the traditional way to display a reporting structure among project
    team members?

       A.   Text-oriented role description
       B.   Flowchart
       C.   Hierarchical-type charts
       D.   Matrix based responsibility chart

46. The Project Charter formally authorizes a project. Who authorizes the
    project charter?

       A.   The project manager
       B.   A project sponsor or initiator internal to the project
       C.   The user of the product
       D.   A project sponsor or initiator external to the project

47. In an ongoing project, the project sponsor and a manager of the performing
    organization are having conflicts. What would be your comment on this
    situation?

       A. The project manager needs to step in and handle the stakeholders'
          expectations. The stakeholders may have different objectives and
          interests in the project.
       B. The project manager needs to step in and handle the stakeholders'
           expectations. All stakeholders are supposed to have the same
           objectives and interests in a project.
        C. The project manager should resolve in favor of the project sponsor
           since he is providing the funds for the project.
        D. The project manager should resolve in favor of the manager of the
           performing organization since they are executing the project and
           need to be kept in good books.

48. Project risks should be identified by:

        A.   Those invited to the risk identification process only
        B.   Key project stakeholders only
        C.   The project manager only
        D.   All project personnel

49. A control chart should always contain:

        A.   Upper and lower warning limits
        B.   The moving average
        C.   Upper and lower control limits
        D.   Upper and lower specification limits

50. When would Rolling Wave Planning be useful in a project?

        A. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to help you achieve the
           appropriate level of detail in each work package at the right time.
        B. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to determine the correct
           sequencing for long term items.
        C. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to help you organize team
           member's activities within a large project group.
        D. You should use Rolling Wave Planning to help you determine
           which activities are more important and should be done first.


Answers

1. D - Since the project manager enjoys coercive powers, it seems likely that he has
   assigned a neutral facilitator to facilitate the team meetings. Facilitation is a
   management skill. A good facilitator should always remain neutral in a meeting
   and help facilitate consensus when required. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 408]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]
2. A - All regulatory requirements must be met. Not doing anything or considering
   this a scope creep are not valid options for the project manager. The project
   manager would have to request for additional funds but first he needs to submit a
   change request for approval. Change request can be submitted as a part of the
   Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 85] [Project
   Integration Management]
3. D - This organization would be called a composite organization. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 25] [Project Framework]
4. A - The decomposition technique allows the project manager to create smaller
    and more manageable pieces of work from the larger work packages. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 151] [Project Time Management]
5. C - The stakeholder register is developed during the Identify Stakeholders
    process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 392] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. A - The Create WBS process identifies the deliverables at the lowest level in the
    WBS, the work package. Project work packages are typically decomposed into
    smaller components called activities that represent the work necessary to
    complete the work package. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 126] [Project Time
    Management]
7. C - Contingency funds are used to handle cost uncertainty due to unknown
    purchases that may be needed during a project. These funds are generally used for
    items that are likely to occur, but not certain to occur. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    206] [Project Cost Management]
8. C - Staffing is typically the highest during the execution phase of the project. The
    other three responses may not hold true. Projects can move forward into
    subsequent phases without the deliverables of the prior phase being completely
    approved - this is known as fast tracking. Changes during the initial phases of the
    project are the least expensive. The influence of the stakeholders is the highest
    during the start of the project and reduces as the project moves to completion.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 40] [Project Framework]
9. D - Standardized stakeholder list is not a valid organizational asset used in the
    Plan Human Resource Management process. The others are valid assets. Other
    assets are: Historical information on org structures that have worked in previous
    projects and organizational processes and policies. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    260] [Project Human Resource Management]
10. A - All of the given choices correctly define the project stakeholders. However,
    the key stakeholders are the subset of the project stakeholders that are in a
    decision making position. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]
11. A - Change request is not a valid response. The configuration management
    activities included in the Perform Integrated Change Control process are
    Configuration Identification, Configuration Status Accounting, Configuration
    Verification and Auditing. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96, 97] [Project Integration
    Management]
12. D - A probability and impact matrix will help filter the high risk items and high
    impact items from the others so that you can focus your attention on these riskier
    items. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 331] [Project Risk Management]
13. C - Control Costs is the process of managing the project's costs and the changes
    that threaten the bottom line. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 215] [Project Cost
    Management]
14. A - The fixed price contract works best with a very well defined project scope.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 362] [Project Procurement Management]
15. A - Resisting to change is not a valid interpersonal skill. The rest of the choices
    are examples of interpersonal skills. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 407] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]
16. C - The logical sequence of the six scope management processes are Plan Scope
    Management, Collect Requirements, Define Scope, Create WBS, Validate Scope
    and Control Scope. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 105] [Project Scope Management]
17. B - The work package is the lowest and most detailed level of the WBS and can
    be scheduled, cost estimated, monitored, and controlled. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 126] [Project Scope Management]
18. D - The Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical presentation of the
    project risks sorted by risk categories. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 560] [Project
    Risk Management]
19. A - Expert Judgment is a tool or technique used in the Monitor and Control
    Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 86] [Project Integration
    Management]
20. C - Notifying project stakeholders and following proper procedures for dealing
    with budget variances is the best response. Attempting to pass off or hide an
    unexpected expense in another budget or in expense reports rather than following
    proper procedures is dishonest and unprofessional. The PMI code of ethics
    requires project managers to be honest, take responsibility for errors, and to
    follow all organizational rules and policies. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
21. B - The make-or-buy analysis is a technique used by the project manager to
    determine whether a particular work can be best completed by the project team or
    should be procured from outside sources. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 365]
    [Project Procurement Management]
22. D - Start to Finish relationships indicate that the next task is not able to be
    completed until the one preceding it has started. This is not commonly used.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 157] [Project Time Management]
23. C - A RACI chart outlines, in matrix form, the project tasks and who is
    responsible, accountable, consultable, and informable for each task. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 226] [Project Human Resource Management]
24. B - The cost variance (CV) equals the EV - AC. In this case, the CV = $5,000.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 224] [Project Cost Management]
25. C - While organizational and cultural differences can cause conflict, the project
    manager is bound by the code of ethics to practice honestly, respect,
    professionalism, and to follow policies, regulations, and laws pertaining. The best
    choice is to decline the gift, and confer with management about gift policies.
    [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2,3] [Prof.
    Responsibility]
26. B - Since this will be an official project document, it should be formal in nature.
    Additionally, since you are requesting money from someone higher up in the
    organization, you are creating a vertical communication. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 287] [Project Communications Management]
27. 27.) B - The Delphi technique involves anonymous questionnaires circulated to a
    group of experts and provides an unbiased assessment of the risks. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 324] [Project Risk Management]
28. C - The Time and Material (T&M) contract will allow the contract to change as
    the project scope changes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement
    Management]
29. D - This statement describes the Develop Project Management Plan process.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 72] [Project Integration Management]
30. B - All of the given choices are the components of the project management plan
    that can be utilized during the Control Stakeholder Engagement process.
    However, the key project stakeholders are usually not interested in the minor
      details of the project; rather they are more interested in the project's objectives,
      the current progress, and the current risks and issues. From the given choices, 'the
      selected project management processes for the project' is the weakest choice.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 411] [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   B - Stage Gates, Phase Gates and Kill Points refer to the same term and refer to a
      phase end review with the objective of obtaining authorization to close the current
      phase and starting the next one. This is a retrospective review of the current
      phase. The phase planning, on the other hand, is carried out early during the
      planning phase of the project.[PMBOK 5th edition, Page 41] [Project Framework]
32.   A - The attribute sampling measures the quality characteristic of items in a sample
      on a pass/fail basis; on the other hand, the variable sampling measures the quality
      characteristic on a continuous scale. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 250] [Project
      Quality Management]
33.   D - Requirements Traceability Matrix is an output of the Collect Requirements
      process. It is used for tracing requirements to project scope, objectives, and test
      strategy. Tracing requirements to project risk is not a valid use. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 117, 118] [Project Scope Management]
34.   A - The Bill of Material (BOM) is not used as an input in the Create WBS
      process. The other three are valid inputs. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 125] [Project
      Scope Management]
35.   A - During the procurement process, predefined criteria are used to select vendors
      to supply goods and services. Circumventing this process to benefit a friend is a
      conflict of interest and is unfair to other vendors competing in good faith. The
      project management code of ethics demands that practitioners adhere to its
      standards at all times. The best response is to notify the project stakeholders that
      you have a conflict of interest, and excuse yourself from the selection committee.
      [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3,4] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   C - The Identify Risks process is an ongoing, iterative process as risks are often
      identified throughout the project's life cycle. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 321]
      [Project Risk Management]
37.   D - Risk categories provide a structure that ensures a comprehensive process of
      systematically identifying risks and contribute to the effectiveness and quality of
      the process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 317] [Project Risk Management]
38.   A - Create WBS is a process in the Project Scope Management area, while the
      other options are all Project Time Management processes. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 105, 141] [Project Time Management]
39.   A - The method used by most project management software packages to construct
      a project schedule network diagram is Activity-On-Node (AON). This uses boxes
      or rectangles, called nodes to represent activities and connects them with arrows
      showing the logical relationship between them. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 156]
      [Project Time Management]
40.   A - The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the work to be executed by the
      project team and defines the total scope of the project. It represents the work
      specified in the current approved project scope statement. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 126] [Project Scope Management]
41.   C - Creating the WBS is a very important process, but often a previous WBS can
      be used as a template to save time and the potential rework of forgetting
      something important. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 127] [Project Scope
      Management]
42. A - Finish to Start relationships indicate that the next task is not able to start until
    the one preceding it is completed. This is the most commonly used type of
    activity relationship. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 157] [Project Time Management]
43. A - Since you have little authority over the projects you manage, you are working
    for a weak matrix organization. In such organizations the functional managers
    have more authority. You need to use the 'Negotiation' tool and technique from
    the Acquire Project Team process in order to obtain the required resources from
    the functional managers. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 270] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
44. A - A quality audit should be a structured process performed by an independent
    entity to provide the best results. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 247] [Project Quality
    Management]
45. C - A hierarchical-type organization chart can clearly show roles and reporting
    relationships within a team. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 165] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
46. D - A project initiator or sponsor external to the project, at a level that is
    appropriate to funding the project, authorizes the project charter. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 68] [Project Integration Management]
47. A - The project manager needs to recognize that the stakeholders could have
    conflicting interests and objectives. It is the responsibility of the project manager
    to successfully manage the stakeholders' expectations. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    404] [Project Stakeholder Management]
48. D - While it is not feasible to invite everyone to the risk identification meetings,
    everybody should be encouraged to identify risks as they encounter them.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 321] [Project Risk Management]
49. C - Upper and lower control limits allow the control chart to serve its purpose of
    indicating when a process is in or out of control. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238]
    [Project Quality Management]
50. A - Rolling Wave Planning is a technique used to create a more detailed work
    plan while keeping the right level of detail for each activity - activities happening
    sooner have more detail than those further in the future. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 152] [Project Time Management]
Framework Test        Questions
1. Which of the following is an input to the Develop Project Team process?

       A.   Resource Requirements
       B.   Resource Conflicts
       C.   Resource Calendars
       D.   Resource Breakdown Structure

2. Successful conflict management results in:

       A.   Decreased productivity but positive working relationships.
       B.   Greater productivity and positive working relationships.
       C.   Greater productivity but negative working relationships.
       D.   Decreased productivity and negative working relationships.

3. The transition from one phase to another within a project's life cycle (e.g.
   design to manufacturing) is typically marked by:

       A.   Kill point
       B.   Monte Carlo
       C.   Constraint
       D.   Decision tree

4. Ongoing operations and a project both have Initiating Processes, but only a
   project has __________.

       A.   Planning Processes
       B.   Closing Processes.
       C.   Controlling Processes
       D.   Executing Processes

5. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor?

       A.   Configuration management knowledge base
       B.   Change control procedures
       C.   Historical information
       D.   Commercial databases

6. Estimating the type and quantities of material, people, equipment or
   supplies required to perform each activity is:

       A.   Estimate Activity Workload
       B.   Estimate Activity Input
       C.   Activity Resource Requirements
       D.   Estimate Activity Resources

7. Which of the following is a classic organizational structure?
       A.   Functional
       B.   Projectized
       C.   Composite
       D.   Matrix

8. Fill in the blank: _______________means developing in steps and
   continuing by increments.

       A.   Progressive management
       B.   Iterative elaboration
       C.   Waterfall development
       D.   Progressive elaboration

9. Defining a new project or a new phase of an existing project relates to:

       A.   Initiating process
       B.   Planning process
       C.   Scope management process
       D.   Control process

10. Which of the following is not a project competing constraint?

       A.   Budget
       B.   Procurement
       C.   Risk
       D.   Resource


Answers

1. C - Resource calendars are input of the Develop Project Team process. [PMBOK
   5th edition, Page 273] [Project Human Resource Management]
2. B - Successful conflict management results in greater productivity and positive
   working relationships. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource
   Management]
3. A - The transition from one phase to another within a project's lifecycle generally
   involves, and is usually defined by, some form of technical transfer or handoff.
   These are also called as kill points. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 41] [Project
   Framework]
4. B - A project is a finite effort; the Initiating Process Group starts the cycle, and
   the closing Process Group ends the cycle. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project
   Framework]
5. D - The commercial databases are considered enterprise environmental factors.
   Rest of the choices are organizational process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, 29]
   [Project Framework]
6. D - Estimate Activity Resources is the process of estimating the type and
   quantities of material, people, equipment or supplies required to perform each
   activity. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 160] [Project Framework]
7. A - A functional organization is a classical organizational structure. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 22] [Project Framework]
8. D - Progressive elaboration is a characteristic of projects that allows a project
    management team to manage it to a greater level as the project evolves. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 55] [Project Framework]
9. A - The Initiating process group consists of the processes performed to define a
    new project or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to
    start the project of phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 54] [Project Framework]
10. B - Six competing project constraints are scope, quality, schedule, budget,
    resources and risk. Procurement is not a project competing constraint. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 6] [Project Framework]
Exam 2 Test Questions
1. 1.) You are managing a multi-million dollar project, and discover several
   critical pieces of data in the project information repository have been
   modified without authorization. What should you do?

       A. A. Determine the extent of the data breach, and implement security
          procedures to prevent a recurrence.
       B. Determine the extent of the data breach and notify the appropriate
          project and company staff of the incident.
       C. Determine the extent of the data breach, and restore the modified
          data from a backup.
       D. Determine the extent of the data breach, and setup auditing to track
          further unauthorized access.

2. If you are developing a Project Management Plan, how should you
   determine the level of detail to be included in the plan?

       A.   Always only provide a summary or high level plan
       B.   Include only the details your manager specifically requested
       C.   Always provide the maximum level of detail possible
       D.   Provide the level of detail based on the project complexity and
            application area

3. If you want to have multiple vendors bid on your contract, what is the best
   way to ensure that all vendors have the same information before bidding?

       A.   Issue a standard request for bid and do not allow any questions
       B.   Hold a bidder conference
       C.   Communicate only through email
       D.   Develop a qualified sellers list

4. Randy is managing a project and identifies that there are 8 stakeholders in
   the project. He is worried that he might end up with an unmanageable
   number of communication channels. In your view, how many
   communication channels does Randy have to plan for?

       A.   64 channels
       B.   56 channels
       C.   8 channels
       D.   28 channels

5. Julie is currently populating her project's stakeholder register with the
   names and details of the people identified during the Identify Stakeholders
   process. Some of these people are not supporting the project but they can
   directly influence the project. Julie is adding these people to her project's
   stakeholder register because?

       A. These people are negative stakeholders and they have to be closely
           managed.
        B. Although these people are not stakeholders, they have influence
           over the project.
        C. Julie is adding them to the stakeholder register as they are potential
           project stakeholders.
        D. Although these are not stakeholders, their names were identified
           during the Identify Stakeholders process.

6. You have been asked to establish a project charter for your new project.
   According to PMBOK, who normally has the responsibility to authorize the
   charter?

        A.   Company president or CEO
        B.   Project initiator or sponsor
        C.   Key project stakeholders
        D.   Project manager

7. In general, Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is:

        A.   not often completed
        B.   complete and 100% accurate
        C.   in-depth and thorough
        D.   quick and cost-effective

8. As a project manager, you are performing various project performance
   measurements to assess the magnitude of variation. You then attempt to
   determine the cause and decide whether corrective action is required. This
   would be known as:

        A.   Scope Analysis
        B.   Variance Analysis
        C.   Performance Reporting
        D.   Configuration Management

9. Two efficiency indicators that reflect the cost and schedule performance of
   a project are:

        A. Cost Projection Index (CPI) and Schedule Projection Index (SPI)
        B. Cost Performance Index (CPI) and Schedule Performance Index
           (SPI)
        C. Actual Cost (AC) and Planned Value (PV)
        D. Cost Pricing Index (CPI) and Schedule Performance Index (SPI)

10. Sarah has just started the Identify Stakeholders process for her project. She
    is currently looking for a template for the stakeholder register so that she
    doesn't have to reinvent the wheel. Where can she find stakeholder register
    templates?

        A. Organizational process assets
        B. Project charter
        C. Project management plan
        D. Enterprise environmental factors

11. If you want to compress a project schedule, what are two of the
    recommended alternatives to consider?

        A.   Fast Tracking and Schedule Network Analysis
        B.   Crashing and Fast Tracking
        C.   Resource Leveling and What-If Scenario Analysis
        D.   Crashing and Schedule Network Analysis

12. A project manager wishes to expand an existing list of sellers. Which of the
    following techniques should she consider?

        A.   Bidder conferences
        B.   Make or buy analysis
        C.   Analytical techniques
        D.   Advertising

13. Which of these tools is NOT a part of the Seven Basic Tools of Quality?

        A.   Control Chart
        B.   Statistical Sampling
        C.   Flowcharting
        D.   Scatter Diagram

14. Which quality control technique or tool should be used when trying to
    determine the cause of a major defect?

        A.   Pareto Chart
        B.   Control Chart
        C.   Histogram
        D.   Fishbone diagram

15. During a project update meeting for the key stakeholders, the schedule of
    some project activities was challenged. The VP Operations challenged that
    some of the critical path activities cannot be executed as scheduled as they
    will disturb critical operations. The VP has requested rescheduling of these
    tasks so that they are carried out during the non-working times of the
    business. What should the project manager do first?

        A. Analyze the impact of change
        B. Record the issue in the issue log
        C. Send the change request to the change control board for the
           approval
        D. Produce a change request

16. Why is it important to have a staff release plan for people within the project
    team?

       A.   It helps people manage their time.
       B.   The project protects itself from lawsuit.
       C.   It is not important.
       D.   The project saves money by releasing people from the project at the
            right time and morale is also improved.

17. Midway through a project, a project manager determined that the project
    was running way behind schedule. If the project manager needs to shorten
    the project schedule, without changing the project scope, which of the
    following schedule compression techniques could be applied?

       A.   Crashing
       B.   Reserve Analysis
       C.   Forecasting
       D.   Last Tracking

18. At the end of a project, what will your schedule variance be equal to?

       A.   Zero
       B.   Equal to the total PV
       C.   One
       D.   Equal to the total EV

19. Quantitative risk analysis should be performed:

       A.   only on risks identified by the project manager
       B.   only in extreme cases
       C.   only on prioritized risks
       D.   on all risks

20. While a co-worker is out on vacation for two weeks, you are standing in for
    her as the project manager of a process improvement project. During
    project meetings it becomes apparent that there is a great deal of conflict
    between stakeholders, and as you review the project documentation you
    discover that the vacationing project manager has made several critical
    project decisions without collecting inputs from the stakeholders. Some of
    these decisions resulted in changes to the project scope, and did not go
    through the formal change management process. What should you do?

       A. Do nothing as you are a temporary project manager.
       B. Notify the project stakeholders and sponsor that the project scope
          has changed without proper authorization.
       C. Update the requirements document to include the scope changes.
       D. Make a formal change request to incorporate all previously
          unauthorized changes made to the scope.

21. While analyzing a project, the project manager calculated the ratio of the
    Earned Value (EV) to the Actual Costs (AC) and obtained a value of 1.2.
    The project manager decided that this was an unfavorable condition to the
    project and decided to take corrective action. What is your view?

        A. The project manager is correct. The ratio of EV to AC is called Cost
           Performance Index and a ratio greater than 1 is unfavorable to the
           project
        B. The project manager is not correct. The ratio of EV to AC is called
           Cost Variance and a ratio greater than 1 is favorable to the project.
        C. The project manager is not correct. The ratio of EV to AC is called
           Cost Performance Index and a ratio greater than 1 is favorable to the
           project
        D. The project manager is correct. The ratio of EV to AC is called Cost
           Variance and a ratio greater than 1 is unfavorable to the project

22. Which of these is not an approved Estimate Activity Durations technique?

        A.   Three Point Estimating
        B.   Parametric Estimating
        C.   Analogous Estimating
        D.   Critical Path Estimation

23. If you are working on a project where there is no definite project detailed
    scope, but similar projects have been completed in the past, what is the
    correct Estimate Activity Durations tool to use?

        A.   Analogous Estimating
        B.   Parametric Estimating
        C.   Critical Path Estimation
        D.   Three Point Estimating

24. As project manager, you would like to show the relationship between two
    variables to help your project team understand the quality impacts better.
    Which tool should be used?

        A.   Scatter Diagram
        B.   Run Chart
        C.   Fishbone Diagram
        D.   Pareto Chart

25. You have been called in to give an executive presentation on the status of
    your project. Just before you walk into the meeting, you are informed that a
    critical resource for the project is no longer available, and could result in a
    substantial delay to the project. However, you believe there may be an
    alternative resource that could be used. What do you tell the executive
    committee?

        A. Wait until you have all facts before you advise the executive team.
        B. Ask your deputy project manager to add this to the risk database,
          but do not mention it to the executive team.
       C. Advise the executive team of the situation exactly as you know it to
          be at that moment.
       D. Do not mention it to the executive team because you know that you
          have enough reserve to support a 2 month delay.

26. In a cause and effect diagram, which of these is not a potential cause?

       A.   Personnel
       B.   Problem statement
       C.   Time
       D.   Material

27. Which of the following is inaccurately represented by the term Progressive
    elaboration?

       A. Changes to project scope
       B. Rolling wave planning
       C. Detailing out the product requirements which were developed
          during the initiation process.
       D. Production of fabrication and construction drawings from the design
          drawings for a chemical plant.

28. Which document describes the project's deliverables and the work required
    to create those deliverables?

       A.   Project authorization document
       B.   Project scope statement
       C.   Project scope management plan
       D.   Project charter

29. During a presentation to management, you want to display the project
    schedule with only the key deliverables displayed. What is the correct tool
    for this purpose?

       A.   Project schedule network diagram
       B.   Critical path network
       C.   Milestone chart
       D.   Critical chain diagram

30. Susan is about to review her project stakeholder management plan to make
    some necessary adjustments. She has got her project management plan, the
    recent issue log and the work performance data. Which of the following
    inputs is still missing for this process?

       A. Project charter
       B. Stakeholder management plan
       C. Project documents
       D. Communication management plan

31. Which of these items are important to address when determining each
    person's role in the project team?

       A.   Role, authority, responsibility, and competency
       B.   Role, responsibility, and competency
       C.   Role and responsibility
       D.   Role, authority, and competency

32. If you want to reduce the number of quality inspections and thus reduce the
    cost of quality control for your project, which technique should be used?

       A.   Run Chart
       B.   Defect Repair Review
       C.   Statistical Sampling
       D.   Pareto Chart

33. When beginning a new outsourcing project, what is the best way to
    determine which companies you should request a bid from?

       A.   Send your proposal to the company you last worked with
       B.   Have someone else manage this part of the process
       C.   Send your proposal to everyone
       D.   Consult the qualified sellers list

34. Which of the following is not a general management technique used to
    generate different approaches to execute and perform the project work?

       A.   Lateral thinking
       B.   Analysis of alternatives
       C.   Map Out
       D.   Brainstorming

35. Your boss advises you that your final project schedule and budget must be
    ready to present to the executive steering committee at a meeting later this
    week. A draft schedule has been completed based on estimates provided by
    your team. However, they have not yet had a chance to review the schedule
    to be sure their estimates are appropriate and realistic. Timing constraints
    make it impossible to complete this review before the meeting. What is the
    best approach?

       A. Present the estimate to your boss first and explain the basis of
          estimate.
       B. Declare the faulty estimate to the executive steering committee.
       C. Present the estimate in the meeting as a rough order of magnitude
          (ROM) estimate with an accuracy range of plus/minus 5%
       D. Deny the request to present the estimate to the executive steering
            committee.

36. Where would you find a detailed list and description of specific project
    assumptions associated with the project?

       A.   Project charter
       B.   Project scope statement
       C.   Project configuration document
       D.   Change management plan

37. The date through which the project has provided actual status and
    accomplishments is called:

       A.   Data Date (DD)
       B.   Due Date (DD)
       C.   Project Date (PD)
       D.   Reporting Date (RD)

38. Which of these is NOT a risk diagramming technique?

       A.   System or process flow charts
       B.   Cause and effect diagram
       C.   RACI chart
       D.   Influence diagrams

39. Which of the following is a tool or technique for the Develop Project Team
    process?

       A.   Organizational charts
       B.   Colocation
       C.   Acquisition
       D.   Conflict management

40. A hierarchical structure of resources organized by resource type category
    and resource type used in resource leveling schedules is known as:

       A.   Team structure
       B.   Resource Pool
       C.   Organization breakdown Structure
       D.   Resource Breakdown Structure

41. A Project Manager's primary professional responsibility is towards:

       A.   The performing organization
       B.   The project sponsor
       C.   All stakeholders
       D.   Customers
42. What does a Cost Performance Index (CPI) of more than 1.0 indicate?

        A.   The project is over budget.
        B.   The project is right on budget.
        C.   The project is under budget.
        D.   The project is ahead of schedule.

43. Which of the following statements is correct?

        A.   A collection of unrelated programs can constitute a portfolio.
        B.   The scope of a portfolio is typically smaller than that of a program.
        C.   A program is a group of unrelated projects.
        D.   A program need not consist of projects.

44. A project team member finds that the color scheme of the webpage he is
    designing appears too gaudy and decides to change it to a mellowed down
    color scheme. The independent testing team flags this as a defect and there
    is a heated discussion between the team member and the testing team. What
    is your view?

        A. The testing team is incorrect in flagging this as a defect. This is an
           example of expert judgment, wherein historical expertise is being
           brought into the project.
        B. The testing team is correct. Even though the new color scheme is
           more pleasing than the old one, the appropriate change management
           process has not been followed and the work product is not as per
           design.
        C. The testing team is not right in flagging this down. The color
           scheme is a simple matter and the new colors are definitely more
           pleasing than the old ones.
        D. The testing team is correct in flagging this down. The team member
           should have sent a note along with the work product indicating that
           the color scheme change had been made.

45. Which of the following items needs to be kept in mind when relying on risk
    identification checklists?

        A.   They are biased.
        B.   They are not exhaustive.
        C.   They are often inaccurate.
        D.   They are easy to prepare.

46. As an external vendor, you are managing a complex software project that
    has been contracted on Time & Material (T&M). One of your team-
    members reports a break-through in automating some of the testing
    activities. This will potentially result in cost savings to the project as well as
    the project getting completed ahead of schedule by a month. Which of the
    following actions would you take?
       A. This is confidential information within your project team and need
          not be shared with the customer. The savings will be additional
          profits on the project.
       B. Communicate the current status and inform the customer that you
          will be incorporating some additional features to use up the savings
          in cost and time since it has been budgeted for.
       C. Communicate the current status to the customer and indicate the
          potential changes to cost and schedule.
       D. Communicate the savings in cost and time to the customer. At the
          end of the project, notify your billing department that they need to
          prepare an invoice for 50% of the cost being saved.

47. What is the advantage of preparing an estimate of costs by an outside
    professional estimator?

       A.   To determine if a lump sum contract should be used
       B.   To determine the project funding limits
       C.   To hold vendors accountable to a certain price
       D.   To serve as a comparison point for incoming estimates

48. Which of the following may help in ensuring that certain bidders in the
    procurement process do not receive preferential treatment that all
    prospective sellers have a clear and common understanding of the
    procurement?

       A.   Use of weighted criteria
       B.   Use of bidder conferences
       C.   Use of screening techniques
       D.   Use of expert judgment

49. If you have an unresolved issue while working on a project, what is the best
    way to communicate that issue?

       A.   Assume that someone else is already working on it
       B.   Write an email describing the issue
       C.   Create an issue log
       D.   Complain to a fellow colleague

50. Your manager has asked you to include the Human Resource Management
    Plan and the Schedule Management Plan in your Project Management Plan.
    Is this the appropriate place for these items?

       A. No, these are stand alone documents only.
       B. Yes, you should unquestioningly include anything your manager
          suggests.
       C. No, these documents should not be created until later in the project.
       D. Yes, include them in the Project Management Plan.

51. On obtaining the project charter, the Project Manager of a project
    immediately starts acquiring the project team. Is this correct?

       A. Yes. Acquisition of the project team is primarily an Initiating
          Process Group activity.
       B. Yes. The project manager needs to get the team together as soon as
          the project starts.
       C. No. It is the responsibility of the project sponsor to provide the team
          for execution.
       D. No. Acquisition of the project team is primarily an Executing
          Process Group activity.


Answers

1. B - Notification of the appropriate staff of an information security breach, and
   providing detail to assist with an investigation is the appropriate response. The
   project manager is responsible for maintaining an accurate project information
   base and protecting the intellectual property of others, per the code of ethics.
   Failing to notify project or corporate staff that there has been unauthorized access
   to critical information violates the PMI code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Conduct, Page 2,3] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. D - The level of detail required in a Project Management Plan would vary by
   project and would include only the details necessary for the project. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 78] [Project Integration Management]
3. B - A bidder conference is a good way to ensure all bidders have the same
   information at the same time and to ensure fairness and equity within the bidding
   process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 375] [Project Procurement Management]
4. D - The correct response is 28. The formula to identify the number of
   communication channels is n*(n-1)/2, where n is the number of stakeholders.
   Hence in this case, it works out to 8*(8-1)/2 = 28. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
   292] [Project Communications Management]
5. A - Projects have both positive and negative stakeholders. All of these
   stakeholders need to be carefully managed and their details must be recorded in
   the project stakeholder register. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 391] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
6. B - The project initiator or sponsor external to the project authorizes the project
   charter. However, a project manager should be involved in the process as early as
   possible. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 67] [Project Integration Management]
7. D - Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis is quicker than Perform Quantitative Risk
   Analysis which is sometimes not required by the project. [PMBOK 5th edition,
   Page 328, 333] [Project Risk Management]
8. B - This is known as Variance Analysis. As project manager, you would then
   attempt to determine the cause of the Variance, relative to the scope baseline and
   then decide on whether corrective action is required. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
   139] [Project Scope Management]
9. B - The Cost Performance Index (CPI) and the Schedule Performance Index (SPI)
   are two efficiency indicators in the project to reflect the cost and schedule
   performance of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219] [Project Cost
   Management]
10. A - Neither the project charter not the project management plan contains any
    project document templates. Templates are organizational process assets.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 395] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11. B - Crashing and fast tracking can compress the project's schedule when
    necessary, but might come at a higher cost and rework potential. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 181] [Project Time Management]
12. D - Advertising is a good avenue to expand existing lists of sellers.
    Advertisements can be placed in general circulation publications in order to
    achieve this. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 376] [Project Procurement Management]
13. B - The seven basic tools of quality are: cause and effect diagrams, control charts,
    flowcharting, histograms, Pareto charts, check sheets, and scatter diagrams.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 239] [Project Quality Management]
14. D - A fishbone diagram, also called a cause-and-effect diagram, helps identify
    potential causes of an issue or problem. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 236] [Project
    Quality Management]
15. B - All of the tasks in the choices need to be carried out. However, the question is
    asking for the task to be carried out first. The identified issue must be documented
    in the project's issue log first. This should be captured and recorded during the
    meeting. Rest of the tasks can be performed after the meeting. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 408] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16. D - A staff release plan provides a clean break point for an individual and saves
    the project money in the process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 266] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
17. A - Crashing is the technique that can be applied to compress the project schedule
    without changing the project scope. The other technique is Fast tracking.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181] [Project Time Management]
18. A - The schedule variance is the earned value minus the planned value. At the end
    of the project, all of the planned values should be earned and the difference
    should be zero. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 218] [Project Cost Management]
19. C - Since the quantitative risk analysis is a more in-depth process, it should only
    be performed on prioritized risks to minimize impact to the overall project
    schedule. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 334] [Project Risk Management]
20. B - The best choice is to notify the stakeholders that the scope has changed
    without authorization. Intentionally not following project process and policies for
    any reason is unacceptable. Knowingly ignoring an error in scope, schedule, cost,
    or other project factor, and not adhering to policies is a violation of PMI's code of
    ethics. Further, project managers are bound by the code to report ethics violations
    to appropriate management. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
21. C - The project manager is not correct. Cost Performance Index (CPI) is the ratio
    of EV to AC. A value greater than 1 is a favorable condition for the project. The
    project manager has incorrectly interpreted the situation. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 219] [Project Cost Management]
22. D - Analogous, parametric, and three-point estimating techniques are all accepted
    practices for determining the correct amount of time required for a portion of the
    project. The Critical Path Analysis techniques evaluates the whole project
    schedule. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 169, 170, 176] [Project Time Management]
23. A - Analogous estimation relies on comparing a project to previous such projects
    that were similar in nature. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 169] [Project Time
      Management]
24.   A - A scatter diagram plots several occurrences of two variables (one on each
      axis). A relationship can then often be determine between the two variables based
      on how closely they fit a geometric model. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238]
      [Project Quality Management]
25.   C - Include the newly discovered information in your executive presentation.
      Failure to disclose a known risk until a mitigation plan is developed is a violation
      of the PMI code of ethics. It mandates that project managers are to be truthful in
      their communication and provide accurate and timely information. [Reference:
      PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4,5] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   B - A cause-and-effect diagram helps determining the root cause behind a
      problem statement. The potential causes of a specific effect fall into these
      categories: time, machine, method, material, energy, measurement, personnel, and
      environment. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 236] [Project Quality Management]
27.   A - The distinction between Progressive elaboration and Scope Creep needs to be
      understood since the two terms are different. The changes to scope (especially in
      an uncontrolled manner) are called scope creep. In contrast, Progressive
      elaboration involves building on, or elaborating the output of a previous phase.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 6] [Project Framework]
28.   B - The project scope statement is the correct response. This document describes
      the project's deliverables in detail and the work that is required to create those
      deliverables. It also forms the baseline for evaluating whether requests for
      changes are within or outside the project's boundaries. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      123] [Project Scope Management]
29.   C - A milestone chart displays only the key deliverables and is simple and easy to
      understand. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 182] [Project Time Management]
30.   C - Since Susan is planning to adjust her project stakeholder management plan,
      this implies that she is about to start the Control Stakeholder Engagement process.
      The stakeholder management plan and the communication management plan are
      the components of the project management plan, hence these are already included.
      The project charter is not an input of the Control Stakeholder Engagement
      process. The missing input to the process is the project documents. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 410] [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   A - All four of these are important to consider when considering someone for a
      position within the project team: role, authority, responsibility, and competency.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 261] [Project Human Resource Management]
32.   C - Statistical sampling will provide sufficient inspection to ensure a high
      likelihood of a quality product, while saving money for the project. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 240] [Project Quality Management]
33.   D - A qualified seller list is a list of sellers that have been pre-screened for their
      qualifications and past experience, so that procurements are directed only to likely
      sellers who can work on the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 386] [Project
      Procurement Management]
34.   C - Alternatives Identification concerns itself with identifying techniques to
      generate different approaches to execute and perform the work of the project.
      Map-Out is not a valid technique - the other three namely brainstorming, lateral
      thinking and analysis of alternatives are techniques used to generate ideas for
      different approaches. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 123] [Project Scope
      Management]
35. A - You have a rough order of magnitude (ROM) estimate as you didn't have the
    chance to review your estimate and make it more accurate. However, declaring a
    rough order of magnitude estimate as an accurate estimate is unethical. ROM
    estimates usually have a range of -25% to +75% and are not necessarily faulty.
    Denying the request is not advisable. The best option is to present the estimate to
    your boss first and explain the basis of the estimate. He can then decide if he
    wishes to present this to the steering committee or if he would like to postpone the
    meeting. [PMI Code of Ethics & Professional Conduct, Honesty] [Prof.
    Responsibility]
36. B - The Project scope statement lists and describes the specific project
    assumptions associated with project scope and the potential impact of those
    assumptions if they prove to be false. The assumptions listed in the detailed
    project scope statement are typically more numerous and detailed than the project
    assumptions listed in the project charter. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 124] [Project
    Scope Management]
37. A - The date through which the project has provided actual status and
    accomplishments is called the data date. It is also known as the as-of date or the
    status date [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 184] [Project Communications
    Management]
38. C - Risk diagramming techniques can include: cause-and-effect diagrams (also
    known as the fishbone diagrams), flowcharts, and influence diagrams. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 325] [Project Risk Management]
39. B - Colocation is a tool and technique of the Develop Project Team process. The
    rest are the tools and techniques of the other three Human Resource Management
    processes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 273] [Project Human Resource
    Management]
40. D - The Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical structure of
    resources by resource category and resource type used in resource leveling
    schedules and to develop resource-limited schedules. This may also be used to
    identify and analyze project human resource assignments. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 261] [Project Time Management]
41. C - A project manager's professional responsibilities are not limited to any one of
    the stakeholders. The other choices are correct but not complete by themselves.
    Expectations of every project stakeholder need to be managed. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 391] [Prof. Responsibility]
42. C - The CPI is calculated as the earned value divided by the actual cost. An index
    of greater than one indicates that you have spent less than you forecasted to this
    point. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219] [Project Cost Management]
43. A - A portfolio refers to a collection of projects of programs that are grouped
    together to facilitate their effective management. The projects or programs need
    not be directly related or interdependent. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 9] [Project
    Framework]
44. B - The testing team is correct in their findings. Even though the new color
    scheme might be a better choice than the old one, all changes need to follow the
    change management process and go through the appropriate change and approval
    process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94] [Project Scope Management]
45. B - While the risk identification checklist is a useful tool, it should be used in
    combination with the other tools, since it is impossible to cover all scenarios on
    one checklist. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 325] [Project Risk Management]
46. C - A project manager should always communicate an accurate statement of the
    project status. There could be subsequent actions to discuss how the savings could
    be best utilized, whether there can be any cost sharing etc. - but they would need
    to done following the appropriate procedure. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Responsibility, Page 2, 3] [Project Framework]
47. D - An estimate of costs will serve as a benchmark on proposed responses. Any
    significant differences in cost estimates can be an indication that the procurement
    statement of work was deficient, ambiguous or the prospective sellers failed to
    understand the work. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 376] [Project Procurement
    Management]
48. B - Bidder conferences allow prospective sellers and buyers to meet prior to
    submission of a bid. This ensures that all prospective sellers have a clear and
    common understanding of the procurement. This usually prevents any bidders
    from receiving preferential treatment. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 375] [Project
    Procurement Management]
49. C - An issue log allows you to communicate, track, and resolve project issues.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 305] [Project Communications Management]
50. D - These are subsidiary plans and should be included in the Project Management
    Plan. [PMBOK Page 78] [Project Integration Management]
51. D - No, the project team is not acquired immediately after signing of the project
    charter. Acquisition of a project team starts with HR management planning in the
    planning process group, followed by the Acquisition of the team in the execution
    phase. The other answers are wrong because the acquisition of the project team is
    mentioned in the wrong phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 255] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
Integration Test      Questions
1. What is a recommended method for controlling change within a project?

       A. Have only the project manager able to initiate change
       B. Have each change approved or rejected through a formal change
          control process
       C. Allow each project member ultimate control of changes within their
          realm of the project without a review process
       D. Freeze scope and allow absolutely no changes

2. The project manager of a project calls you in as a consultant to provide
   inputs on developing the Project Charter. According to the PMBOK, your
   contribution to the project could be best termed as:

       A.   Professional Consultant
       B.   Expert Judgment
       C.   Charter Consultant
       D.   Expert Consultancy

3. Which process is concerned with providing forecasts to update current cost
   information?

       A.   Monitor and Control Project Work
       B.   Project Management Information System
       C.   Close Project or Phase
       D.   Direct and Manage Project Work

4. Which of the following would not be considered as an Enterprise
   Environmental Factor during the Develop Project Charter process?

       A.   Scope Statement
       B.   Organizational infrastructure
       C.   Governmental standards
       D.   Marketplace conditions

5. The Close Project or Phase process is not applicable for?

       A.   Projects being cancelled
       B.   Projects being closed
       C.   Project phase being closed
       D.   Projects being reactivated

6. Which of these tools and techniques are common to all six Project
   Integration Management processes?

       A. Project management Information System
       B. Analytical techniques
       C. Facilitation techniques
       D. Expert Judgment

7. You are beginning a new project. When should you use the Perform
   Integrated Change Control process?

       A.   Throughout the entire project
       B.   Only when closing out the project
       C.   Only after the project is completely funded
       D.   Only after the project scope is clearly defined

8. The project management team has determined that there are some changes
   to the Scope of the project. According to the PMBOK, who would be
   responsible for reviewing, evaluating and approving documented changes
   to the project?

       A.   Change Control Board (CCB)
       B.   Change Configuration Board (CCB)
       C.   Scope Control Board (SCB)
       D.   Configuration Control Board (CCB)

9. What is the difference between the Monitor and Control Project Work and
   the Direct and Manage Project Work processes?

       A. The Monitor and Control Project Work and the Direct and Manage
          Project Work processes are the same.
       B. The Monitor and Control Project Work process monitors the project
          performance while the Direct and Manage Project Work process is
          concerned with performing the activities to accomplish project
          requirements.
       C. The Monitor and Control Project Work process is a sub-process of
          the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
       D. There is no such thing as the Monitor and Control Project Work
          process.

10. Which of following is not an output of the Direct and Manage Project Work
    process?

       A.   Deliverables
       B.   Work performance data
       C.   Project management plan
       D.   Change requests


Answers

1. B - The change control procedure varies from project to project. However, every
   change request must be processed through a formal change control process.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration Management]
2. B - Expert judgment is the judgment provided, based upon the expertise in an
      application area, knowledge area, discipline, industry etc. This is available from
      many sources including consultants. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 71] [Project
      Integration Management]
3.    A - The Monitor and Control Project Work process is responsible for keeping
      track of the project's measures, including cost. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 86]
      [Project Integration Management]
4.    A - The Scope statement is clearly not an enterprise environmental factor whereas
      the other three choices - Governmental standards, Organizational infrastructure,
      and Marketplace conditions are enterprise environmental factors. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 29] [Project Integration Management]
5.    D - The Close Project or Phase process allows the project manager to close or
      finish a specific phase of the project. [PMBOK Page 100] [Project Integration
      Management]
6.    D - All six processes of Project. Integration Management use Expert judgment as
      a tool and technique. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 65] [Project Integration
      Management]
7.    A - Changes can occur in the project at any time, therefore the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process is valuable for managing and tracking those changes.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration Management]
8.    A - The Change Control Board is a group of formally constituted stakeholders
      responsible for reviewing, evaluating, approving, delaying or rejecting changes to
      the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration Management]
9.    B - The Monitor and Control Project Work process monitors the other project
      processes, including the Direct and Manage Project Work process, while the
      Direct and Manage Project Work process completes the project scope. [PMBOK
      Page 79, 86] [Project Integration Management]
10.   C - The Direct and Manage Project Work has several outputs, including
      deliverables, work performance data, change requests, project management plan
      updates, and project document updates. The project management plan is an input
      to the process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 79] [Project Integration Management]
Exam 3 Test Questions
1. Your project schedule shows a 15 month finish, but your customer has just
   realized there is a regulatory requirement to complete the project by a
   certain date and insists this project must be finished in 12 months. Which of
   the following is the best approach?

       A. Tell the customer it can be done, then cut your estimates by 20%.
       B. Cut the scope by 20%, tell the customer the critical path has
          changed, and resubmit the schedule for review.
       C. Stand your ground. Cutting scope or time will result in an inferior
          project outcome.
       D. Inform the customer of the impacts, then crash the project.

2. What is the difference between a histogram and a Pareto chart?

       A.   A histogram is a less accurate version of a Pareto chart.
       B.   A histogram is a type of Pareto chart.
       C.   A Pareto chart is a type of histogram.
       D.   A histogram and a Pareto chart simply different terms for the same
            technique.

3. As a project manager, you are responsible for determining and delivering
   the required levels of both grade and quality. Select which of the following
   statements you disagree with.

       A.   Grade relates to the product's characteristics
       B.   Grade relates to the customer requirements
       C.   Quality relates to the customer requirements
       D.   Quality and grade of a product must be carefully managed

4. Which of the following processes produces a work breakdown structure as
   an output?

       A.   Create WBS
       B.   Define Scope
       C.   Develop Project Management Plan
       D.   Define Activities

5. Michael is managing a construction project. The project charter has been
   approved by the project sponsor. What should Michael do next?

       A.   Create the WBS
       B.   Develop the project scope statement
       C.   Analyze project risks
       D.   Identify the project stakeholders

6. Most project management software packages use a method of constructing
    a project schedule network diagram known as:

       A.   Activity Diagramming Method
       B.   Precedence Diagramming Method
       C.   Project Diagramming Method
       D.   Critical Diagramming Method

7. When a negative unidentified risk occurs in a project, a response to it would
   be called:

       A.   Disaster recovery
       B.   Failure planning
       C.   A workaround
       D.   Backup planning

8. Martin is the project manager of a project that is in an early phase. He needs
   to estimate costs but finds that he has a limited amount of detailed
   information about the project. Which of the following estimation techniques
   would be least suited to his requirements?

       A.   Top-down Estimating
       B.   Bottom-up Estimating
       C.   Analogous Estimating
       D.   Budgetary Estimating

9. If you had an experience with a particularly good or poor performing
   vendor, what is the correct way to document this experience for future
   projects?

       A.   Create a seller performance evaluation
       B.   Call the vendor and talk to them about the experience
       C.   Tell all your friends about it
       D.   Vow to only work with that vendor from now on

10. John is managing a software development project for the first time. He is
    facing issues with scheduling meetings with the senior project managers at
    the company as they are extremely busy with their current assignments.
    John needs to understand what went right and wrong on previous similar
    projects so that he can manage his project better. In this situation, what
    should John do?

       A.   Review the project's business case for details.
       B.   Request key stakeholders to help schedule these coaching meetings.
       C.   Review lessons learned from the past similar projects.
       D.   Review the project charter for details.

11. Which of these is not a tool or technique for the Control Procurements
    process?
       A.   Contract change control system
       B.   Recommended Corrective Action
       C.   Claims administration
       D.   Performance reporting

12. You are looking at various process improvement models. Which of the
    following is not a process improvement model?

       A.   Malcolm-Baldrige
       B.   Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3)(R)
       C.   Capability Maturity Model Integrated (CMMI(R))
       D.   Shewhart-Deming

13. Which of these statement correctly links project and product life cycles?

       A. A product life cycle is generally contained within a project life
          cycle.
       B. A project life cycle is generally contained within a product life
          cycle.
       C. A product life cycle is the same as a project life cycle.
       D. The last life cycle for a project is generally the product's retirement.

14. Before closing a contract, the project manager should:

       A.   consult a lawyer
       B.   verify that all deliverables were acceptable
       C.   re-read the contract
       D.   contact everyone on the project team for approval

15. Carole is the project manager for a healthcare facility construction project.
    She is currently holding a board briefing and updating the project's current
    status to the board members. When Carole was presenting her project risks,
    the chairman suggested some preventive actions. What should Carole do
    first?

       A. Carole should politely deny the request
       B. Carole should write a change request
       C. Carole should directly update the project management plan as the
          request has come from the Chairman
       D. Carole should escalate the issue to the project sponsor

16. A management control point where scope, budget, actual cost and schedule
    are integrated and compared to earned value for performance measurement
    is called a:

       A. Code of accounts
       B. Control packages
       C. Control account
       D. Account Plan

17. You are defining the schedule activities for your project and identifying
    deliverables at the lowest level in the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).
    You find that there is insufficient definition of the project scope to
    decompose a branch of the WBS down to the work package level. You now
    look at using the last component in that branch of the WBS to develop a
    high-level project schedule for that component. Such a planning component
    is called:

       A.   A planning packet
       B.   Control system
       C.   A planning package
       D.   Control element

18. Which of the following best describes the Validate Scope process?

       A. Validating that the project quality requirements have been met
       B. Controlling changes to the scope of the project
       C. Obtaining stakeholders' formal acceptance of the project
          deliverables
       D. Validating that all of the project's objectives have been met

19. As a project manager of a project, you are analyzing the costs which have
    incurred. Which of the following costs cannot be classified under 'Cost of
    non-conformance'

       A.   Quality Assurance Costs
       B.   Warranty costs
       C.   Costs due to loss of reputation
       D.   Rework costs

20. You are a consulting project manager with over 15 years experience
    running software development projects. You have been engaged to manage
    a finance application project for a new customer. However on the first day
    onsite at the customer's headquarters you are told the project has been
    cancelled, but there is a need for a project manager to manage a major
    infrastructure project to deploy a large number of servers and storage
    devices. The customer asks if you would be interested in leading this
    project. You have never managed this type of project before but would be
    interested in the challenge. Which of the follow is the best response?

       A. Do not mention your lack of experience, but ask for more
          information about the project. After reviewing the information and
          see that you could probably wing the project, accept the project.
       B. Accept the job with the caveat you can bring in any needed
          resources to work on the project, then hire a project manager you
          know that works in this area to handle the implementation details.
       C. Decline the opportunity, citing your lack of experience and
           knowledge in this area.
        D. Do not mention your lack of experience and accept the job.

21. A Project manager estimates the work to be accomplished in the near term
    in detail, at a low level of the Work Breakdown structure (WBS); while he
    estimates work far in the future as WBS components, that are at a relatively
    high level of the WBS. What is this technique called?

        A.   Decomposition
        B.   Rolling wave planning
        C.   Scope Creep
        D.   Earned value planning

22. Negative risks can either be ______, transferred, or mitigated as a
    countermeasure.

        A.   enhanced
        B.   avoided
        C.   exploited
        D.   ignored

23. The WBS represents all product and project work. The total work at the
    lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out
    and no extra work is performed. This is also called as:

        A.   100% rule
        B.   80/20 rule
        C.   Pareto's rule
        D.   Ground rule

24. A technical team can begin editing of a large document 15 days after they
    begin writing it. What kind of a dependency would this be represented as?

        A.   Start-to-start with a 15-day lead
        B.   Finish-to-finish with a 15-day lead
        C.   Start-to-start with a 15-day lag
        D.   Finish-to-start with a 15-day lag

25. You are at work related social event and a colleague tells you another
    project manager has just hired her niece's engineering firm for a city public
    improvement project that you are managing. You know that this company's
    proposal did not meet the pre-defined selection criteria to be considered for
    award. What do you do?

        A. File a complaint with PMI.
        B. Escalate the issue to the appropriate management.
        C. Ask the project manager about what you have just heard. If your
           suspicions are confirmed, escalate the issue to the appropriate
           management.
       D. Do nothing.

26. A project manager is just finishing a project that has not gone well. Apart
    from cost overruns and schedule overruns, there have been a lot of quality
    defects and the project required a lot of senior management intervention to
    finally reach completion. The project manager should now:

       A. Focus on closing the project and moving on to the next one. Lessons
          learned is not applicable to this project since it has done badly
       B. Focus on presenting the data in positive light while ensuring that the
          reasons for the delays and problems are appropriately documented.
       C. Mask bad data and only present good data since his performance
          appraisal will otherwise be impacted.
       D. Document lessons learned from the project and update the lessons
          learned knowledge database.

27. In a matrix organization, where the team members report to both, a
    functional manager as well as a project manager, generally, whose
    responsibility is it to manage the dual reporting relationship?

       A.   Functional manager
       B.   HR manager
       C.   Team members
       D.   Project Manager

28. A first-time project manager wants to know during what phases of the
    project, Perform Integrated Change Control will be performed. What would
    you respond?

       A. Perform Integrated Change Control is performed only in the
          execution phase.
       B. Perform Integrated Change Control is performed during the project
          closure phase.
       C. Perform Integrated Change Control is performed throughout the
          project from project inception through project completion.
       D. Perform Integrated Change Control is part of the Build phase and is
          typically found only in IT projects.

29. A Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) would be used to breakdown the
    project by type of resources. The RBS is an example of a:

       A.   Linear chart
       B.   Matrix chart
       C.   Flow chart
       D.   Hierarchical chart

30. A pharmaceutical company has recently established a PMO in the company
    to centrally manage the corporate projects. This has resulted in the spread
    of the project management jargon in the company. Some of the employees
    are now being called 'project managers' by the PMO. Most of the project
    managers are getting confused with this new project management jargon.
    One of the questions being repeatedly asked is the difference between the
    work performance data and the work performance information. Which of
    the following correctly differentiates these two?

        A. The work performance data is numerical while the work
           performance information is textual.
        B. The work performance data is internal, while the work performance
           information is external to the project.
        C. The work performance information is the processed form of the
           work performance data.
        D. The work performance data is captured by the project team, while
           the work performance information is prepared by the project
           sponsor.

31. While managing a project, you decide to prepare an email for the project
    stakeholders describing the current project status. This is best described as
    an example of:

        A.   Vertical communication
        B.   Nonverbal communication
        C.   Informal communication
        D.   Formal communication

32. Analogous Estimating is an estimation technique that use the values of
    parameters such as scope, cost, budget and duration from a previous similar
    activity as the basis of activity and is frequently used to estimate when there
    is a limited amount of information about the project. This is a form of:

        A.   Gross value estimation
        B.   Function point estimation
        C.   Fixed point estimation
        D.   Precision Estimation

33. During the execution of your project, you decide that you would like to
    have charts of your project status - cost and schedule, display certain key
    project data, and hold your project meetings in a specific conference room.
    Such a place would be called:

        A.   Armageddon
        B.   War room
        C.   Battlefield
        D.   Ground zero

34. The document that formally authorizes a project is the:

        A. Project SOW
        B. Project Plan
       C. Project Charter
       D. Project Scope Statement

35. You are managing a medium sized construction project, and are reviewing
    some invoices from the electrical contractor. You see that materials not
    required for your project have been included on the invoice. After making a
    few phone calls it becomes clear that one of your project resources asked
    one of the vendor's staff to add a few extra circuits to one part of the
    building. This change was never approved through the change management
    process. What do you do?

       A. Notify the manager of your project resource that he failed to follow
          proper processes.
       B. Refuse to pay the charges.
       C. Call a team meeting to determine how this will impact the project,
          then inform stakeholders of the impacts.
       D. Immediately inform the project stakeholders of the unauthorized
          scope change. Then call a team meeting to determine the impact to
          the project.

36. You are presented with a situation in a project where you need to measure
    the performance of the project. Which of these techniques would suit your
    requirement?

       A.   Learned Value Technique
       B.   Earned Value Technique
       C.   Analogous Estimating
       D.   Expert Judgment

37. A manager asks you to evaluate four new projects that he has suggested for
    next year. You review the projects and notice that one is not really a
    project, but more an operational task. Which of these is not a project?

       A. Change the product to enable increased consumer usage
       B. Manage a set of people for the next year to deliver the desired
          productivity results
       C. Respond to a customer request for different product packaging
       D. Resolve a space constraint issue by building a new addition to the
          plant

38. Which of the following Project Scope Management processes documents a
    configuration management system?

       A.   Control Scope
       B.   Define Scope
       C.   Verify Scope
       D.   Plan Scope Management
39. The stakeholders of a project typically have:

        A.   Positive objectives
        B.   Negative objectives
        C.   Conflicting objectives
        D.   Similar objectives

40. A project was estimated to cost $ 200,000 with a timeline of 10 months.
    Due to a shipment delay, the schedule was slightly delayed. This was
    however made up by receiving the first batch of materials for the project by
    air. The net result was that there was some additional cost in the project. At
    the end of the second month, the Project Manager reviews the project and
    finds that the project is 20% complete and Actual Costs are $ 50,000. The
    Estimate to complete (ETC) for the project would now be:

        A.   $160,000
        B.   $210,000
        C.   $250,000
        D.   $200,000

41. You have a team of engineers working on your project. Two of the
    engineers have frequent disagreements. You ask them to resolve their
    differences through a discussion. However, that does not yield any results.
    Subsequently, you get involved and based on an analysis of the situation,
    suggest some changes in the way they work with each other. This still does
    not yield results and you find that the project schedule is beginning to
    suffer. What is you next course of action?

        A. Take Disciplinary action, if required, since the needs of the project
           are not being met.
        B. Don't do anything. Differences of opinion amongst the team
           members is a healthy situation
        C. Speak to the two team members and ask them to resolve their
           conflict amicably.
        D. Ensure that they work in different shifts so that they don't clash with
           each other.

42. As a project manager, where would you document the escalation process to
    resolve issues that cannot be resolved at a lower staff level?

        A.   Scope management plan
        B.   Stakeholder management plan
        C.   Staffing management plan
        D.   Communications Management Plan

43. While developing the project schedule, you find that the completion of a
    successor activity depends on the completion of its predecessor activity.
    What is this dependency called?
       A.   Start-to-Finish
       B.   Start-to-Start
       C.   Finish-to-Start
       D.   Finish-to-Finish

44. Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Collect
    Requirements process?

       A.   Group creativity techniques
       B.   Interviews
       C.   Questionnaires
       D.   Traceability matrix

45. You are planning out the communications methods to use as part of
    stakeholder management. The most effective means for communicating and
    resolving issues with stakeholders is:

       A.   Status reports.
       B.   Electronic mail.
       C.   Telephone calls.
       D.   Face-to-face meetings

46. A project manager wishes to illustrate the connections between the work
    that needs to be done and the project team members. According to the
    PMBOK, the resulting document would be called:

       A.   Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM)
       B.   Resource Planning Chart (RPC)
       C.   Task Assignment Model (TAM)
       D.   Resource Assignment Chart (RAC)

47. Many project managers have seen a graph which shows "Influence of
    Stakeholders" starting out high and declining as the project progresses.
    Conversely, it shows the "Cost of Changes" starting out low and increasing
    as the project progresses. What is the key message a project manager
    should obtain from this graph?

       A. Stakeholder influence is not important at the end of the project.
       B. Changes should be made as early in the project as possible.
       C. Money should be set aside for expected changes at the end of the
          project.
       D. The project should be placed on hold until all changes are made.

48. Which of the following contains an extensive procurement changes
    approval process?

       A. Scope statement
       B. Test plan
       C. Requirements management plan
       D. Contract change control system

49. A project manager found that some of the project work was not done at the
    right time and was done in an improper sequence. What do you think was
    the likely issue?

       A. This is a project communications breakdown. The project manager
          needs to re-develop the communication management plan
       B. The Project Scope document was not properly updated.
       C. The Work Authorization System was not properly established in the
          project.
       D. This is due to poor teamwork.

50. A contract change control system should include:

       A. Vendor contact information, tracking systems, and approval levels
          necessary for authorizing changes
       B. Paperwork, tracking systems, dispute resolution procedures, and
          approval levels necessary for authorizing changes
       C. Information database, dispute resolution procedures, and approval
          levels necessary for authorizing changes
       D. Tracking systems, legal ramifications for certain actions, and
          approval levels necessary for authorizing changes


Answers

1. D - Informing the customer of the impacts, then crashing cost and schedule is the
   best approach. Arbitrarily trimming estimates or scope without directly advising
   your customer is dishonest, while simply refusing to make a change is
   unprofessional. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page
   4,5] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. C - A Pareto chart is a type of histogram where the causes are ordered by
   frequency. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 237] [Project Quality Management]
3. B - The grade of a product relates to the technical characteristics of the product.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 228] [Project Quality Management]
4. A - The Create WBS process produces the work breakdown structure of the
   project as an output. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 125] [Project Scope
   Management]
5. D - Since the project charter has been approved, this marks the completion of the
   Develop Project Charter process. The second process from the initiating process
   group is the Identify Stakeholders process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 393]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. B - PDM uses Nodes to represent Activities and connects the activities with
   Arrow to show dependencies. This is the most commonly used method by most
   project management software packages.[PMBOK 5th edition, Page 156] [Project
   Time Management]
7. C - A workaround is a response to a negative unplanned risk that has occurred. It
   differs from a contingency plan in that a workaround is not planned in advance of
      the occurrence of the risk event. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 567] [Project Risk
      Management]
8.    B - Bottom-up estimating is a technique that can be applied only when there is a
      sufficient amount of detail available to the project manager. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 205] [Project Cost Management]
9.    A - A seller performance evaluation is created by the buyer and provides
      information about the seller's performance. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 386]
      [Project Procurement Management]
10.   C - The business case and the project charter do not have information regarding
      previous similar projects. The best available option for John at the moment is to
      review the lessons learned from the past similar projects. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 395] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   B - Recommended corrective action is not a tool or technique in the Control
      Procurements process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 379] [Project Procurement
      Management]
12.   D - Shewhart and Deming were quality management experts. The rest of the
      choices are process improvement models. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 229]
      [Project Quality Management]
13.   B - The product life cycle usually consists of sequential, non-overlapping product
      phases. The project life cycle is generally contained within one or more product
      life cycles. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 12, 13, 38] [Project Framework]
14.   B - Closing a contact should be done promptly after all contract work and
      deliverables are achieved. A procurement audit must be conducted prior to the
      closure of a contract. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 388] [Project Procurement
      Management]
15.   B - Any change to the project management plan must go through the formal
      change control. The first step to initiate this process is to produce a change
      request. Once that's done, the change request is analyzed, and if approved,
      incorporated to the project management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 408]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   C - This is a Control Account. Control Accounts are placed at selected
      management points of the Work Breakdown Structure WBS. Each control
      account may include one or more work packages, but each of the work packages
      must be associated with only one control account. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      132] [Project Scope Management]
17.   C - The correct response is Planning package. Control Accounts and Planning
      packages are two planning components used when the there are insufficient
      details of the project scope. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 132] [Project Time
      Management]
18.   C - Scope Validation involves obtaining the stakeholders' formal acceptance of
      project deliverables. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 133] [Project Scope
      Management]
19.   A - The Quality Assurance Costs are part of the cost of conformance. The cost of
      non-conformance includes the failure costs. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 229]
      [Project Quality Management]
20.   C - The best response is to decline the project due to lack of experience or
      expertise in this area. The PMI code of ethics mandates that project managers
      only accept assignments that are consistent with their background, experience,
      skills, and qualifications. Failing to disclose lack of experience and knowingly
      accepting a job for which you are not qualified is a violation of the code. While
      not presented as an option in this question, it would be acceptable to indicate your
      interest in the project following a full disclosure to the customer that you lack
      experience in this area. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   B - In Rolling Wave Planning, the work to be accomplished in the near term is
      estimated in detail at a low level of the Work Breakdown structure (WBS), while
      the work far in the future is estimated as WBS components that are at a relatively
      high level of the WBS. The work to be performed within another one or two
      reporting periods in the near future is planned in detail during the current period.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 152] [Project Time Management]
22.   B - You can avoid a risk by revising the project plan to eliminate the risk entirely.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 344] [Project Risk Management]
23.   A - The WBS represents all product and project work. The total work at the
      lowest levels should roll up to the higher levels so that nothing is left out and no
      extra work is performed. This is also called as 100 percent rule. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 131] [Project Scope Management]
24.   C - The relationship between the two tasks would be represented as a start-to-start
      with a lag of 15 days. A lag directs a delay in the successor activity. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 156] [Project Time Management]
25.   C - Project managers must disclose any potential conflict of interest, and avoid
      both favoritism and discrimination in all situations. However, project managers
      may not make unfair accusations or file false or inaccurate complaints. You must
      first respectfully confront the project manager to ensure that you have accurate
      information about the situation. Doing nothing, or escalating the issue
      prematurely are behaviors that run counter to the code of ethics. [Reference: PMI
      Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2,4,5] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   D - A project manager has a professional responsibility to conduct lessons learned
      sessions for all projects with key internal and external stakeholders, particularly if
      the project yielded less than desirable results. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 2,4,5] [Prof. Responsibility]
27.   D - In a matrix organization, where the team members are accountable to both, a
      functional manager as well as a project manager, the management of the project
      team can tend to be complicated. In matrix organizations, the role of the project
      manger varies from a coordinator's role to a directive project manager's role.
      Generally, it is considered the responsibility of the project manager to manage
      this dual reporting relationship and handle the coordination. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 23] [Project Framework]
28.   C - The Perform Integrated Change Control process is performed from project
      inception through project completion. This process is necessary for controlling
      factors that create changes, to make sure those changes are beneficial,
      determining whether a change has occurred, and managing the approved changes,
      including when they occur. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration
      Management]
29.   D - The Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchical chart. It is used to
      break down the chart by type of resources. For example, an RBS can depict all of
      the welders and welding equipment being used in different areas of a ship even
      though they may be scattered among different branches of the Organizational
      Breakdown Structure and RBS. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 165] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
30.   C - The work performance data is the project performance measurements
      collected by the project team. This data are analyzed, integrated and transformed
      into the work performance information. The work performance information is
      then distributed to the project stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 413]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   C - The correct response is that an email is an example of an informal
      communication. Another example is an ad-hoc conversation. Reports, briefings
      are considered as formal communication. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287]
      [Project Communications Management]
32.   A - Analogous estimating is gross value estimating technique. It is most reliable
      when the previous activities are similar in fact and not just in appearance, and the
      project team members preparing the estimates have the needed expertise.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 169] [Project Time Management]
33.   B - According to the PMBOK, a team meeting room is also called a war room.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 277] [Project Human Resource Management]
34.   C - The document that formally authorizes a project is the Project Charter. It
      provides the project manager with formal authority to apply organizational
      resources to a project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 67] [Project Integration
      Management]
35.   D - Immediately inform the stakeholders of the unauthorized scope change, then
      call team meeting to determine the impact. The code of ethics requires project
      managers to provide accurate and timely information about their projects, and to
      report the errors and omissions made by others when they are discovered.
      [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
36.   B - The Earned Value Technique measures performance of the project as it moves
      from initiation to closure. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 217] [Project Integration
      Management]
37.   B - Managing an operating team does not meet the project definition because it is
      not temporary or unique. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
38.   D - Configuration management activities are documented as part of the
      requirements management plan which is an output of the Plan Scope Management
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 110] [Project Scope Management]
39.   C - Stakeholder expectation management is a key responsibility of a project
      manager as they often have conflicting objectives. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      391] [Project Stakeholder Management]
40.   A - The Budget at completion (BAC) = $ 200,000 (given). The Actual Cost (AC)
      = $ 50,000 (given). The Earned value (EV) = ( 2 /10 ) * 200,000 since 20% of the
      project is complete i.e. 2 months out of 10. Hence, Earned Value (EV) = $ 40,000.
      This is an instance of an atypical situation in the project. Late arrival of materials
      does not mean that all subsequent material will arrive late. Hence, the calculation
      used for ETC is: ETC = BAC - EV = $200,000 - $40,000 = $160,000. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost Management]
41.   A - After the project manager has tried intervening, it is time to go in for more
      formal conflict resolution mechanisms, such as disciplinary action. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource Management]
42.   D - The correct response is the Communications Management plan. The
      Communications Management Plan documents the escalation process. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 296] [Project Communications Management]
43.   D - In a Finish-to-Finish dependency, the completion of the successor activity
      depends upon the completion of its predecessor activity. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 156] [Project Time Management]
44.   D - The requirements traceability matrix is an output of the Collect Requirements
      process and not one of its tools and techniques. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 111]
      [Project Scope Management]
45.   D - Face to face meetings are interactive, and hence are the most effective means
      for communicating and resolving issues with stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 295] [Project Communications Management]
46.   A - The correct response is Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM). This
      illustrates the connections between the work that needs to be done and the various
      team members. On larger projects, the RAMs can be developed at various levels.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 262] [Project Human Resource Management]
47.   B - Changes should be made as early as possible in the process to avoid additional
      cost and delays. The influence of stakeholders is high at the start of the project
      and low towards the end. Vice-versa, the cost of making changes in a project is
      low at the start of a project and high towards the end of the project. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 40] [Project Framework]
48.   D - The procurement change process is a part of the Contract Change Control
      System. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 383] [Project Procurement Management]
49.   C - The Work Authorization System is a subsystem of the overall project
      management system. It is a collection of formal documented procedures that
      defines how work will be authorized to ensure that work is done by the identified
      organization at the right time and in the right sequence. It includes the steps,
      documents, tracking systems and defined approval levels to issue work
      authorizations. The other responses could be contributory factors, but the most
      likely reason is that the work authorization procedure was either not properly
      established, or not properly followed. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 567] [Project
      Integration Management]
50.   B - Having a contract change control system will allow you to establish the
      procedures and process should you need to modify a contract. It contains
      paperwork, tracking systems, dispute resolution procedures, and approval levels
      necessary for authorizing changes [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 383] [Project
      Procurement Management]
Scope Test Questions
1. Which of the following is not a Group Creativity Technique used in the
   Collect Requirements process?

       A.   Nominal group technique
       B.   Pareto chart
       C.   Mind mapping
       D.   Affinity diagram

2. Linda is a project manager in charge of an online banking project. The
   project has completed phase 1 and is moving into the next phase of the
   project. Which of the following processes must be carried out first for the
   phase 2?

       A.   Define Scope
       B.   Identify Stakeholders
       C.   Develop Project Charter
       D.   Develop Project Management Plan

3. Which of the following processes is not a part of the Project Scope
   Management?

       A.   Create WBS
       B.   Control Quality
       C.   Control Scope
       D.   Collect Requirements

4. The WBS is finalized by establishing control accounts for the work
   packages and a unique identifier from a code of accounts. This provides a
   structure for hierarchical summation of:

       A.   Schedule and requirements information
       B.   Cost and requirements information
       C.   Cost and resource information
       D.   Cost, schedule and resource information

5. Uncontrolled project scope changes are often referred to as ________ .

       A.   Scope creep
       B.   Scope verification
       C.   Value Added Scope
       D.   Scope control

6. While managing a project, you have included the product acceptance
   criteria in the Quality Management Plan. When reviewing your plan, a
   senior manager asks you look at this closely. You then realize that what you
   have done is incorrect. Where should you actually place the product
    acceptance criteria?

        A.   Project Charter
        B.   Change control process
        C.   Project Scope Statement
        D.   Scope Verification Plan

7. The Project Scope Management is primarily concerned with:

        A. Defining the scope of work that is included in the project.
        B. Defining and controlling what is and what is not included in the
           project.
        C. The scope of work that is required during the initiation phase.
        D. Defining the specifications and functionality of the work product

8. A project manager approaches you to understand the Work Breakdown
   Structure (WBS) in better detail. You tell her that:

        A. The WBS is a detailed project plan and includes the effort, resources
           and dates on which the tasks for the project are completed.
        B. The WBS is a task oriented decomposition of work that identifies
           each task and the resource required to accomplish the task.
        C. The WBS is a deliverable oriented hierarchical decomposition of the
           work to be accomplished by the project team to accomplish project
           objectives.
        D. The WBS is a Gantt chart which contains details about the project
           deliverables required to be done by the project team.

9. Why must the Validate Scope be completed in a project?

        A. To obtain scope documents from recent similar projects for
           benchmarking
        B. To determine if the scope is assigned the correct complexity level
        C. To obtain formal acceptance of deliverables by the customer or
           sponsor
        D. To ensure the project team is all aware of the scope

10. A project manager wants to use a group decision making technique to
    generate, classify and prioritize requirements. Which of these is not a valid
    group decision making technique?

        A.   Dictatorship
        B.   Singularity
        C.   Majority
        D.   Unanimity


Answers
1. B - The Pareto chart is not a Group Creativity Technique. The others are valid
    techniques. Additional techniques are Brainstorming and the Delphi Technique.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 115] [Project Scope Management]
2. B - Linda needs to initiate the second phase of her project. There is no need to
    revisit the Develop Project Charter process. However, she needs to revisit the
    Identify Stakeholders process to determine any change in the stakeholders for the
    second phase of the project. Stakeholder identification is a continuous process.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 31] [Project Stakeholder Management]
3. B - Control Quality is not a part of the Project Scope management process.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 105] [Project Scope Management]
4. D - The WBS is finalized by establishing control accounts for the work packages
    and a unique identifier from a code of accounts. This provides a structure for
    hierarchical summation of costs, schedule and resource information.[PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 132] [Project Scope Management]
5. A - Scope creep is often viewed negatively, but can be managed using a change
    control process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 137] [Project Scope Management]
6. C - The project scope statement documents and addresses the characteristics and
    boundaries of the project and its associated products and services, as well as
    product acceptance criteria and scope control. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 123]
    [Project Scope Management]
7. B - Project Scope Management includes the processes required to ensure that the
    project includes all the work required and only the work required to complete the
    project successfully. It is primarily concerned with defining and controlling what
    is included and what is not included in the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    105] [Project Scope Management]
8. C - The WBS is a deliverable oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work to
    be accomplished by the project team to accomplish project objectives. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 132] [Project Scope Management]
9. C - Validate Scope is the process of formalizing acceptance of the completed
    project deliverables by the customer or sponsor of the project. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 133] [Project Scope Management]
10. B - Singularity is not a valid method to reach a group decision. The other choices
    are valid methods to reach a group decision. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 115]
    [Project Scope Management]
Exam 4 Test Questions
1. Your project is slightly behind schedule, and you have not yet made a full
   impact assessment to make associated project changes to accommodate it.
   The weekly project status meeting is this afternoon, and because of your
   conference call schedule this morning you will not be able to complete the
   assessment to report to in the meeting. However, this is only a minor delay
   and you do not want anyone to worry unnecessarily. What is the best
   response?

       A. Use contingency reserves to compensate for the delay and report
          that progress is as planned.
       B. Report the actual status of the project in the meeting, and assure the
          project team that additional updates will be coming soon.
       C. Inform the project team the progress is slightly behind schedule, and
          use the contingency reserves to cover the delay.
       D. Say nothing about the delay at this time, and report that there are no
          major issues.

2. You are involved as project manager in a fairly large-sized project. You are
   in the process of making a procurement decision and plan to go with a
   simple purchase order. However, you are doubtful whether this is the
   correct thing to do and decide to find out more details about the process to
   be followed. Based on your findings, which of the following would be
   correct?

       A. A simple purchase order is not appropriate for project. The project
          manager should always use the Request for Proposal (RFP) route.
       B. Organizational process assets are guidelines available to the project.
          As project manager you have the final decision making authority
          and can decide whether to go in for a simple purchase order or not.
       C. The value of the project is immaterial. As project manager, you
          have the final decision making authority to go in for a simple
          purchase order as long as you are contracting with an approved
          vendor
       D. You would need to verify the policy constraints that form part of the
          Organizational process assets. Many organizations have policies that
          constrain procurement decisions and require use of a longer form of
          contract for projects above a certain value.

3. Which of the following is an output of the Define Activity process?

       A.   Milestone list
       B.   Project schedule activity diagrams
       C.   Resource calendar
       D.   Activity duration estimates

4. A control chart is used to determine whether or not a process is stable or
   has predictable performance. When a process is within acceptable limits,
    the process need not be adjusted. What are the upper and lower control
    limits usually set as?

       A.   + / - 3 sigma
       B.   + / - 6 sigma
       C.   + / - 2 sigma
       D.   + / - 1 sigma

5. Robert is currently identifying his project stakeholders. Which of the
   following is the key input to this process?

       A.   Project charter
       B.   Cost management plan
       C.   Scope management plan
       D.   Stakeholder register

6. As part of a new project that you have just started on as project manager,
   you are putting together your team and find that one of the critical pieces of
   work requires a specialist from one of the functional departments. However,
   you are aware that the functional manager may not be very happy giving
   the resource to your project since your project is not a very high-profile
   one. Which of the following techniques will you need to apply:

       A.   Acquisition
       B.   Coercion
       C.   Politics
       D.   Negotiation

7. The Cost Management Plan is an output of the Plan Cost Management
   process. This plan is then integrated with other project plans in which of
   these processes?

       A.   Develop Project Management Plan
       B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
       C.   Perform Integrated Change Control
       D.   Direct and Manage Project Work

8. The three categories into which contracts can be broadly classified are:

       A.   Cost-Reimbursable, Time and Material, Cost plus fixed fee
       B.   Fixed Price, Cost-Reimbursable and Lump Sum
       C.   Fixed Price, Cost-Reimbursable, Time and material.
       D.   Fixed Price, Time and Material, Lump Sum

9. The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle as the basis for Quality
   Improvement is generally attributed to:

       A. Deming
       B. Crosby
        C. Juran
        D. Pareto

10. For any complex project, once the project stakeholders are identified, the
    next step is to classify these stakeholders based on their current and desired
    engagement levels. What is the benefit of classifying the project
    stakeholders?

        A.   To help identify the project scope
        B.   To help populate the stakeholder register
        C.   To help define an approach strategy
        D.   It is a mandatory step in stakeholder analysis

11. A ______ is a collection of projects or programs grouped together for
    strategic business needs.

        A.   Portfolio
        B.   Management System
        C.   Enterprise
        D.   Array

12. In a Finish to Start relationship between predecessor and successor
    activities, a project manager decides to schedule a successor activity 5 days
    before its predecessor is complete. This is accomplished by providing 5
    days of:

        A.   Lag
        B.   Load
        C.   Fast-tracking
        D.   Lead

13. While managing a project, you decide to contract to an external enterprise.
    You enter into a contract where you pay the external enterprise a set
    amount (as defined by the contract), irrespective of the seller's costs. What
    would best describe this type of contract?

        A.   FP-EPA
        B.   FFP
        C.   FPIF
        D.   CPFF

14. Which of the following inaccurately describes a prototype?

        A. A prototype is tangible and allows stakeholders to fine-tune their
           expectations.
        B. Requirements from a prototype are usually insufficient to move to
           the design phase.
        C. Prototypes support the concept of progressive elaboration.
       D. A prototype is a working model of the expected product.

15. Susan is the project manager for a dam construction project. All project
    communications are recorded and documented for future reference. It has
    been decided that the project team will maintain last three months of project
    communication records at any given point in time. It has also been decided
    that the older communication records will be archived on a monthly basis.
    Where these records must be archived?

       A.   Change log
       B.   Organizational process assets
       C.   Enterprise environmental factors
       D.   Issue log

16. The Develop Project Management Plan process does not include?

       A.   How changes will be monitored and controlled
       B.   The need for communication among the stakeholders
       C.   The level of implementation of each selected process
       D.   List of changes to the project baselines

17. Which of these is not an information gathering technique used in the
    Identify Risks process?

       A.   Interviewing
       B.   Root cause analysis
       C.   Brainstorming
       D.   Delta technique

18. Which of the following is accurate regarding Project Integration
    Management?

       A. Project deliverables are not part of Integration Management
       B. It involves the integration of process groups and not individual
          processes
       C. The need for it becomes evident in situations where individual
          processes interact
       D. It involves disregarding trade-offs and focuses on clearly
          articulating how accomplish all requirements by the deadline

19. Which of the following is NOT a tool or technique of the Acquire Project
    Team process?

       A.   Negotiation
       B.   Multi-criteria decision analysis
       C.   Pre-assignment
       D.   Conflict management

20. A company you worked for several years ago is bidding on a project your
    new company will be starting in approximately 6 months. You have been
    selected to manage the project, and will be participating in the vendor
    selection processes. What should you do?

       A. Notify the stakeholders of your status and excuse yourself from the
          vendor selection process.
       B. Provide the vendor selection committee with as much detail as you
          can remember about your former company so that the best decision
          can be reached.
       C. Notify the project stakeholders of your status as a former employee
          of the bidding company, and comply with their preferences for how
          you participate in the vendor selection process.
       D. Do nothing.

21. While the five process groups are typically completed in order, they often
    overlap with each other throughout the project. Which two process groups
    do not overlap unless a project is canceled?

       A.   Initiating and Closing
       B.   Initiating and Executing
       C.   Initiating and Monitoring and Control
       D.   Planning and Closing

22. Which of the following is the correct logical sequence of the five process
    groups?

       A.   Planning, Monitoring and Controlling, Initiating, Executing, Closing
       B.   Planning, Initiating, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, Closing
       C.   Initiating, Monitoring and Controlling, Planning, Executing, Closing
       D.   Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, Closing

23. What are the outputs of the Plan Procurement Management process?

       A. Procurement management plan, Procurement statements of Work,
          Qualified sellers lists.
       B. Procurement management plan, Qualified sellers lists, Selected
          sellers
       C. Procurement management plan, Procurement statements of Work,
          Make-or-buy decisions
       D. Procurement management plan, Qualified sellers lists, Resource
          calendars

24. You have met with your project sponsor and have been told that the project
    MUST be completed by the end of the year, no exceptions. This should be
    included in the project scope statement as a:

       A. Project Constraint
       B. Project Boundary
       C. Project Acceptance Criteria
       D. Project Assumption

25. Your company has just announced a 10% cut in all project budgets
    company wide. Which of the following is the best response?

       A. Immediately notify the project stakeholders of the impact on your
          project.
       B. Do nothing, as your contingency reserves will cover the cuts.
       C. Crash the project
       D. Fast track the project.

26. The change requests created as an output of the Monitor and Control
    Project Work process may be attributed to all of the following except:

       A.   Preventive Action
       B.   Defect Repair
       C.   Project status update
       D.   Corrective Action

27. Lee is the project manager of a project and is planning responses to a set of
    risks. As a direct response of implementing this risk response, he
    anticipates certain other risks to arise. These would be termed as:

       A.   Secondary risks
       B.   Primary risks
       C.   Planned risks
       D.   Workaround

28. You have been identified as the project manager for constructing a large
    shopping mall in your city. Which of the following are not necessarily
    stakeholders in your project?

       A. The suppliers of the project
       B. The tenants of the shopping mall
       C. A senior project manager in your organization who just completed a
          similar project.
       D. The chief financial officer of your company who controls the project
          finances.

29. A tool that provides a visual representation of human resource allocation to
    a project, number of working hours and availability on the project is a:

       A.   Resource Histogram
       B.   Staff release plan
       C.   Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS)
       D.   Organization Breakdown Structure (OBS)

30. A project team is currently inspecting the recent project deliverables. The
    team is recording the number and the nature of defects found in these
    deliverables. The defect details list in this case is an example of?

        A.   Quality control checklist
        B.   Work performance data
        C.   Change request
        D.   Work performance information

31. Three strategies that typically deal with negative risks or threats are:

        A.   Enhance, Share and Accept
        B.   Transfer, Exploit and Accept
        C.   Avoid, Transfer and Exploit
        D.   Avoid, Transfer and Mitigate

32. Which of the following is least likely to be a project?

        A.   Regular updates of the company website
        B.   Responding to a contract solicitation
        C.   Running a campaign for a political office
        D.   An endeavor that lasts for ten years.

33. Which of the Project Time Management processes involves identifying and
    documenting dependencies between schedule activities?

        A.   Sequence Activities
        B.   Define Activities
        C.   Develop Schedule
        D.   Control Schedule

34. What does it mean if the Earned Value is equal to Actual Cost?

        A.   Schedule Variance Index is 1
        B.   Project is on budget and on schedule
        C.   There is no cost variance
        D.   There is no schedule variance

35. Your project sponsor has asked you to add 30% contingency to your project
    budget as a hedge against any unforeseen costs that could exceed the
    currently forecasted expenses, but has not provided any additional detail
    about why this is required. What do you do?

        A.   Add 30% to the management reserves.
        B.   Ask the sponsor to elaborate the risks that are behind the request.
        C.   Rebaseline the project budget.
        D.   Add 30% to the total budget.

36. Steve is the project manager of a global project. He finds that of late, there
    has been a deterioration in the quality of communication between various
    team members across the globe. What would you term this?

        A.   Noise
        B.   Encoding
        C.   Medium
        D.   Message

37. You are the project manager managing a project to design a print head for
    dot matrix printers. In order to determine ideal settings for print quality, the
    quality manager of the company suggests trying out various scenarios for
    printing by varying certain parameters on the print head. Identifying such
    variables which influence the product or process under development is
    called:

        A.   Benchmarking
        B.   Design of Experiments
        C.   Statistical Sampling
        D.   Brainstorming

38. You have recently started working at a company as a senior project
    manager. The company has no employee training programs in place for
    junior project managers. Some junior project managers have been asking
    you for assistance in dealing with some work related issues. You feel that
    they could benefit from some guidance. Which courses of action would
    NOT fulfill your responsibility?

        A. Do nothing; it was not in your job description to mentor other
           employees.
        B. Suggest that you and other senior project managers develop a
           mentoring program.
        C. Develop a training program for junior project managers.
        D. Offer to conduct periodic coaching sessions for the employees
           seeking assistance.

39. Which of the following statements best describes Time & Material (T&M)
    contracts?

        A. T&M contracts are hybrid type of contractual agreements that could
           contain aspects of both cost-reimbursable and fixed-price type
           arrangements
        B. T&M contracts are the best form of contracts when the scope of
           work and the number of hours of work for a specific resource
           category is clearly known.
        C. T&M contracts are the same as Fixed Price contracts except that the
           total value is calculated using Fixed rates and the effort data is
           available to the purchaser as well as the seller. Once this is agreed
           upon, it becomes the same as a Fixed Price project.
        D. T&M contracts are very risky since the value of the project is not
           known. It is best to go in for a fixed price (FP) contract.
40. Cause and Effect diagrams are used to illustrate how various factors might
    be linked to potential problems or effects. They are also called:

       A.   Taguchi diagrams
       B.   Pareto diagrams
       C.   Ishikawa diagrams
       D.   Process diagrams

41. When does the Close Project or Phase process need to be performed in case
    of multi-phased projects?

       A. The Close Project or Phase process needs to be done at the end of
          each phase of the project; however, it is left to the project manager's
          discretion on whether he/she wants to perform this process in
          between phases. It necessarily needs to be done at the end of the
          project.
       B. The Close Project or Phase process is done at the end of the project
          in case the work is contracted out to external performing
          organizations.
       C. The Close Project or Phase process needs to performed at the end of
          the project and involves closing out the entire project scope.
       D. The Close Project or Phase process needs to be performed at the end
          of each phase of the project and involves closing out the portion of
          project scope applicable to that phase.

42. A project manager is about to start on a new project. Where would he find
    details about his authority level in the project?

       A.   Organizational Process Assets
       B.   The Project Charter
       C.   The PMBOK
       D.   The Scope statement

43. Which of the following is not true about the WBS?

       A.   The project team must be involved in developing the WBS
       B.   The WBS must represent all product and project work.
       C.   WBS should focus on activities rather than deliverables
       D.   WBS is usually represented in a hierarchical fashion

44. Which of the following is accurate regarding the Estimate Activity
    Resources process?

       A. It produces project resource calendars as the output
       B. It determines dependencies that may require a lead or lag to define
          the relationship
       C. This process is coordinated independent of the Estimate Cost
          process
       D. It involves determining what and how many resources will be used

45. In a project, Activity A has a duration of 4 days and begins on the morning
    of Monday the 4th. The successor Activity, B, has a Finish-to-Start (FS)
    relationship with A. The Finish-to-Start relationship has 2 days of lag, and
    Activity B has a duration of 3 days. If Saturday and Sunday are non
    working days, which of the following statements is true?

       A.   Total elapsed days (completing both activities) is 7 days
       B.   Activity B will be completed by the end of day on Thursday, 14th
       C.   Activity B will be completed by the end of day on Friday, 15th.
       D.   Activity B will be completed by the end of day on Tuesday, 12th

46. Analogous Cost Estimating is which of the following?

       A. Uses statistical relationship between historical data and other
          variables
       B. Generally less accurate
       C. Bottom-up estimating
       D. Generally accurate

47. What is the BEST way to make an accurate forecasting of ETC?

       A.   EAC - AC
       B.   BAC - EV
       C.   Manual forecasting of cost of the remaining work.
       D.   (BAC - EV)/CPI

48. Which of the following is not a valid instance of Risk Transference?

       A.   Use of a Cost Reimbursable contract
       B.   Warranties
       C.   Fixed Price contracts
       D.   Performance bonds

49. Under which of the following scenarios would you not use a Decision tree?

       A. When some future scenarios are unknown.
       B. When you need to look at the implications of not choosing certain
          alternatives.
       C. When the future scenarios are known.
       D. When the outcomes of some of the actions are uncertain.

50. You have been assigned as a project manager of a new project to be
    executed out of New York. However, you determine that the project
    requires a Global Positioning Systems Expert who is not available within
    the company in New York. On doing a little checking, you determine that
    the company has an expert based in London, who is suitable for the project.
    However, the London based employee is not willing to relocate to New
    York for the project. In such a case:

       A. Write to the manager of the London based employee and inform
          him that the employee needs to be convinced to relocate to New
          York due to project requirements.
       B. You would look at the option of moving ahead with the project by
          using a virtual team.
       C. Manage the project without the key resource and flag this as a risk.
       D. Co-location of resources is a key factor for the success of projects.
          As per PMI guidelines, you will not be able to proceed with the
          project since the resources is not available in New York.


Answers

1. B - Report on the actual status of the project, inform the team that the impact
   assessment will be made shortly, and update the team at that time. The project
   manager is required by the code of ethics to provide honest and accurate
   information about the project at all times. Providing inaccurate or misleading
   information, regardless of the reason, is dishonest and unprofessional. [Reference:
   PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 5,6] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. D - Organizational process assets provide the existing formal and informal
   procurement-related policies, procedures, guidelines and management systems
   that are considered in developing the procurement management plan and selecting
   the type of contracts to be used. Organizational policies frequently constrain
   procurement decisions. They may limit use of simple purchase orders and may
   require all purchases above a particular value to use a longer form of contract.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 362] [Project Procurement Management]
3. A - A milestone list is a valid output of the Define Activity process. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 149] [Project Time Management]
4. A - The upper / lower control limits are normally set at + / - 3 sigma. [PMBOK
   5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
5. A - The stakeholder register is the output of the Identify Stakeholders process.
   Both the scope and cost management plans are developed during the planning
   phase of the project. The correct answer is the project charter at it is one of the
   inputs to the Identify Stakeholders process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 393]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. D - The correct response is Negotiation. This is typically done on many projects.
   The project management team may need to negotiate with functional managers to
   ensure that the team receives appropriately competent staff in the required
   timeframe. They may also need to negotiate with other project management
   teams. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 270] [Project Human Resource Management]
7. A - The cost management plan is a component of the project management plan.
   Once the cost management plan is developed, it is integrated to the project
   management plan during the Develop Project Management Plan process.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 198] [Project Cost Management]
8. C - Broadly speaking, contracts can be classified as: 1. Fixed price (Firm Fixed
   Price, Fixed Price Incentive) 2. Cost reimbursable (Cost Plus Fixed Fee, Cost plus
   Incentive Fee, Cost Plus Award Fee) 3. Time and Material (T&M) [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 362, 363, 364] [Project Procurement Management]
9.    A - The PDCA (plan-do-check-act) was defined by Shewhart and later modified
      by Deming. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 229] [Project Quality Management]
10.   C - Stakeholder classification is not mandatory. For simpler projects with few
      stakeholders, stakeholder classification might not be necessary. Stakeholder
      classification is done when the number of stakeholders is high. This helps in
      defining the stakeholder management strategy. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   A - A portfolio is the collection of projects or programs and helps facilitate
      efficient management. [PMBOK 5th Edition, Page 9] [Project Framework]
12.   D - A lead allows an early start of the successor activity. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 158] [Project Time Management]
13.   B - This is an example of a Firm-Fixed Price (FFP) contract. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 363] [Project Procurement Management]
14.   B - Prototypes usually go through multiple feedback cycles after which the
      requirements obtained from the prototype are sufficiently complete to move to a
      design or build phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 116] [Project Scope
      Management]
15.   B - The change log and the issue log contain current project changes and issues
      respectively. They don't archive historic communication records. The historic
      communication records must be updated to the project file in the organizational
      process assets library. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 409] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
16.   D - The list of changes to the project baselines is called a Change Log. The
      change log is not a part of the project management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 78] [Project Integration Management]
17.   D - Delta technique is not a valid example of an Information Gathering
      Technique. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 324, 325] [Project Risk Management]
18.   C - Project Integration Management is needed more where individual processes
      interact. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 63, 64] [Project Integration Management]
19.   D - Conflict management is not a tool and technique of the Acquire Project Team
      process. The rest of the choices are valid tools and techniques of this process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 267] [Project Human Resource Management]
20.   C - Notify the project stakeholders of your potential conflict of interest and follow
      their directives as to how to proceed, whether it is to excuse yourself or to fully
      participate. The code of ethics requires project managers to fully disclose to all
      project stakeholders any conflicts of interest or situations where you may unfairly
      influence a decision. Regardless of the project stakeholders' decision, you are still
      bound to respect the intellectual property of your former employer. [Reference:
      PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   A - Throughout the project, the different process groups often are conducted at
      the same time except for the initiating and closing, which are separated by the
      other three groups. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 51] [Project Framework]
22.   D - These logical sequence of the five process groups is: Initiating, Planning,
      Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing. [PMBOK Page 51] [Project
      Framework]
23.   C - Procurement management plan, Procurement statements of Work, and Make-
      or-buy decisions are three for the seven outputs of the Plan Procurements process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 358] [Project Procurement Management]
24.   A - An imposed deadline or milestone is an example of a constraint. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 124] [Project Scope Management]
25.   A - Immediately notify the project stakeholders of the impact of this cut. It is the
      project manager's responsibility to act in the best interest of the project; simply
      accepting this constraint and determining how to cut costs without stakeholder
      knowledge runs counter to the code of Professional Conduct. [Reference: PMI
      Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   C - Project status updates do not require change requests. The other three choices
      Corrective Action, Preventive Action and Defect Repair are valid reasons for
      change requests in the Monitor and Control Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 93] [Project Integration Management]
27.   A - Secondary risks are those that arise as a direct response of implementing a
      risk response. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 348] [Project Risk Management]
28.   C - Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations that are actively
      involved in the project, or whose interests may be affected as a result of project
      execution or project completion. A senior project manager who worked on a
      similar project may not necessarily be a stakeholder. The other three choices are
      valid since they have an interest in the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 30 -
      33] [Project Stakeholder Management]
29.   A - The correct response is Resource Histogram. This bar chart illustrates the
      number of hours that a project, department or entire project team will be needed
      each week or month over the course of the project. The chart can include a
      horizontal line that represents the maximum number of hours available for a
      particular resource. Bars that extend beyond the maximum available hours
      indicate the need for a resource leveling strategy. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 265]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
30.   B - Project measurements collected by the project team are the work performance
      data. Work performance information is the processed form of the work
      performance data. A detailed inspection report based on the team's findings with
      the recommended corrective and preventive actions would have been an example
      of the work performance information. The defect details list is neither a change
      request not a quality control checklist. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 411] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
31.   D - Four negative risk management strategies are: Avoid, Transfer, Mitigate and
      Accept. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 344, 345] [Project Risk Management]
32.   A - Regular updates of the company website is an operational activity and is
      clearly not a project. 'Responding to a contract solicitation' and 'Running a
      campaign' are clearly projects. The endeavor lasting for ten years cannot be ruled
      out as a project just because of the duration. Projects can last from a few weeks to
      many years. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
33.   A - Sequence Activities is the process of identifying and documenting
      dependencies between schedule activities. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 157, 158]
      [Project Time Management]
34.   C - CV = EV - AC. If the EV is equal to the AC then there is no cost variance on
      the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 218] [Project Cost Management]
35.   B - You should ask the sponsor to explain the risks that are driving this request
      before proceeding. The PMI code of ethics and Professional Conduct mandates
      that the project manager always provide accurate information. It is the project
      manager's job to appropriately document all project changes; intentionally
      omitting the information behind this change is a violation of the code. [Reference:
      PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4,5] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   A - Anything that interferes with the transmission and understanding of a message
      is termed as noise. Distance would be such an example, as in the case of global
      teams. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 293] [Project Communications Management]
37.   B - The correct response is Design of Experiments. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      239] [Project Quality Management]
38.   A - PMI expects Project Management Professionals to share their knowledge with
      other professionals. Doing nothing to assist the employees because it does not
      strictly fall within your job description would not fulfill your responsibility to
      transfer knowledge to others. Even if the project managers job description does
      not include helping to transfer knowledge to others it is your responsibility as a
      project manager to do so. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
39.   A - T&M contracts are hybrid type of contractual agreements that contain aspects
      of both cost-reimbursable and fixed-price type arrangements. They resemble cost-
      reimbursable contracts in that they are open ended, but resemble fixed price type
      contracts where the unit rates can be preset and agreed upon between buyer and
      seller for a specific resource category. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project
      Procurement Management]
40.   C - Cause and Effect diagrams are also called Ishikawa diagrams. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 325] [Project Quality Management]
41.   D - In multi-phase projects, the Close Project or Phase process is done at the end
      of each phase and closes out the portion of project scope and associated activities
      for a particular phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 101] [Project Integration
      Management]
42.   B - The project charter contains details of the assigned project manager and
      authority level. It provides the project manager the authority to apply
      organizational resources to project activities. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 71]
      [Project Integration Management]
43.   C - The WBS puts a greater focus on the deliverables than on actual activities.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 132] [Project Scope Management]
44.   D - The Estimate Activity Resources process determines what and how many
      resources will be used. The resource calendars are inputs to this process and this
      process is closely coordinated with the Estimate Costs process. Activity leads and
      lags are not determined during this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 160]
      [Project Time Management]
45.   B - Activity A has a duration of 4 days and completes by end of the day on
      Thursday, 7th. There is a 2 day lag and since Saturday and Sunday are non-
      working, Activity B can begin only on Tuesday, 12th. Activity B has a duration of
      3 days and completes by end of the day on Thursday, 14th. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 156] [Project Time Management]
46.   B - Analogous cost estimating is generally deemed less accurate than other
      methods of estimation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 204] [Project Cost
      Management]
47.   C - Manual forecasting of costs for remaining work is generally the best means of
      generating an accurate forecast. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost
      Management]
48. A - A Cost reimbursable contract does not transfer risk to the seller, rather, the
    risk is with the buyer. Risk Transference involves shifting the negative impact of
    a risk, along with the ownership of the response, to a third party. Risk
    transference nearly always involves payment of a premium to the party taking on
    the risk. Examples are use of performance bonds, warranties, fixed price
    contracts. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 344] [Project Risk Management]
49. C - You would use a Decision Tree when uncertainty and unknowns exist
    regarding future scenarios and their outcomes; not when future scenarios are
    known. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 339] [Project Risk Management]
50. B - The use of Virtual teams has created possibilities of having teams located in
    different global locations working towards a common goal. The availability of
    email, video conferencing has made such teams possible. Virtual teams do present
    additional challenges, but these can be managed in most cases. The other choices
    are not valid. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 271] [Project Human Resource
    Management]
Time Management Test Questions
1. While planning the schedule for your project, you frequently refer to the
   project calendar. The project calendar is:

       A. A calendar containing the days on which various meetings are
          scheduled within the project team.
       B. A calendar of working days or shifts that establishes those dates on
          which schedule activities are worked.
       C. A calendar containing the list of days on which the project team
          members will be on leave or take an "off".
       D. A calendar that establishes the dates on which project deliverables
          are sent to the customer.

2. As a project manager, you are in the process of preparing the project
   schedule for the project. Which of the following accurately depicts the
   sequence of your activities before you begin preparing the project schedule?

       A. Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Resources, Estimate Activity
          Durations
       B. Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity Durations, Estimate Activity
          Resources
       C. Estimate Activity Durations, Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity
          Resources
       D. Estimate Activity Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, Sequence
          Activities

3. After one year of construction, an office building is scheduled to be
   completed on 30th January. The landscaping work needs to start 15 days
   prior to completion of the building. Which of the following relationships
   most likely represents the relationship of the start of landscaping work to
   the completion of the office building?

       A.   Finish-to-start with a 15 day lead
       B.   Start-to-finish with a 15 day lead
       C.   Finish-to-start with a 15 day lag
       D.   Start-to-finish with a 15 day lag

4. You are the project manager of a project. As part of the planning process,
   you utilize a planning technique to subdivide the project scope and
   deliverables into smaller, more manageable components. What is this
   technique called?

       A.   Unit task analysis
       B.   Decomposition
       C.   Rolling wave planning
       D.   Arrow Diagramming Method

5. The accuracy of Activity Duration estimates can be improved by
    considering the amount of risk in the original estimate. The three types of
    estimates on which three-point estimates are based are:

        A.   Budgetary, ballpark, and Order of Magnitude.
        B.   Best case scenario, expected scenario and current scenario.
        C.   Most likely, likely and unlikely
        D.   Most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic

6. You have decided to apply Resource Leveling to a project due to a critical
   required resource being available only at certain times. Which of the
   following will likely be true?

        A. Resource Leveling can often cause the original critical path to
           change.
        B. Resource Leveling will over allocate resources to schedule the
           project before the deadline.
        C. Resource Leveling will require additional resources to complete the
           project.
        D. Resource Leveling will never alter the original critical path

7. Bar charts, with bars representing activities, show activity start dates as
   well as end dates and expected activity durations. For control and
   management communication, the broader, more comprehensive summary
   activity that is used between milestones is referred to as:

        A.   Activity bridge
        B.   Milestone chart
        C.   Hammock activity
        D.   Gantt chart

8. A technique that iterates the project schedule many times, to calculate a
   distribution of possible project completion dates is called:

        A.   Monte Carlo Analysis
        B.   Monteford analysis
        C.   Pareto Cost chart
        D.   Deming Analysis

9. The critical path method (CPM) calculates the theoretical early start and
   finish dates; and late start and finish dates. The difference between the late
   and early start of a task is called:

        A.   Free float
        B.   Feeding buffer
        C.   Danger zone
        D.   Total float

10. You are managing a project that involves work on a film shoot. The editing
    activity can happen only after the film has been shot. The logical
    relationship between the editing and shooting of the film can best be
    described as:

        A.   Finish-to-Finish (FF)
        B.   Start-to-Start (SS)
        C.   Start-to-Finish (SF)
        D.   Finish-to-Start (FS)


Answers

1. B - A project calendar is a calendar of working days or shifts that establishes
    those dates on which schedule activities are worked. It also establishes non-
    working days that determine dates on which schedule activities are idle, such as
    holidays, week-ends and non-shift hours. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 184] [Project
    Time Management]
2. A - The correct sequence of processes in the Time Management Knowledge Area
    is: Plan Schedule Management, Define Activities, Sequence Activities, Estimate
    Activity Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, Develop Schedule and Control
    Schedule. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 141] [Project Time Management]
3. A - The landscaping work needs to start on completion of the office building, so it
    is a finish-to-start relationship. Since it needs to start 15 days before completion
    of the building, it requires a lead of 15 days. Hence the answer is finish-to-start
    with a 15 day lead. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 156] [Project Time Management]
4. B - Decomposition is the correct response. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 151]
    [Project Time Management]
5. D - The accuracy of Activity Duration estimates can be improved by considering
    the amount of risk in the original estimate. The three types of estimates on which
    three-point estimates are based are: Most likely, Optimistic, and Pessimistic. An
    Activity Duration can be created using a value derived from these three estimated
    durations. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 170] [Project Time Management]
6. A - Resource Leveling can often cause the original critical path to change.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 179] [Project Time Management]
7. C - The correct response is the Hammock activity. The comprehensive summary
    activity that is displayed in bar chart reports for control and management
    communication is called Hammock activity. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 182]
    [Project Time Management]
8. A - Monte Carlo Analysis is a technique that computes, or iterates, the project
    cost, or the project schedule many times using input values selected at random
    from probability distributions of possible costs or durations, to calculate a
    distribution of possible total project costs or completion dates. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 180, 340] [Project Time Management]
9. D - The difference between the early and late finish of a task is called the total
    float for that task. Total float is the amount of time that a schedule activity can be
    delayed from its early start date without delaying the project finish date. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 177] [Project Time Management]
10. D - This is a situation where the Editing activity can happen ONLY after the film
    shooting has been completed. Hence the logical relationship between the two
    tasks is Finish to Start (FS). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 156] [Project Time
Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 5 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations


Exam 5 Test Questions
1. You are managing a project to manufacture widgets for a customer. The
   customer has come to the factory to examine the product, and determines
   that while the product itself meets its requirements, the manner in which
   about half the widgets have been packaged does not meet requirements and
   is insisting they be repackaged. This re-work will require considerable time,
   resources, and cost to complete. The investigation into how and why the
   packaging was problematic, revealed that no process was developed to
   govern how the widget was to be placed in the packaging. The result is that
   the assembly line workers developed their own processes for packaging.
   What do you do?

       A. Notify the project stakeholders immediately and accept
          responsibility for the failure to develop and implement a packaging
          process.
       B. Pursue formal disciplinary action against the assembly line manager
          and the quality manager.
       C. Contact the legal department.
       D. Crash the project.

2. When writing the roles and responsibilities for team members, you should
   document the role, authority, responsibility and competency for each team
   member. Where must this information be documented?

       A.   Human resource management plan
       B.   RACI chart
       C.   Resource calendar
       D.   Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS)

3. A project's financial management reserve is identified in which process:

       A.   Estimate Costs
       B.   Determine Budget
       C.   Control Costs
       D.   Estimate Activity Resources

4. Which of these is not a component of the scope baseline that is contained in
   the project management plan?

       A.   Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
       B.   Requirements documentation
       C.   WBS Dictionary
       D.   Project Scope Statement

5. John has been assigned to design a new car model for a well-known car
   manufacturer. The project has a small number of key stakeholders and John
    is planning to meet all of them in person in order to understand their
    requirements and expectations. Which of the following is not a project key
    stakeholder?

        A.   Project sponsor
        B.   Project manager
        C.   Customer
        D.   Competitor

6. Project stakeholders are individuals and organizations that are actively
   involved in the project or have an interest in it. Which of the following is
   not a stakeholder?

        A.   Customer
        B.   Project Sponsor
        C.   Competitor
        D.   Project Manager

7. You have landed your dream job, as project manager working in an exotic
   sports car factory. Your project involves coming up with a smoother ride
   for the car. You have tasked the engineers to determine which type of
   suspension and what type of tires will provide the best ride and the most
   reasonable cost. This relates to which of the following processes?

        A.   Control Risks
        B.   Perform Quality Assurance
        C.   Control Quality
        D.   Plan Quality Management

8. The Manage Communications process requires which of the following
   inputs to determine which project management information system is
   available to manage project communications?

        A.   Communications Management Plan
        B.   Enterprise Environmental Factors
        C.   Organizational Process Assets
        D.   Work Performance Reports

9. You are about to contract out a project to a service provider. However, at
   the time of awarding the contract, you are not sure of the total effort
   involved. Since the scope of work cannot be accurately estimated, you want
   to agree the per unit rates for difference services. Which of the following
   would best suit your purpose?

        A.   Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF)
        B.   Time & Material (T&M)
        C.   Fixed Price (FP)
        D.   Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF)
10. The Identify Stakeholders process has four inputs. Three of them are project
    charter, enterprise environmental factors and organizational process assets.
    What is the fourth one?

       A.   Procurement documents
       B.   Stakeholder register
       C.   Stakeholder engagement matrix
       D.   Stakeholder management plan

11. As an experienced PMP, you have found that running a WBS meeting is
    tricky because you need to find a balance between decomposition and
    excessive decomposition. When items are excessively decomposed it leads
    all of the following, EXCEPT:

       A.   It breaks the 100% rule.
       B.   Inefficient use of resources
       C.   Non productive management effort
       D.   Decreased efficiency when performing work

12. You are the sponsor of a project that is designed to record phone calls for
    quality control purposes. You are in the process of writing the charter, what
    is NOT an input into this document?

       A.   Organizational standard processes
       B.   Marketplace conditions
       C.   Government or industry standards
       D.   Project Scope Statement

13. John, a project manager, for Code Crashers Inc. has been assigned a project
    where he must lead a group of inexperienced programmers in developing a
    software package that creates Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for a
    chemical company. This is very similar to a project that his colleague,
    Peter, worked on in 2006, with some junior programmers. If John needs to
    come up with a rough order of magnitude estimate, what tool or technique
    should he use?

       A.   Parametric Estimating
       B.   Bottom Up Estimating
       C.   Three-point estimate
       D.   Analogous Estimating

14. You are an expatriate working in a foreign country and have been asked to
    offer a cash payment gift to the procurement manager at a company you are
    bidding on work for. How BEST should you interpret this request?

       A. Agree to provide the cash payment because the procurement
          manager controls whether your bid is accepted.
       B. Inform the procurement manager that offering such a payment
          would violate your professional standards.
       C. Base your interpretation of the request on an understanding of the
          norms of the country you are in.
       D. Express your anger at the request and inform the procurement
          manager that this would never happen in your home country.

15. Jonathan is managing a computer network deployment project at a
    university campus. Jonathan wants to involve the key project stakeholders
    in the scheduling of the major work packages. He sends out a meeting
    invitation to all key stakeholders for this brainstorming session. Which of
    the following types of communication methods has Jonathan selected for
    the brainstorming?

       A.   Push communication
       B.   Interactive communication
       C.   Pull communication
       D.   One-sided communication

16. The Project Managers have maximum authority in which type of
    organization?

       A.   Weak Matrix
       B.   Strong Matrix
       C.   Functional
       D.   Balanced Matrix

17. As the Project Manager on the construction of a new hotel you have
    developed a project management plan that you believe is realistic and will
    be formally approved. The organizational assets that influenced the
    development of the plan may include all of the following except:

       A.   Project management plan templates
       B.   Risk register from a past project
       C.   Change control procedures
       D.   Business case for the project

18. As part of your staffing management plan, you have developed a chart
    indicating the # of hours (Y axis) a senior programmer will be working over
    the months (X axis) of the project. This is an example of what?

       A.   Pareto Chart
       B.   Ishikawa Diagram
       C.   Resource Histogram
       D.   Staff Acquisition Chart

19. Which of the following is a control tool that helps the project management
    team quantify and categorize defects according to sources?

       A. Scatter chart
       B. Pareto diagram
       C. Control chart
       D. Cause and effect diagram

20. While performing an audit on a project run by another project manager, a
    certified PMP, you find that project processes have not been followed, and
    that company procurement policies have been repeatedly violated. What do
    you do?

       A.   Develop a plan to deal with the associated problems.
       B.   Ask the project manager to explain why these things have happened.
       C.   Notify the appropriate management immediately.
       D.   File a complaint with PMI

21. You have successfully passed your PMP exam and are leading a project to
    replace the storage devices in a data center. In the following week, you and
    your team of experts will be meeting with a storage device vendor to
    discuss the status of their deliverables that are due at week's end. What
    management process do these activities reflect?

       A.   Plan Procurement Management
       B.   Control Procurements
       C.   Conduct Procurements
       D.   Close Procurements

22. Alan is the project manager of a project with 6 stakeholders. If the number
    of stakeholders goes up to 8, how many additional channels does he have to
    manage?

       A.   2
       B.   14
       C.   13
       D.   28

23. The project management plan can best be described as:

       A. A list of tasks, activities, durations and resources in a software
          program (e.g., Microsoft Project)
       B. Coordinating changes across the entire project
       C. Integrating and coordinating all project plans to create a consistent,
          coherent document
       D. Integrating and coordinating all project documents and stakeholder
          expectations

24. Which of the following is not an example of a procurement document?

       A. Tender Notice
       B. Risk Register
       C. Request for Proposal (RFP)
        D. Invitation for Negotiation

25. Your company will receive a large bonus payment for completing a
    customer's project by a certain date. However, as the project manager, you
    know the project will complete approximately 2 weeks after that date as it
    is currently scheduled. Your manager is insisting that you to do whatever it
    takes to finish the project by that date, even if it means "cutting corners here
    and there." What do you do?

        A. Make a formal scope change request.
        B. Fast track the project.
        C. Explain to both your manager and the project stakeholders the
           impact that this schedule change could have on the project.
        D. Compress the schedule

26. An organization wishes to ensure that the opportunity arising from a risk
    with positive impact is realized. This organization should:

        A.   Exploit the risk
        B.   Mitigate the risk
        C.   Accept the risk
        D.   Avoid the risk

27. Your Vice President has asked you what the Estimate at Completion is
    going to be for a small project you are working on. You were given a
    budget of $30,000, and to date you have spent $20,000 but only completed
    $10,000 worth of work. You are sure that the future work will be
    accomplished at the planned rate.

        A.   $40,000
        B.   $30,000
        C.   $60,000
        D.   $10,000

28. You have just sat through an exhausting change control meeting discussing
    a change in scope to the project you have been working on for the last 7
    months. After lengthy discussion the change in scope was approved. As the
    Project Manager you should now update all of the following
    documentation, EXCEPT:

        A.   Scope Baseline
        B.   Requirements documentation
        C.   WBS Dictionary
        D.   Project charter

29. You work at a software company that authors Material Safety Data Sheets
    (MSDS) for chemical companies. Prior to releasing the MSDS to the
    company you have created a list of items to be reviewed to see that they
    appear on the document such as: chemical name, CAS#, protection
    required, what to do an emergency, etc. This is an example of what type of
    tool?

        A.   Checklist
        B.   Process Improvement Plan
        C.   Quality Management Plan
        D.   Quality Metrics

30. A project team is required to prepare a monthly project update report for the
    project key stakeholders. This report must contain the current status of the
    deliverables, information related to the recently approved change requests,
    project's health and the forecasted estimates. This report is an example of?

        A.   Milestone
        B.   Expert judgment
        C.   Work performance information
        D.   Work performance data

31. You are the Project Manager for a large petroleum company and are in the
    process of writing the project charter for your sponsor. You have used the
    following as inputs except:

        A.   Business case for the project
        B.   Project statement of work
        C.   Work breakdown structure (WBS)
        D.   Project contract

32. Which of these statements is accurate regarding quality management?

        A. Modern quality management complements project management
        B. Overworking the team to meet requirements is not likely to increase
           attrition and rework
        C. Quality and grade are essentially the same
        D. Project requirements are turned into customer needs, wants, and
           expectations

33. Which of the following processes produces a Risk Register?

        A.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
        B.   Plan Risk Management
        C.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
        D.   Identify Risks

34. The Risk Register contains details of all identified risks and current status.
    It is a document containing the results of:

        A. Plan Risk Responses
        B. Identify Risks
        C. Control Risks
        D. Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk
           Analysis and Plan Risk Responses

35. A co-worker mentions that another project manager regularly takes certain
    project resources to expensive dinners and expenses it to the company.
    However, this project manager does not recognize or reward the
    contributions of any other project resources. What should you do?

        A. Do nothing.
        B. Confront the project manager.
        C. Implement a formal reward and recognition program on your own
           project.
        D. Report this to the appropriate management.

36. You the project manager responsible for building a 100,000 sq. ft. data
    center. One of the schedule activities in your plan is to install the Computer
    Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units, however in order to start the
    installation of the units the raised floor in the data center must be
    completely installed first, so the units have something to be bolted on to.
    This is an example of what type of dependency?

        A.   External
        B.   Optional
        C.   Discretionary
        D.   Mandatory

37. Robert wants to assign a risk owner for every project risk for which a risk
    response action has been planned. Where must he update this information?

        A.   Human resource management plan
        B.   Risk register
        C.   Stakeholder register
        D.   Project charter

38. You are analyzing the risk in a project and decide to do sensitivity analysis
    to determine which risks have the most potential impact on the project. You
    look at a tool to help compare the relative importance of variables that have
    a high degree of uncertainty to those that are more stable. One such tool is:

        A.   Beta Distribution
        B.   S-Curve
        C.   Control Chart
        D.   Tornado Diagram

39. Which of these is accurate regarding the Develop Schedule process?

        A. Schedules are optimized such that all non-critical activities have a
           zero total float.
        B. The critical path method is a schedule network analysis technique
           that is performed using the schedule model
        C. Schedule compression shortens the project schedule while changing
           the project scope
        D. Schedule network analysis is a technique that is carried out once the
           schedule is approved.

40. A new CEO has come into your company and has promptly shut down your
    project because it no longer met the business needs of the company. While
    not pleased with the decision, you document the level and completeness of
    the project to date. What activity or process is this part of?

        A.   Close Project or Phase
        B.   Close Procurements
        C.   Control Scope
        D.   Validate Scope

41. When a project is performed under contract, the contractual provisions will
    generally be considered as _____________ for the project.

        A.   Constraints
        B.   Exclusions
        C.   Deliverables
        D.   Provisions

42. You are the project manager responsible for building a 100,000 sq. ft. data
    center. One of the schedule activities in your plan is to install the Computer
    Room Air Conditioning (CRAC) units, however in order to start the
    installation of the units the raised floor in the data center must be
    completely installed first. This is an example of what type of precedence
    relationship?

        A.   Finish to Finish
        B.   Start to Finish
        C.   Start to Start
        D.   Finish to Start

43. The Manage Project Team process is part of what process group?

        A.   Planning
        B.   Executing
        C.   Monitoring and Controlling
        D.   Closing

44. You have been assigned a project where you are responsible for building a
    condo complex in a resort town. The project is expected to take 2 years to
    complete. During your work breakdown structure meeting you have
    decomposed many deliverables into work packages and schedule activities,
    however there are some work packages that will be occurring a year from
    now, so you have elected not to decompose those deliverables and work
    packages at this time. This is an example of what tool and/or technique?

        A.   Scope Creep
        B.   Poor Planning
        C.   Rolling Wave Planning
        D.   Time Delayed Decomposition

45. A Probability and Impact Matrix contains risks prioritized according to
    their potential implications for meeting the project's objectives. The typical
    approach is:

        A. To use a look-up table or Probability and Impact Matrix with
           specific combinations of Probability and impact that lead to a risk
           being rated as "high", "moderate" or "low" importance. The
           importance for planning responses to the risk are usually set by the
           organization.
        B. To create a Risk Breakdown Structure with the probabilities and
           Impacts listed on the individual boxes. The higher the risk, the
           closer it is towards the Start Node.
        C. To use a look-up table or Probability and Impact Matrix with
           specific combinations of Probability and impact that lead to a risk
           being rated as "high", "moderate" or "low" importance. The
           importance for planning responses to the risk are usually set by the
           project manager.
        D. To create a matrix with the Cost, Time, Scope and Quality on one
           axis and probability of occurrence on the other.

46. You are attempting to estimate the resources required to put the server racks
    together in the new data center you are building. It has occurred to you that
    you may be able to compress the schedule if you look at using power tools
    vs. hand tools to build the racks and use individuals who have worked on
    this brand of rack in the past. This is an example of what type of resource
    estimating tool?

        A.   Top Down Estimating
        B.   Bottom Up Estimating
        C.   Alternative Analysis
        D.   Published Estimating Data

47. A project is contracted as a Time & Material (T&M) type of contract. The
    service provider initially estimates that the total effort involved would be
    about 1000 hours of effort. The project is contracted at a rate of US$ 75 per
    hour of effort. If the project ended up with 1200 hours of effort, what would
    the contract payout be.

        A.   US$ 75,000
        B.   US$ 90,000
        C.   US$ 82,500
        D.   US$ 120,000
48. A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) type of
    contract. The project is negotiated such that if the final costs are less than
    expected costs, the sharing formula for cost savings is 75:25. The targeted
    cost is US$ 100,000 with an 8% incentive fee on the targeted cost. If the
    project comes in at US$ 80,000, what would be the cost of the total
    contract?

        A.   US$ 108,000
        B.   US$ 93,000
        C.   US$ 112,000
        D.   US$ 91,400

49. Organizations strongly influence the project framework. The PMBOK
    Guide recognizes which of the following types of organizations?

        A.   Projectized, Functional
        B.   Strong Matrix, Organic
        C.   Weak Matrix, Pre-existing
        D.   Functional, Transactional

50. During a work breakdown structure meeting you have decomposed the
    deliverables into work packages and created your WBS dictionary.
    However, you now want to decompose the work packages to assist you in
    estimating, executing and control the project. These decomposed work
    packages are called?

        A.   Work Packages can't be decomposed into smaller units
        B.   Activities
        C.   Milestones
        D.   Control Accounts


Answers

1. A - Notify the project stakeholders of the situation immediately and accept all
   responsibility for the problem. Once the stakeholders have been notified, a path
   forward can be established. The code of Professional Conduct requires that
   project managers accept responsibility for their mistakes; ensuring that all
   customer requirements are met is ultimately the responsibility of the project
   manager. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4,5]
   [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - Information regarding team roles, responsibilities, authorities and
   competencies are documented in the Human Resource Management Plan.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 264] [Project Human Resource Management]
3. B - The Management Contingency Reserve is identified in the Determine Budget
   process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 213] [Project Cost Management]
4. B - Project requirements documentation is used as an input to define the project's
   scope baseline. However, the requirements documentation is not a part of the
   scope baseline. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 131, 132] [Project Scope
      Management]
5.    D - Project stakeholders are people or organizations who are affected by the
      outcome of the project. Key stakeholders are the project stakeholders that are
      actively involved in the project and are in a decision-making role. Although it can
      be debated that a competitor is a project stakeholder, a competitor is never
      considered a key stakeholder. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
6.    C - The competitors are affected by the project but are not actively involved in the
      project. Competitors are not project stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 30]
      [Project Framework]
7.    D - Design of Experiments is a statistical method that helps identify which factors
      may influence specific variables of a product or process under development or in
      production. It is a tool in the quality planning process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      239] [Project Quality Management]
8.    B - The Project Management Information System is an enterprise environmental
      factor. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 299] [Project Communications Management]
9.    B - This type of a project situation calls for a Time & Material type of contract.
      The contract will be open ended since the effort is not completely known.
      However, the unit rates will be negotiated and agreed upon for a particular
      resource category. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement
      Management]
10.   A - The Identify Stakeholders process has four inputs: project charter,
      procurement documents, enterprise environmental factors and organizational
      process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 393] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
11.   A - Excessive decomposition can lead to: inefficient use of resources, decreased
      efficiency and non productive management efforts. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      131] [Project Scope Management]
12.   D - The project charter is an input to the project scope statement. All the other
      choices are inputs into the project charter. All the other choices are enterprise
      environmental factors or organizational process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      70] [Project Integration Management]
13.   D - Analogous estimating is the correct choice. This technique relies on
      parameters from a similar previous project and is a gross value estimating
      approach. It is also generally less accurate. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 204]
      [Project Cost Management]
14.   C - It is important to understand the local customs and standards in the area where
      your project is taking place. This knowledge will ensure your decisions are
      considered ethical. Project Managers have a responsibility to not accept or offer
      inappropriate payments. In some cultures it would be considered inappropriate to
      offer a cash payment to a company accepting bids, however, in the scenario
      presented it may be a lawful and accepted practice of the foreign country you are
      working in. In such a scenario, offering cash payment would not be an
      inappropriate payment. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 2, 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
15.   B - Meetings are examples of interactive communication. They are neither push
      nor pull. Further if any meeting is one-sided communication, it is more of a
      lecture than a meeting. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 295, 407] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
16. B - A Strong Matrix organization provides Project Managers with the most
    authority. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 22] [Project Framework]
17. D - The business case for the project is used to develop the project charter and
    may not play a role in the development of the project management plan. The rest
    of the choices are some of the organizational process assets that are used during
    the Develop Project Management Plan process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 75]
    [Project Integration Management]
18. C - A chart representing hours and the time the position, department, company
    will be working on the project is an example of a resource histogram. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 265, 266] [Project Human Resource Management]
19. B - A Pareto Diagram helps the management team quantify and categorize
    defects. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 237] [Project Quality Management]
20. C - The other project manager has failed to follow proper policies and processes.
    You must report the findings to the appropriate management immediately. Project
    managers are required by the code of ethics to report errors and omissions to the
    appropriate management, whether they have been made by themselves or by
    someone else. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2]
    [Prof. Responsibility]
21. B - The Control Procurements is the process of monitoring the contract
    performance. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 379] [Project Procurement
    Management]
22. C - The formula to calculate the number of channels is n*(n-1)/2 where n is the
    number of stakeholders. In the original situation, with 6 stakeholders, the no. of
    channels is 6 * (6 - 1) / 2 = 30 / 2 = 15 In the new situation, with 8 stakeholders,
    the no. of channels is 8 * (8 - 1) / 2 = 56 / 2 = 28. Hence the additional number
    channels to manage is = 28-15 = 13. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project
    Communications Management]
23. C - The Project Management Plan is the combination of all the other management
    plans such as: scope management plan, risk management plan, cost management
    plan, etc. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 76] [Project Integration Management]
24. B - The risk register is not a procurement document. Procurement documents are
    used to seek proposals from prospective sellers. Examples are: Invitation for bid,
    Request for proposal, Request for Quotation, tender notice, Invitation for
    Negotiation and contractor initial response. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 368]
    [Project Procurement Management]
25. C - Explain the potential impacts of this deadline change to your manager and the
    project stakeholders. Once they know how the project could be impacted, the
    team can explore options for going forward with the change. The PMI code of
    ethics and Professional Conduct mandates that the project manager always
    provide accurate information. It is the project manager's job to appropriately
    document all project changes; intentionally omitting the information behind this
    change is a violation of the code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct, Page 4,5] [Prof. Responsibility]
26. A - Four strategies to deal with risks with potentially positive impacts on project
    objectives are to exploit, share, enhance and accept the opportunity. An exploit
    strategy ensures that the opportunity is realized. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 345,
    346] [Project Risk Management]
27. A - If the future work will be accomplished at the planned rate, then then Estimate
    at Completion (EAC) will be AC+BAC-EV. Budget at Completion (BAC) is
      $30,000, Earned Value (EV) is $10,000 and Actual Cost (AC) is $20,000. Hence
      the EAC is $40,000. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 224] [Project Cost Management]
28.   D - It is the project scope statement and not the project charter that should be
      updated. The project charter only contains the high-level requirements and high-
      level project description. All of the other documents listed in the question should
      also be updated. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page. 100] [Project Scope Management]
29.   A - The scenario describes a checklist that someone would use to review the
      document prior to it being released. Creating checklists is a tool in the Plan
      Quality Management process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 242] [Project Quality
      Management]
30.   C - Producing a monthly report by the project team is neither expert judgment nor
      a milestone. The report being discussed is an information pack for the key
      stakeholders detailing the project's health. This report is an example of work
      performance information produced by transforming the work performance data
      collected by the project team. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 413] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
31.   C - The WBS is not an input to the creation of the project charter. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 66] [Project Integration Management]
32.   A - As the correct item states, modern quality management complements project
      management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 227, 228, 229] [Project Quality
      Management]
33.   D - The Risk Register is an output of the Identify Risks process. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 312] [Project Risk Management]
34.   D - The Risk Register contains the results of the Perform Qualitative Risk
      Analysis, Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis, and Plan Risk Responses. It details
      all identified risks, including description, category, cause, probability of
      occurring, impact(s) on objectives, proposed responses, owners, and current
      status. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 333, 341, 347] [Project Risk Management]
35.   D - The rules of the organization must be applied without favoritism or
      discrimination. Rewarding only certain project resources and ignoring others is
      unfair and unprofessional. The code of ethics and professional behavior not only
      prohibit this behavior, but it also requires that project managers report violations
      by other project managers to the appropriate management. [Reference: PMI Code
      of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   D - This is an example of a mandatory dependency, since the units will be bolted
      to the raised floor. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 157] [Project Time Management]
37.   B - The assigned risk owners are documented in the risk register. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 343] [Project Risk Management]
38.   D - A tornado diagram is useful for comparing the relative importance of
      variables that have a high degree of uncertainty to those that are more stable.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 338] [Project Risk Management]
39.   B - The accurate statement regarding the Develop Schedule process is that the
      critical path method is a schedule network analysis technique that is performed
      using the schedule model. The rest of the statements are not accurate. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 173] [Project Time Management]
40.   A - Documenting the completeness of the project to date in case of premature
      termination of a project is an activity under the Close Project or Phase process.
      PMBOK 5th edition, Page 101] [Project Integration Management]
41. A - When a project is performed under contract, the contractual provisions are
    generally considered as constraints for the project as they are the limiting factors.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 124] [Project Scope Management]
42. D - The successor activity, in this case the installation of the CRAC units, can't be
    started until the raised floor in the data center is finished (i.e., the units need to sit
    on the floor), therefore this is an example of a finish to start relationship.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 156] [Project Time Management]
43. B - The Manage Project Team process is part of the Executing process group.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61] [Project Human Resource Management]
44. C - The correct answer is rolling wave planning. Rolling wave planning is a form
    of progressive elaboration and is used when the project management team does
    not have enough information for a phase or deliverable that will occur quite a
    long way into the future. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 131] [Project Scope
    Management]
45. A - A look-up table or Probability and Impact Matrix with specific combinations
    of Probability and impact that lead to a risk being rated as "high", "moderate" or
    "low" importance is used. The importance for planning responses to the risk are
    usually set by the organization. The project manager can tailor this to the specific
    project during the Plan Risk Management process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    318] [Project Risk Management]
46. C - In this scenario you are looking for alternative ways to compress the schedule
    by using experienced resources and power tools instead of hand tools. This is an
    example of alternative analysis. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 164] [Project Time
    Management]
47. B - The correct answer is US$ 90,000. Since this is a T&M contract, the contract
    is open-ended in value. Hence the contract value is the actual effort multiplied by
    the agreed rate = US$ 75 x 1200 = US$ 90,000. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364]
    [Project Procurement Management]
48. B - The correct answer is US$ 93,000. The calculation is as follows: Incentive fee
    based on budgeted costs = 8% of 100,000 = 8,000 Actual costs = 80,000 Share of
    cost savings = 25% of 20,000 = 5,000 (since the cost savings is 100,000 - 80,000)
    Hence the payout = 80,000 + 8,000 + 5,000 = US$ 93,000. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 364] [Project Procurement Management]
49. A - Both projectized and functional organizations are formally recognized terms
    for organizations in the PMBOK guide. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 22, 25]
    [Project Framework]
50. B - Activities represent the effort needed to complete a work package and are an
    output of the Define Activities process. During this process, the work packages
    are further decomposed into project activities. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 152]
    [Project Time Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 6 Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations


Exam 6 Test Questions
1. While having lunch with another project manager, he tells you that he
   underestimated the number of staff resources needed for his project by
   nearly 50%, but says he has plenty of reserves to cover the costs. During the
   next staff meeting, the same project manager says he has nothing new to
   report for his project and that all is progressing according to schedule. What
   do you do?

       A.   Double check your own resource estimates.
       B.   File a complaint with PMI.
       C.   Do nothing.
       D.   Report this to the appropriate management.

2. Accepted deliverables are an input to the Close Project or Phase process.
   These deliverables would have been accepted through which of the
   following processes?

       A.   Validate Scope
       B.   Control Quality
       C.   Control Scope
       D.   Perform Quality Assurance

3. Which of the following is not accurate about the initial phase of a project?

       A.   The highest uncertainty is at this stage of the project
       B.   The cost associated at the beginning of the project is highest
       C.   Stakeholders have maximum influence during this phase
       D.   Staffing levels are the highest at this stage

4. As part of the Define Scope process, a project manager documented the
   specific project assumptions associated with the project scope in the project
   scope statement. While reviewing this document, an experienced project
   manager pointed out that the project manager should also document:

       A.   The date on which the assumption becomes invalid.
       B.   The assigned responsibility for each of the assumptions.
       C.   The potential impact of the assumptions if they proved to be false.
       D.   An Assumption Management Plan.

5. Nancy has recently taken over a website development project. The project
   is already in execution and half of the project work has been completed.
   Nancy finds out that the stakeholder register does not contain any
   information about key stakeholders from the buyer of the product. What is
   the potential root cause of this issue?

       A. Project stakeholders change over time.
        B. The previous project manager was not competent.
        C. This is an unknown risk that has just occurred.
        D. The Identify Stakeholders process was not properly carried out in
           the past.

6. Which process group corresponds to the "do" part of the plan-do-check-act
   cycle?

        A.   Closing
        B.   Monitoring and Controlling
        C.   Planning
        D.   Executing

7. The Control Procurements process ensures that the seller's performance
   meets contractual requirements and that the buyer performs according to the
   terms of the contract. This process is part of which process group?

        A.   Executing
        B.   Closure
        C.   Planning
        D.   Monitoring & Controlling

8. You are currently leading a project and performing the work defined in the
   project management plan. This activity relates to which of the following
   processes?

        A.   Direct and Manage Project Work
        B.   Validate Scope
        C.   Control Scope
        D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

9. One of the configuration management activities in the project involved
   capturing, storing and reporting configuration information needed to
   manage products and product information. This is known as:

        A.   Configuration status accounting
        B.   Configuration auditing
        C.   Configuration verification
        D.   Configuration identification

10. Sharon has recently been asked to manage the deployment of an enterprise
    resource planning system for her organization. Sharon has sent her project
    sponsor a meeting request to discuss her project's stakeholder management
    plan. The sponsor believes that the stakeholder management planning is not
    relevant for such internal projects. The sponsor believes that only the scope,
    schedule and cost management plans are sufficient for such projects. The
    sponsor has asked Sharon to describe the objective of the meeting. Which
    of the following is the best response to this question?
        A. The objective of the meeting is to develop the project stakeholder
           register.
        B. The objective of the meeting is to develop strategies to effectively
           keep the project stakeholder engaged and committed to the project.
        C. The objective of the meeting is to conform to the PMBOK
           standards.
        D. The objective of the meeting is to identify and classify project
           stakeholders.

11. The paint on the exotic cars that are manufactured in your plant is bubbling
    after about a year of application. What would be the BEST tool for your
    team to use to find potential causes of the peeling paint?

        A.   Defect Repair Review
        B.   Ishikawa Diagram
        C.   Control Chart
        D.   Inspection

12. You are meeting with your team, early in the project, and would like to
    address all the strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats the project is
    facing. What tool should be used?

        A.   SWOT Analysis
        B.   Interviewing
        C.   Delphi Technique
        D.   Brainstorming

13. You are assigned to prepare the Procurement Management Plan for a
    project that involves setting up an org-wide supply chain management
    system. You are looking for a guideline on what type of contracts you can
    use and what type of contract forms are to be used for this project. Which
    source will help you obtain this?

        A. Each project is unique so you will need to prepare the necessary
           documentation for this.
        B. Department process repository
        C. Organizational Process Assets
        D. Integrated project Plan

14. You are in charge of constructing the Ferris wheel in each town a carnival
    visits. However, this is something you have never done before and you are
    getting different opinions from others on how long it takes. Joe, is new and
    has given you what you believe to be an optimistic estimate of 3 hours, Bill
    says it will take 10 hours, which seems too long to you and quite
    pessimistic. Lastly, Margie, who is the most experienced at this task is
    telling you it will take 8 hours. You are not sure who to believe, so you
    decide to do a PERT estimation, based on this you have determined it will
    take how many hours to assemble the Ferris wheel.
        A.   7.5 hours
        B.   8 hours
        C.   21 hours
        D.   7 hours

15. Rosemary is the project manager at a pharmaceutical company. She begins
    her day by analyzing her team's work requirements. She then assigns daily
    tasks to her team members over a centralized project management
    information system that then generates automatic task assignment
    notifications for the team members. Which of the following types of
    communication methods has been selected by Rosemary?

        A.   Formal, push communication
        B.   Informal, pull communication
        C.   Formal, pull communication
        D.   Informal, push communication

16. A project manager colleague of yours is currently working under contract
    on a short term project. He has expressed some concerns about finding
    work after the project ends. The project he is working on is currently ahead
    of schedule and he expects they will finish a month sooner than initially
    expected. What advice would be appropriate to provide him?

        A. Slow down work on the project to have it finish on schedule.
        B. Continue the work within the project's scope and possibly finish
           ahead of schedule.
        C. Exaggerate his experience to the sponsor to try to get a project
           manager position for him on other upcoming projects.
        D. Inform the client the project is behind schedule and it will have to
           be extended.

17. You have just returned from the weekly change control board meeting
    where you presented the requested changes to the employee move project.
    You had five change requests approved, however one rejected request.
    These are outputs of what process?

        A.   Control Quality
        B.   Control Scope
        C.   Control Risks
        D.   Perform Integrated Change Control

18. There are two activities on your schedule, which are: 1) Install server in lab
    2) Move server into the data center. However, the second task can't start
    until the server has run in the lab for 5 days without failure. This is an
    example of what?

        A. Fast Track
        B. Lead
        C. Crashing
       D. Lag

19. You just found out that a major subcontractor for your project consistently
    provides deliverables late. The subcontractor approaches you and asks you
    to continue accepting late deliverables in exchange for a decrease in project
    costs. This offer is an example of:

       A.   Forcing
       B.   Smoothing
       C.   Confronting
       D.   Compromise

20. You have just been assigned a project with an unrealistic deadline. What do
    you do?

       A.   Do the best you can to deliver the project on time.
       B.   Ask for more resources
       C.   Insist that the deadlines for the project be changed.
       D.   Ask for a larger budget.

21. During your weekly status reports you are reporting the earned value for the
    project. This information is important for you and the stakeholders to gauge
    the progress of the project. What process group are the cost and schedule
    control part of?

       A.   Closing
       B.   Planning
       C.   Executing
       D.   Monitoring and Controlling

22. You have your project team members record the time they spend on
    different activities during the day such as: programming, electrical, HVAC,
    etc. This is an example of a tool and technique in what process?

       A.   Manage Communications
       B.   Direct and Manage Project Work
       C.   Monitor and Control Project Work
       D.   Manage Project Team

23. You are working with your team and are looking at the cost risks in the
    project. You are your team are currently creating a tornado diagram for the
    project risks. This is done as a part of which of the following processes?

       A.   Qualitative Risk Analysis
       B.   Risk Response Planning
       C.   Quantitative Risk Analysis
       D.   Control Risks

24. Body language plays an important role in effective communications. This
    relates to which of the following communications dimensions?

        A.   Nonverbal
        B.   Informal
        C.   Verbal
        D.   Formal

25. You have taken over the management of a project from another project
    manager, who is a certified PMP. This project has been completed and is in
    the process of closing. You discover that there is no project schedule. What
    do you do?

        A.   Add this issue to the lessons learned database.
        B.   Do nothing.
        C.   Notify the appropriate management immediately.
        D.   Create a schedule.

26. You are in the execution stage of your project and you have been informed
    that "corporate" will be sending in a team of consultants to review whether
    your project activities comply with company's and PMI's policies, standards
    and procedures. This is an example of?

        A.   Quality Audit
        B.   Organizational Process Assets
        C.   Process Analysis
        D.   Recommended Corrective Actions

27. You are in the initiation phase of your project and believe the project can be
    completed for $100,000. However, you are an experienced project manager
    and know that many things can happen between the initiation phase and the
    closure of the project. You have provided an estimate in the project charter
    of $75,000 - $175,000. This is an example of?

        A.   Narrow Estimate
        B.   Absolute Estimate
        C.   Rough Order of Magnitude Estimate
        D.   True Estimate

28. PMBOK recognizes five process groups typical of almost all projects.
    Which of the following is not one of them?

        A.   Executing
        B.   Monitoring and Controlling
        C.   Planning
        D.   Pre-Inception

29. A technique that calculates multiple project durations with different sets of
    activity assumptions and variables is called:
       A.   Process analysis
       B.   Theoretical Analysis
       C.   Simulation
       D.   Effect Analysis

30. A project team is currently assessing the project stakeholder management
    plan for its validity. The project documents are essential inputs to this
    process. Which of the following project documents must be used by the
    project team during this process?

       A.   All project documents prepared during the project so far.
       B.   Project documents prepared during the project planning.
       C.   Project documents prepared during the project execution.
       D.   Project documents prepared during the project initiation.

31. A process that states how formal validation and acceptance of the
    completed project deliverables will be obtained is documented in the:

       A.   Scope Management plan
       B.   Procurement Management plan
       C.   Risk Management Plan
       D.   Communications Management Plan

32. The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of the work
    to be executed by the project team, to accomplish the project objectives.
    This is created as part of:

       A.   Project Integration Management
       B.   Project Scope Management
       C.   Project Procurement Management
       D.   Project Time Management

33. Which of the following Perform Quality Assurance techniques relates to
    root cause analysis and is used to identify a problem, discover the
    underlying causes, and develop preventive actions?

       A.   Sensitivity Analysis
       B.   Expected monetary value analysis
       C.   Earned Value Analysis
       D.   Process Analysis

34. The process of auditing the quality requirements and the results from
    quality control measurements to ensure appropriate quality standards and
    operational definitions are used is the definition of:

       A. Quality assurance
       B. Quality planning
       C. Quality control
        D. Scope validation

35. Several of your resources report to another manager. You need them to
    participate in a series of project meetings over the next two weeks. How
    should you handle this?

        A. Send meeting invitations to the project resources.
        B. Provide a copy of the project charter to the other manager, showing
           that the resources on his team have been assigned to you for your
           project.
        C. Request in advance resource participation from the other manager
           and the resources and communicate information about the timing
           and duration of the project meetings.
        D. Shortly before each meeting, inform the other manager that his staff
           is required for your project meeting.

36. A buyer has just received a final set of deliverables from the seller and finds
    that they do not conform to the specifications that were originally planned
    for. Ideally, where would the buyer expect to find documentation on how to
    handle non-conforming deliverables?

        A.   Communication Plan
        B.   The contract
        C.   Quality Plan
        D.   Scope Statement

37. A change request that is issued to bring the performance of the project back
    in line with the project management plan is related to:

        A.   Corrective action
        B.   Defect repair
        C.   Proactive action
        D.   Preventive action

38. Two of your team members played the Mega Millions lottery and won! As
    much as they like working on your team, they have decided to retire. What
    plan should be updated?

        A.   Retirement Plan
        B.   Resource Availability Document
        C.   Communications Plan
        D.   Staffing Management Plan

39. You are running one week behind on a project due to the late delivery by a
    vendor. You are forced to compress your project schedule due to a
    government mandated end date that constrains your project. After meeting
    with your team, the decision is to work several tasks in parallel that were
    scheduled to be run consecutively. This is an example of?
        A.   Risk Acceptance
        B.   Crashing
        C.   Resource Leveling
        D.   Fast Tracking

40. When developing your project schedule, you have asked everyone to
    provide a list of planned vacations over the next 3 months and you have
    applied this into the tasks that each person is responsible for. This is an
    example of what tool?

        A.   Resource Calendars
        B.   Adjusting Leads
        C.   Schedule Variances
        D.   Adjusting Lags

41. A project has gone out of control and the project manager is trying to bring
    it back under control. There have been a number of changes to the project
    scope and some of the changes resulted in further changes such that the
    project cost spiraled and the project went out of schedule. This is known as:

        A.   Scope creep
        B.   Scope jump
        C.   Project creep
        D.   Scope control

42. You are working on a data center migration project and will be moving a
    mainframe system to another data center. However, you can't have any
    downtime when performing the move. The subject matter experts have
    various ideas regarding how this daunting task can be done, but the group is
    not coming to a consensus. You have decided that you will send out a
    questionnaire to the subject matter experts to get their views and risks on
    the project. You will then summarize the risks and approaches, and
    recirculate it to the subject matter experts. You are hoping to reach
    consensus after several rounds of this. What type of tool is being used?

        A.   Interviewing
        B.   Brainstorming
        C.   SWOT Analysis
        D.   Delphi Technique

43. You are managing a software development project. The project will involve
    working with a remote team. One of the requirements is to set up a secure
    communication link. The lead-time to setup the link is 45 days. Since the
    initial phase of the project involves requirements gathering, you feel that
    the link is required only after 3 months and are planning accordingly. You
    would typically do this planning activity in:

        A. The Conduct Procurements process
        B. The Define Activities process
       C. The Plan Procurement Management process
       D. The Control Procurements process

44. Which of the following statements is incorrect?

       A. Developing project team is the responsibility of the project manager.
       B. A project manager must not acquire resources needed to develop
          effective project teams.
       C. High team performance can be achieved using open and effective
          communications.
       D. Teamwork is a critical success factor for a project.

45. You are an experienced project manager and have managed several data
    center migration projects. You are currently conducting training on the
    databases, spreadsheets and management plans you will be using during the
    lifecycle of the project. This training is a tool and technique in what
    process?

       A.   Manage Project Team
       B.   Acquire Project Team
       C.   Develop Project Team
       D.   Control Quality

46. You are managing an oil drilling project. With oil at $143 per barrel this
    could be a very lucrative project. However, there is a chance that the price
    of oil will drop below $105 per barrel, thus eliminating the profit in the
    project. This is an example of:

       A.   Requirement
       B.   Assumption
       C.   Risk
       D.   Constraint

47. During the weekly change control board meeting, you invited the facilities
    manager to speak about the change request to increase the BTU's to the air
    conditioning system in the new data center. This is an example of what type
    of tool and technique in the Perform Integrated Change Control process?

       A.   Variance Analysis
       B.   Expert Judgment
       C.   Project Management Methodology
       D.   Project Management Information System

48. You are managing a project that has a task to translate several pages of a
    document into Spanish. This is very similar to a project done last year
    where a document was translated into German. You are not sure how long it
    will take to translate into Spanish so you look at the project plan from the
    German translation and use the activity duration for your current project.
    What type of estimating is this an example of?

       A.   Hypothesis
       B.   Parametric Estimating
       C.   Analogous Estimating
       D.   What if Scenario Analysis

49. To control the schedule, a project manager is re-analyzing the project to
    predict project duration. This is done by analyzing the sequence of activities
    with the least amount of flexibility. What technique is being used?

       A.   Leads and lags
       B.   Work Breakdown Structure
       C.   Flowchart
       D.   Critical Path Method

50. A project manager creates a component-specific tool to verify that a set of
    required steps have been performed. This tool is called a:

       A.   Risk Register
       B.   Assumptions log
       C.   Checklist
       D.   Plan-Do-Act-Check

51. A change request has just been formally documented and approved by the
    Change Control Board. The project manager now needs to communicate
    this to a project team member. Which of the following activities must the
    project manager necessarily do?

       A. Telephone the team member and inform him/her about the changes.
       B. Plan for a meeting over lunch and detail the changes.
       C. Issue a formal communication document informing the team
          member about the changes.
       D. Write an informal memo communicating the changes


Answers

1. D - You must report this to the appropriate management. The other project
   manager has failed to follow proper project processes in failing to report this
   estimation error. Project managers are required to report errors and omission
   made by themselves or others, as per the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
   Conduct. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2]
   [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - Accepted Deliverables are those that have been accepted through the Validate
   Scope process.[PMBOK 5th edition, page 101] [Project Integration Management]
3. B - At the initial stage of a project, the cost is typically not at its highest.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 40] [Project Framework]
4. C - It is important to list out the potential impact of assumptions if they prove to
      be false. The assumptions listed out in project scope are typically more numerous
      and detailed than the assumptions listed in the project charter. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 124] [Project Scope Management]
5.    D - Identifying key stakeholders is a very crucial process that is carried out during
      the project initiation. Since the stakeholder register does not have any information
      about the key stakeholders from the buying organization, this clearly implies that
      the Identify Stakeholders process was not properly carried out in the past. Nothing
      can be said about the competence of the previous project manager as there is no
      guarantee that a competent project manager can never do a lousy job. Project
      stakeholders do change over time, but this cannot be accepted as an excuse that
      none of the key stakeholders from the buying organization were listed in the
      stakeholder register. It is not even acceptable that this was an unknown risk that
      has just happened. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
6.    D - The "Executing" process group corresponds with the "do" portion of the
      PDCA cycle. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 231] [Project Quality Management]
7.    D - Control Procurements is part of the Monitoring and Controlling Process
      Group and is necessary for managing the contract and relationship between the
      buyer and seller. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61] [Project Procurement
      Management]
8.    A - Leading a project and performing the work defined in the project management
      plan relates to the Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 79] [Project Integration Management]
9.    A - The correct response is configuration status accounting. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 97] [Project Integration Management]
10.   B - The objective of stakeholder management planning is to develop effective
      stakeholder engagement strategies. Although this cannot be done until the
      stakeholders are identified and classified; the objective is to keep the project
      stakeholders satisfied and engaged to the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 399]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   B - All the choices are tools/techniques in quality control, however the BEST
      choice would be the Ishikawa or Cause and Effect diagram. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 236] [Project Quality Management]
12.   A - A SWOT Analysis chart would be the best choice. SWOT is an acronym for
      strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 326]
      [Project Risk Management]
13.   C - Organizational process assets provide existing formal and informal
      procurement-related policies, procedures, guidelines, and management systems
      that are considered in developing the procurement management plan and selecting
      the contract type to be used. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 362] [Project
      Procurement Management]
14.   A - The PERT formula is Estimate= (Optimistic + (Most Likely *4) +
      Pessimistic)/6. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 171] [Project Time Management]
15.   D - According to the PMBOK guide, emails and memos are informal
      communication. These are created by the author and then pushed on to the
      readers. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287, 407] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   B - It would be appropriate to advise him to continue the work within the project's
      scope as scheduled. Project Managers have a responsibility to act in a truthful and
      complete manner. Continuing the scheduled work with no hidden slow downs
      fulfills the responsibility of the project manager to the profession and their client.
      It is unfortunate that this action will result in your colleague being without a job a
      month earlier than anticipated but their reputation and the reputation of other
      project management professionals will be upheld. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics
      and Professional Conduct, Page 4, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
17.   D - Approved and rejected change requests are outputs of the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94] [Project Integration
      Management]
18.   D - A Lag is a modification of a logical relationship that directs a delay in a
      successor activity. In this case, there is a 5 day delay before the server can be
      moved into the data center. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 158] [Project Time
      Management]
19.   D - In this scenario both parties are giving up something, this is an example of
      compromise. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Procurement Management]
20.   C - It is the project manager's responsibility to push back against any unrealistic
      project deadlines. The PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct requires
      project managers to stand up for the project and adhere to all project processes.
      Failure to do so runs counter to PMI code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   D - The Control Scope and the Control Costs processes belong to the Monitoring
      & Controlling process group. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61] [Project Scope
      Management]
22.   C - The Monitor and Control Project Work process tracks and reviews the
      project's progress. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 86] [Project Integration
      Management]
23.   C - A tornado diagram is a sensitivity analysis tool. This technique is used during
      the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 338]
      [Project Risk Management]
24.   A - The body language relates to the nonverbal dimension of communications.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287] [Project Communications Management]
25.   C - Notify the appropriate management immediately. PMI's code of ethics
      requires project managers to notify all stakeholders if any discrepancy is found in
      the project. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   A - Any activity that is a structured and independent review to examine the
      project is an example of a Quality Audit. A quality audit is a quality assurance
      tool. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 247] [Project Quality Management]
27.   C - A ROM estimate is given in the beginning of a project and is defined as -25%
      to +75% of the estimated cost. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 201] [Project Cost
      Management]
28.   D - Pre-Inception is not a PMBOK process group. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 49]
      [Project Framework]
29.   C - This is known as simulation. Project simulations use computer models and
      estimates of risk, usually expressed as a probability distribution of possible costs
      or durations at a detailed work level, and are typically performed using Monte
      Carlo Analysis. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 180] [Project Time Management]
30.   A - Since the project team is reviewing the project stakeholder management plan
      for potential adjustments, this relates to the Control Stakeholder Engagement
      process. Multiple project documents from all phases of the project are considered
      during this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 411] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
31.   A - The correct response is the Scope Management Plan. This plan provides
      guidance on how project scope will be defined, documented, validated, managed
      and controlled by the project management team. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 109]
      [Project Scope Management]
32.   B - Creating the WBS is an important process in a project and it is done as a part
      of the Project Scope Management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 125] [Project
      Scope Management]
33.   D - Process Analysis is a Perform Quality Assurance technique that relates to root
      cause analysis and is used to identify a problem, discover the underlying causes,
      and develop preventive actions. The rest of the choices are not the tools and
      techniques of the Perform Quality Assurance process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      247] [Project Quality Management]
34.   A - This is the definition of quality assurance. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 242]
      [Project Quality Management]
35.   C - Provide advance notice and information about the time and effort required for
      your project meetings to both the manager and the resources. This encourages
      mutual cooperation between your team and the other manager, by allowing both
      of you to plan resource usage in advance. The PMI Code requires that project
      managers show respect and encourage and attitude of mutual cooperation with
      others. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3 [Prof.
      Responsibility]
36.   B - The requirements for formal deliverable acceptance and how to address non-
      conforming deliverables are usually defined in the contract. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 377, 378] [Project Procurement Management]
37.   A - A change request that is issued to bring the performance of a project back in
      line with the project management plan relates to a required corrective action.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 81] [Project Integration Management]
38.   D - Any time a team member joins or leaves the team, for any reason, the Staffing
      Management Plan should be updated. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 265] [Project
      Human Resource Management]
39.   D - The example provided is the definition of fast tracking. Crashing the schedule
      would be if you decide to double the amount of resources so the task(s) could be
      done in half the amount of time. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181] [Project Time
      Management]
40.   A - Resource calendars indicate when resources can work on the project.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 265] [Project Time Management]
41.   A - Scope creep is the term used to refer to uncontrolled changes in a project's
      scope and can be a project manager's nightmare if not properly managed.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 137] [Project Scope Management]
42.   D - The exercise described is the Delphi Technique. It is a series of questions that
      are circulated to experts to reach consensus. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 324]
      [Project Risk Management]
43.   C - Determining what, when and how to purchase or acquire is done during the
      Plan Procurement Management process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 358] [Project
      Procurement Management]
44. B - Although, project team development is the responsibility of the project
    manager, the project manager may acquire experts needed to develop effective
    project teams. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 274] [Project Human Resource
    Management]
45. C - Any type of training that is conducted, whether it be formal, on the job,
    computer based, etc. is a tool and technique in Develop Project Team. PMBOK
    Pg. 232 [Project Human Resource Management]
46. C - The uncertainty of the oil price is a project risk and this can positively or
    negatively affect the project. The rest of the choices are incorrect. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 310] [Project Risk Management]
47. B - The facilities manager would be considered an expert in the A/C system, thus
    this is an example of Expert Judgment. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 98] [Project
    Integration Management]
48. C - This is an example of analogous estimating because you went back to an old
    schedule of a similar project to get the estimate. Parametric estimating would be
    correct if you used the number of words translated (e.g. 1000 words takes 1hr.).
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 169] [Project Time Management]
49. D - The critical path of a project is the series of activities that have the least
    amount of float (flexibility). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 176] [Project Time
    Management]
50. C - Checklists are structured tools used to verify that a set of required steps has
    been performed. They can be either simple or complex. Many organizations have
    standardized checklists to ensure consistency in frequently performed tasks.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 242] [Project Quality Management]
51. C - The correct response is to issue a formal communication document.
    Telephoning the team member or planning for an informal lunch meeting may be
    additional options in the communication process, but a formal document has to be
    issued indicating the changes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287] [Project
    Communications Management]
Knowledge Area Quiz Project Cost Management Practice Questions--
Answer Key and Explanations

Cost Management Test Questions
1. The Cost Performance Baseline is a time-phased budget and is used as a
   basis to measure, monitor, and control overall cost performance of the
   project. It is usually displayed in the form of:

       A.   An S-curve
       B.   An inverted S curve.
       C.   Pie-chart
       D.   A Z curve

2. Contingency Reserves are estimated costs to be used at the discretion of the
   project manager to deal with:

       A.   Scope creep
       B.   Anticipated but not certain events.
       C.   Unanticipated events
       D.   Anticipated and certain events

3. A project is estimated to cost $ 50,000 with a timeline of 50 days. After 25
   days, the project manager finds that 50% of the project is complete and
   Actual costs are $ 50,000. What is the Cost Performance Index (CPI) ?

       A.   The CPI is 1
       B.   The CPI is 1.5
       C.   The CPI is 2
       D.   The CPI is 0.5

4. Your project is mid-way through a delivery schedule. As the project
   manager, you want to determine how much work is still left. Which is the
   most accurate way to determine the remaining work to be carried out by the
   project team?

       A.   Rolling wave method
       B.   Earned Value Technique
       C.   A Manual forecast
       D.   Future analysis

5. An estimating technique that uses a statistical relationship between
   historical data and other variables (for example, square footage in
   construction, lines of code in software development) is known as:

       A. Parametric Estimating
       B. Analogous Estimating
       C. Bottom-up Estimating
       D. Historical Analysis

6. Lucy is currently preparing a high-level cost estimate for her project in the
   initiation phase. Given the limited detail available to her, what would you
   expect the range of her estimate to be and what would you call such an
   estimate?

       A.   -25 to +25 %, Rough Order of Magnitude
       B.   -5 to +10 %, Narrow
       C.   -1 to +1 %, Definitive
       D.   -25 to +75 %, Rough Order of Magnitude

7. Funding requirements for a project are usually in incremental amounts that
   are not continuous, and these appear as a step function in the graph
   depicting Cash flow, Cost baseline and Funding. Any gap at the end of the
   project, between the funds allocated and the cost baseline represents:

       A.   Management reserves
       B.   Contingency reserves
       C.   Cost variance
       D.   Charting error

8. As a project manager, you periodically do project performance reviews to
   compare cost performance over time, schedule activities or work packages
   over-running and under-running budget, milestones due, and milestones
   met. Which of the following is not a valid analytical technique?

       A.   Trend Analysis
       B.   Earned Value Performance
       C.   Variance Analysis
       D.   Interpersonal skills

9. A variance threshold for costs or other indicators to indicate the agreed
   amount of variation allowed is called:

       A.   Upper specification limit
       B.   Control thresholds
       C.   Upper control limits
       D.   Cost overrun

10. Which of these are not inputs to the Determine Budget process?

       A.   Cost baseline, requirements traceability matrix
       B.   Project schedule, agreements
       C.   Basis of estimates, activity cost estimates
       D.   Project schedule, resource calendars


Answers
1. A - The correct response is 'S' curve. The Cost Performance Baseline is a time-
    phased budget and is used as a basis to measure, monitor, and control overall cost
    performance of the project. It is usually displayed in the form of: an S curve and
    is developed by summing estimated costs by period. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    213] [Project Cost Management]
2. B - Contingency Reserves are estimated costs to be used at the discretion of the
    project manager to deal with anticipated, but not certain events. These are also
    called as "Known unknowns". [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 206] [Project Cost
    Management]
3. D - The correct answer is 0.5. The Cost performance Index (CPI) is given by the
    formula CPI = EV/AC where EV is the Earned Value and AC is the Actual Cost.
    Earned Value = 50% of $ 50,000 = $ 25,000 since 50% of the project is complete.
    Hence CPI = 25,000 / 50,000 = 0.5. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219] [Project Cost
    Management]
4. C - Although the Earned value technique of determining the balance work in the
    project is quick and automatic, it is not as valuable or accurate as the manual
    forecasting of the remaining work by the project team. This however is more
    time-consuming. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost Management]
5. A - This technique is known as Parametric Estimating and can produce higher
    levels of accuracy depending on the sophistication, as well as the underlying
    resource quantity and cost data built into the model. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    205] [Project Cost Management]
6. D - During the initial stages of the project, the level of information available will
    be limited. Hence the Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) estimate is usually
    prepared and has an accuracy range of -25% to +75%. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    201] [Project Cost Management]
7. A - Management reserves are included in the project's total funds but they are not
    included in the project's cost performance baseline. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    214] [Project Cost Management]
8. D - Interpersonal skills is not a valid choice. The other three choices, namely
    Variance Analysis, Trend Analysis and Earned Value Performance, are analytical
    techniques. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 91, 92] [Project Integration Management]
9. B - Control thresholds are variance thresholds for costs or other indicators such as
    person days and indicate the agreed amount of variation allowed. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 148] [Project Time Management]
10. A - The cost baseline and the requirements traceability matrix are not inputs to the
    Determine Budget process. The rest are valid inputs. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    208] [Project Cost Management]
Exam 7 Test Questions
1. Your company has just completed an unexpected round of layoffs. Morale
   is low, and resources are tighter than ever. Your project is now behind
   schedule because of the loss of resources. Overtime work will be required
   of everyone for the next several weeks in order to close the gap. One of the
   critical resources on your project has an upcoming vacation that was
   approved and scheduled months ago. However, without this resource you
   will be unable to get back on schedule. What do you do?

       A.   Notify the project stakeholders of the situation immediately.
       B.   Cancel all vacations.
       C.   Find another resource.
       D.   Compress the schedule further.

2. You are negotiating a contract with a seller. You want to go in for a Fixed
   price type of contract. The seller uses a different terminology for the fixed
   price type of contract. He is most probably referring to it as a:

       A.   Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract
       B.   A Time and material contract
       C.   Lump sum contract
       D.   Cost-Plus-Fee contract

3. A construction project requires that governmental environmental hearings
   be held prior to site preparation. What kind of a dependency is this?

       A.   Optional dependency
       B.   Discretionary dependency
       C.   Soft logic
       D.   External dependency

4. A manager asked to see a list of milestones in the project. This would be
   available as an output from the:

       A.   Sequence Activities phase
       B.   Define Scope phase
       C.   Estimate Activity Durations
       D.   Define Activities phase

5. Which of the following is the correct statement regarding the Identify
   Stakeholders process?

       A.   It is a discrete process.
       B.   It is an optional process.
       C.   It is an iterative process.
       D.   It is a planning process.
6. A project manager of a project that was contracted on a Time and Material
   basis finds that some of the tasks have been taking lesser time than planned.
   On average each team member has required only 30 hours to accomplish
   work which was planned for 40 hours during the week. The project
   manager should:

       A. Report the accurate status to your manager and send a separate
          report stating that each team member was busy for 40 hours
       B. Report this accurately on the status report and ensure that activities
          are re-planned as necessary, to keep the team completely occupied.
       C. Report on the status report that each team member was busy for 40
          hours, and use the time saved for other activities not related to the
          project.
       D. Avoid mentioning these kinds of savings on status reports.

7. There are a number of risks that have been identified in your project. The
   team has elected not to change the project plan to deal with the risk, but
   they have established a contingency reserve of money in the event some of
   these risks are triggered. This is an example of what type of risk mitigation
   technique?

       A.   Contingent Response Strategy
       B.   Active acceptance
       C.   Passive acceptance
       D.   Avoidance

8. Large variations in the periodic expenditure of funds are undesirable for
   organizational operations. Therefore the expenditure of funds is frequently
   reconciled with the disbursement of funds for the project. According to the
   PMBOK, this is known as:

       A.   Disbursement reconciliation
       B.   Expenditure Reconciliation
       C.   Budget Reconciliation
       D.   Funding Limit Reconciliation

9. The Earned Value Management methodology can be used as a means to:

       A.   Forecast future performance based on past performance
       B.   Calculate the number of days left in the project
       C.   Calculate the value provided to the customer
       D.   Calculate the profitability of the project

10. A project team is participating in a brainstorming meeting for a project. The
    project is in the planning phase. The team is trying to determine the current
    and preferred project stakeholder engagement levels and analyzing the gaps
    between these two states. They are also discussing different approaches and
    strategies that can be adopted to close these gaps. This relates to which of
    the following processes?

        A.   Develop project charter
        B.   Control stakeholder engagement
        C.   Identify stakeholders
        D.   Plan stakeholder management

11. A Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) dictionary supports the WBS and is a
    companion document to the WBS. Which of the following is not included
    in the WBS dictionary?

        A.   List of schedule milestones
        B.   Resource assigned
        C.   Agreement Information
        D.   Code of Account Identifier

12. The State of New York has contracted your company to provide a claims
    payment system for Medicaid benefits. In the contract there is a clause that
    indicates that the State of New York can review your work processes and
    deliverables. This is an example of?

        A.   Performance Report
        B.   Record Management System
        C.   Deliverables Checklist
        D.   Inspections and Audits

13. Control Schedule is part of which Project Management process group?

        A.   Monitoring and controlling
        B.   Planning
        C.   Executing
        D.   Initiating

14. Mandatory dependencies are those that are inherent in the nature of the
    work being done. They often involve physical limitations, such as on a
    construction project where it is impossible to erect the superstructure until
    the foundation has been built. According to the PMBOK, this type of
    dependency is also called:

        A.   Soft logic
        B.   Unilateral dependency
        C.   Fixed logic
        D.   Hard logic

15. Jim's project is in execution. The cost management plan and the project
    budget were approved by all key stakeholders during the planning phase of
    the project. Recently, the finance manager of the company has notified Jim
    that his project funding might suffer as another higher priority project has
    been initiated by the company. Jim is surprised as his project was also a
    high priority project for the company. What should Jim immediately do?

       A. Immediately terminate the project in the best interest of the
          organization
       B. Put the project work on hold until the funds become available
       C. Negotiate for funds with the finance manager and the project
          sponsor
       D. Release the project team members

16. The termination clause and alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
    mechanism for each procurement in a project is documented in:

       A.   Scope Statement
       B.   Agreement
       C.   Resource Calendars
       D.   Source Selection Criteria

17. Jack is the project manager of a project that is halfway through the
    execution. Jack is currently looking at the schedule of work. He adjusts a
    few of the schedule milestones and imposes date constraints for some of the
    work packages. This relates to which of the following processes?

       A.   Control Quality
       B.   Develop Schedule
       C.   Control Scope
       D.   Control Schedule

18. As a project manager, you are concerned with both Prevention and
    Inspection of errors in a work product. The difference between Prevention
    and Inspection is:

       A. Inspection is work done by the Quality Control (QC) team whereas
          Prevention is work done by the Quality Assurance (QA) team
       B. Inspection refers to keeping errors out of the process whereas
          prevention refers to keeping errors out of the hands of the customer.
       C. Prevention refers to keeping errors out of the process whereas
          inspection refers to keeping errors out of the hands of the customer.
       D. Inspection and Prevention refer to the same activity depending on
          what stage of the project the activity is done.

19. Which of these statements is true?

       A. The cost of correcting mistakes through an inspection is much lesser
          than the cost of preventing them.
       B. The cost of preventing mistakes is generally much lesser than the
          cost of correcting them as revealed by inspection.
       C. It does not matter where a defect is captured as long as the finished
          work product does not have a defect.
       D. The cost of correcting mistakes through an inspection is more or
             less same as the cost of preventing them since the same effort goes
             into both activities.

20. A storm has damaged the manufacturing facility that is being constructed as
    part of your project. You have just discovered that, although the project risk
    management plan mandated that the facility be insured against damage and
    loss, this policy was never acquired and the losses now have to be covered
    by the project budget. Who is at fault

        A.   The risk manager
        B.   The project manager
        C.   The facilities manager
        D.   The construction crew.

21. You have a schedule activity that can be delayed without delaying the early
    start date of any subsequent activities. This is an example of?

        A.   Free Float
        B.   Lead Float
        C.   Total Float
        D.   Lag Float

22. As the project manager of a project, you have needed to estimate certain
    activity durations before all project team members were acquired. On
    acquisition of the project team, you find that the actual competency levels
    of the acquired team members are much lower than what you had
    anticipated. In such a case, you will:

        A. Make no changes to the schedule.
        B. Ask the project team members to meet the original schedule by
           putting in overtime if required.
        C. Make changes to activity duration and schedule incorporating the
           changed competency levels.
        D. Inform the customer that the project is behind schedule.

23. The Executive VP of Finance has informed you that you will be the Project
    Manager for an energy audit the company is performing in order to save
    expenses. He has tasked you to identify the stakeholders and to start
    documenting the high-level assumptions and constraints. Your project is in
    what stage?

        A.   Initiating
        B.   Planning
        C.   Monitoring & Controlling
        D.   Executing

24. On a control chart, if six consecutive plot points are above the mean, then
    what can be established about the process?
        A.   The process is out of control
        B.   The process will be out of control after plotting the seventh point.
        C.   The process is in control
        D.   Nothing can be established

25. A software vendor on your project is hoping to be awarded a contract
    providing software for another project at your company. You are not the
    manager of the other project. However, the vendor offers you tickets to an
    upcoming professional sports event if you will "put in a good word" for his
    company to vendor selection team of the other project. What do you do?

        A. Fire the vendor.
        B. Decline the tickets, but provide a recommendation for the vendor.
        C. Decline the tickets and notify appropriate management of the
           situation.
        D. Accept the tickets if company policy allows it, and provide a
           recommendation for that vendor to the other project team.

26. A point in time that a project or project phase is authorized to its
    completion is called:

        A.   Project scope
        B.   Control limit
        C.   Project threshold
        D.   Project boundary

27. A project manager is managing a project where there are teams located in
    remote locations in order to obtain cost savings. This is in line with
    organizational guidelines which require that at least 25% of work should be
    done from a remote location. This is an example of:

        A.   A constraint
        B.   A necessity
        C.   A choice
        D.   An assumption

28. The Project Manager controls the interfacing and overlapping areas of the
    organization's procurement processes, and the project schedule with
    processes from this area:

        A.   Project Human Resource Management
        B.   Project Scope Management
        C.   Project Risk Management
        D.   Project Integration Management

29. Throughout various project meetings you have documented differences in
    opinion, situations to be investigated and emerging or unanticipated
    responsibilities. These are all inputs to what document?
        A.   RACI Chart
        B.   Issue Log
        C.   Risk Register
        D.   Project Performance Appraisals

30. Juliana is managing a complex multimillion dollar project. The number of
    the project stakeholders is high and most of the project stakeholders are
    heavily interested in the project. Providing daily project updates to the
    project stakeholders is becoming difficult for Juliana because of the effort
    required to prepare and distribute this information. In this situation, which
    of the following can help Juliana prepare and distribute the project
    information?

        A.   Configuration management system
        B.   Information management system
        C.   Change control system
        D.   Quality management system

31. You are working on an upgrade to a call distribution system for a call
    center, however you are finding it extremely difficult to get the proper
    resources assigned and tasks completed because the Call Center Manager is
    in control of the budget. You have just realized that you work in what type
    of an organization?

        A.   Balanced Matrix
        B.   Functional
        C.   Strong Matrix
        D.   Projectized

32. You have completed a milestone in your software development project and
    you are now verifying that the product meets the specifications outlined in
    the project management plan. What process group is this process in?

        A.   Quality Control
        B.   Monitor and Controlling
        C.   Executing
        D.   Planning

33. Project performance appraisals are different from team performance
    assessment in that project performance appraisals focus on?

        A.   Reducing staff turnover
        B.   A Team building effort
        C.   How each team member is performing on the project
        D.   An evaluation of the project team's effectiveness

34. You are working on a project where a negative risk has occurred. However,
    you have no contingency plan for this risk. You call a meeting and a
    solution is devised to change the workflow until a permanent solution can
    be implemented. This is an example of?

        A.   Work Item
        B.   Workaround
        C.   Work Package
        D.   Reserve plan

35. You have been asked to fill in for another project manager while he is on
    vacation. During the next project status meeting, you ask for a risk report.
    The project team says they have never reported on that before, and are
    unsure if there is a master project risk log. What do you do?

        A. Do nothing.
        B. Develop a list of risks yourself, based on experiences you have had
           managing similar projects.
        C. Ask the team to brainstorm the risks they think may impact the
           project.
        D. Notify the project stakeholders.

36. Which of the following process groups involves people and resources
    coordination, stakeholder management, as well as integrating and
    performing the activities of the project in accordance with the project
    management plan?

        A.   Executing Process Group
        B.   Monitoring & Controlling Process Group
        C.   Initiating Process Group
        D.   Planning Process Group

37. Megawatt is estimating the overall expected cost of a new ERP system
    deployment project using the actual costs of an earlier similar ERP system
    deployment project as the basis for the cost. This is what type of
    estimating?

        A.   Analogous
        B.   Bottom-up
        C.   Expert Judgment
        D.   Parametric

38. Costs incurred in one area of a project can offset costs in another area of the
    same project. However, it is not the best practice to consider only the costs
    of project execution when making project decisions. What must also be
    considered?

        A.   Costs of non-conformance
        B.   Planning costs
        C.   Operating costs
        D.   Initiating costs
39. Your company is way behind schedule in the deployment of a government
    mandated change to a health care processing system that must be in
    production by the end of the year. You and your team have met and decided
    to hire an additional 50 programmers to work with the existing staff on the
    activities in order to meet the due date. This is an example of what?

       A.   Resource Leveling
       B.   Fast Tracking
       C.   Crashing
       D.   Risk Transference

40. The key difference between Validate Scope and Control Quality is:

       A. Validate Scope is concerned with meeting the quality standards
          specified.
       B. Validate Scope is concerned with the acceptance of deliverables.
       C. Validate Scope does not apply in projects that have been cancelled.
       D. Validate Scope can never be performed in parallel with quality
          control.

41. You are managing a fund raising golf tournament that has a hole-in-one
    contest. However, your company can't afford to pay the $1,000,000 award
    if someone does get a hole in one, so they have elected to take out an
    insurance policy in the event that someone does get lucky. This is an
    example of?

       A.   Sharing
       B.   Mitigation
       C.   Transference
       D.   Avoidance

42. The Make-or-Buy analysis is a technique that is used as part of the Plan
    Procurement Management process. It is used to determine whether a
    particular product or service can be produced by the project team or should
    it be purchased. The analysis to arrive at a decision should include:

       A.   Indirect costs only
       B.   Direct as well as Indirect costs
       C.   Direct costs only
       D.   Staffing costs only

43. Fill in the blank: ______________ includes the processes required to ensure
    that the project includes all the work required, and only the work required,
    to complete the project successfully.

       A. Statement of Work
       B. Project Time Management
       C. Project Scope Management
       D. Work breakdown structure

44. Breaking down project activities into smaller components in order to obtain
    a more accurate cost estimate is called:

       A.   Work breakdown structure
       B.   Analogous estimating
       C.   Decomposition
       D.   Bottom-up estimating

45. All of the following are characteristics of a project, EXCEPT:

       A.   Has a definite beginning and end
       B.   Temporary
       C.   Progressively elaborated
       D.   Ongoing Effort

46. Projects are often started as a result of an external factor such as market
    demand for a new product, a new legislative or regulatory mandate, or a
    change in technology. This results in the creation of ______ by an entity or
    organization external to the project.

       A.   the project charter
       B.   the WBS
       C.   the project budget.
       D.   the RACI chart

47. Bottom-up Cost estimating is typically motivated by the size and
    complexity of:

       A. The project management software
       B. The statistical relationship between historical data and other
          variables
       C. The project budget.
       D. The individual schedule activity or work package

48. The Quality Policy is the intended direction of a performing organization
    with regard to quality. As a project manager in a performing organization,
    you find that the organization lacks a formal quality policy. What should be
    done in such a case?

       A. The project management team need not develop a quality policy
          since the performing organization does not have one.
       B. The project management team needs to obtain the quality policy
          from the customer.
       C. A quality policy is a 'nice-to-have' and is not required for every
          project.
       D. The project management team will need to develop a quality policy
             for the project.

49. For your weekly project status review meetings, you set some time aside on
    the agenda to review the risk register and review the project risks. You
    ensure that the response plans are still appropriate and add or delete risks as
    necessary. This is an example of?

        A.   Technical Performance Measurement
        B.   Trend Analysis
        C.   Risk Reassessment
        D.   Risk Audit

50. The cost estimates for a project are in the range of +/- 5 %. What phase is
    the project likely to be in?

        A.   Closing phase
        B.   Preliminary phase
        C.   Initial phase
        D.   Intermediate phase

51. You are setting up your project team and you are looking at a chart that
    shows that the programming will be performed by Systems Development,
    the infrastructure will be implemented by Infrastructure Systems, the
    customer communication will be handled by the Call Center. This is an
    example of what type of chart?

        A.   RACI
        B.   Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS)
        C.   Work Breakdown Structure
        D.   Resource Breakdown Structure (RBS)


Answers

1. A - An unexpected loss of project resources due to company downsizing that
   results in a schedule slip must be communicated to project stakeholders
   immediately. It would be unfair to penalize the resource by cancelling his
   vacation simply because it is the easiest way to get back on schedule. The PMI
   code requires project managers to communicate accurate and timely information
   about the project, as well as treat team members fairly and with respect.
   [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 3] [Prof.
   Responsibility]
2. C - A fixed price contract is synonymous with a lump sum contract. This type of
   contract involves a fixed total price or a lump sum for a well-defined product.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 362] [Project Procurement Management]
3. D - This is called an external dependency. It involves a relationship between
   project and non-project activities (for example: governmental environmental
   hearings). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 158] [Project Time Management]
4. D - The list of milestones is available as an output from the Define Activities
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 149] [Project Time Management]
5.    C - Identify Stakeholders is a very crucial initiating process for any project. It sets
      the foundation for the project and is never considered optional. However, since
      the project stakeholders and their interests change over time, this stakeholder
      register needs to be updated regularly. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
6.    B - You would need to report the status accurately to the customer even if it
      means losing some revenue. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
7.    B - Recognizing the risk and not changing the plan, but making some
      contingencies in the event the risk is triggered is an example of active acceptance.
      Passive acceptance would be if no contingencies were put in place and avoidance
      would be correct if the project plan were modified. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      345] [Project Risk Management]
8.    D - This is known as Funding Limit reconciliation. This will necessitate the
      scheduling of work to be adjusted to smooth or regulate those expenditures.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 212] [Project Cost Management]
9.    A - The Earned Value Management methodology can be used as a means to
      forecast future performance based on past performance. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 217] [Project Cost Management]
10.   D - The Develop Project Charter and the Identify Stakeholders options can easily
      be eliminated as these are initiating processes. Since the project is in the planning
      phase, this team meeting relates to the Plan Stakeholder Management process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 402] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   B - Resource assignments are not part of the WBS dictionary. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 132] [Project Scope Management]
12.   D - When a buyer puts in a contract that they can review work and deliverables it
      is an example of an inspection and audit. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 383] [Project
      Procurement Management]
13.   A - Control Schedule is part of the monitoring and controlling process group.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61] [Project Framework]
14.   D - Mandatory dependencies are also referred to as hard logic. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 157] [Project Time Management]
15.   C - Jim needs to discuss the issue in detail with the project sponsor and the
      finance manager. The first goal is to negotiate the funds as the project is also a
      high priority project for the company. If the negotiations fail, terminating the
      project, putting the project work on hold, or releasing the team members are some
      of the actions that can be taken. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 408] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
16.   B - The termination clause and alternative dispute resolution (ADR) mechanism
      for each procurement in a project is documented in the respective procurement
      agreement. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 378] [Project Procurement Management]
17.   D - The project is halfway through the execution. Since the project manager is
      adjusting the project plans, this needs to be a process from the monitoring and
      controlling process group. Jack is currently performing the Control Schedule
      process as he is adjusting the project schedule. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 185]
      [Project Time Management]
18.   C - Prevention refers to keeping errors out of the process whereas inspection
      refers to keeping errors out of the hands of the customer. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 250] [Project Quality Management]
19.   B - This is one of the basic tenets of project and quality management. The cost of
      preventing mistakes is generally much lesser than the cost of correcting them as
      revealed by inspection. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 229] [Project Quality
      Management]
20.   B - The project manager is at fault. It is the project manager's ultimate
      responsibility to ensure that all project work, policies, and processes are
      conducted properly. PMI requires that the project manager take ownership for his
      or her actions or inactions, and the consequences that arise from them.
      [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
21.   A - The question given is the definition of free float. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      177] [Project Time Management]
22.   C - The appropriate action is to make changes to the project schedule and activity
      durations depending on the actual competency of the team. Asking the project
      team members to put in overtime or informing the customer that the project is late
      are too drastic in nature given the stage of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      185] [Project Time Management]
23.   A - Identifying stakeholders, high-level assumptions and constraints are all part of
      developing the project charter, which is a part of the Initiating Process Group.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61] [Project Integration Management]
24.   D - Nothing can be established. The process is out of control if seven consecutive
      points are either above or below the mean, or any single point is outside of the
      control limits. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
25.   C - Do not accept the tickets that are offered and notify the appropriate
      management of the situation. By offering an incentive to you to help the vendor
      win more business from your company, the vendor has effectively offered a bribe.
      PMI's Code of Ethics prohibits project managers from accepting bribes, and
      further requires project managers notify the appropriate management of any
      unethical conduct. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
      Page 2, 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   D - A point in time that a project or project phase is authorized to its completion
      is called project boundary. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 54] [Project Framework]
27.   A - This is an example of a constraint. Constraints are factors that can limit the
      project management team's options. An organizational mandate requiring that a
      certain part of the team operate from a different location to obtain cost savings is
      a constraint that the project management team needs to incorporate into their
      planning. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 124] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
28.   D - Project Integration Management includes the processes and activities needed
      to identify, define, combine, unify, and coordinate the various processes and
      project management activities within the project management process groups.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 63] [Project Integration Management]
29.   B - These are all inputs to an issue log. The issue log is a written document and
      helps address obstacles that can prevent the team from achieving its goals.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 305] [Project Communications Management]
30.   B - The change control and the quality management systems are not utilized for
      the timely distribution of the project information. The configuration management
      system is used to manage the configuration of the product of the project. A good
      information management system can help Juliana prepare and distribute the
      project information to the stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 412] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
31.   B - The functional manager, in this case, the Call Center Manager, controls the
      budget in Functional and Weak Matrix organizations. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      22] [Project Framework]
32.   B - Verifying a product meets specifications relates to the Validate Scope process,
      which belongs to the monitoring and controlling process group. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 133] [Project Scope Management]
33.   C - Project performance appraisals deal with how each team member is
      performing work, rather than how well the team is working together. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 278, 282] [Project Human Resource Management]
34.   B - A response to a negative unplanned risk is called a workaround. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 567] [Project Risk Management]
35.   D - Report the lack of risk tracking and communication to the project
      stakeholders. Risk reporting is one of the most critical elements to report in any
      project status meeting. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct require
      project managers to follow project processes and policies, as well as provide
      timely and accurate project information. Failure to track and communicate risks is
      a violation of the code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 2, 4, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   A - The Executing process groups involves coordination of people and resources,
      stakeholder management, as well as integrating and performing the activities of
      the project in accordance with the project management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 56] [Project Framework]
37.   A - Analogous cost estimating means using the actual cost of previous, similar
      projects as the basis for estimating the cost of the current project. Analogous cost
      estimating is frequently used to estimate costs when there is a limited amount of
      detailed information about the project (e.g., in the early phases). [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 204] [Project Cost Management]
38.   C - Project Cost Management is primarily concerned with the cost of the
      resources needed to complete schedule activities. However, Project Cost
      Management should also consider the effect of project decisions on the cost of
      using, maintaining, and supporting the product, service or result of the project.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 195] [Project Cost Management]
39.   C - Crashing is a specific type of project schedule compression technique
      performed by taking action to decrease the total project schedule duration.
      Typical approaches for crashing a schedule include reducing activity durations
      and increasing the assignment of resources. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181]
      [Project Time Management]
40.   B - Verify Scope differs from Perform Quality Control in that Verify Scope is
      primarily concerned with the acceptance of the deliverables, while Perform
      Quality Control is primarily concerned with meeting the quality requirements
      specified for the deliverables. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 134] [Project Scope
      Management]
41.   C - The use of insurance to shift the negative impact of a risk, in this case the
      payment of $1,000,000 is an example of risk transference. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 344] [Project Risk Management]
42. B - The analysis should include both indirect as well as direct costs. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 365] [Project Procurement Management]
43. C - Project scope management is primarily concerned with defining and
    controlling what is and is not included in the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    105] [Project Scope Management]
44. D - This is an example of bottom-up estimating. When an activity is complex and
    cannot be accurately estimated, it is broken down into smaller components for
    estimation. These individual component estimates are then summed up to obtain
    the cost estimate of the activity. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 205] [Project Cost
    Management]
45. D - Projects are not repeated on an ongoing basis (e.g. quarterly) these are
    classified as Operations. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
46. A - A project initiator or sponsor external to the project, at a level that is
    appropriate to funding the project, issues the project charter in response to some
    sort of stimulus. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 68] [Project Integration Management]
47. D - Bottom-up estimating involves estimating the cost of individual work
    packages or individual schedule activities with the lowest level of detail.
    Generally activities with smaller associated effort increase the accuracy of the
    schedule activity cost estimates. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 205] [Project Cost
    Management]
48. D - The project management team will need to develop a quality policy for the
    project if the performing organization does not have a formal policy. It is also the
    responsibility of the project management team to ensure that the project
    stakeholders are fully aware of the policy. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 231]
    [Project Quality Management]
49. C - All of the answers listed are tools/techniques of Control Risks process. The
    regular review of your risk register for appropriateness (e.g., responses, identified
    risks, etc.) is an example of risk reassessment. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 351]
    [Project Risk Management]
50. A - The project is likely to be in a closing phase since the range of estimates is
    quite narrow. Early on in the project, there is less cost information available and
    the range of estimates is much higher. As the project progresses, the degree of
    accuracy improves. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 201] [Project Cost Management]
51. B - A hierarchically organized depiction of the project organization arranged so as
    to relate the work packages to performing organizational units is an example of
    Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 261]
    [Project Human Resource Management]
PMP Lite Mock Exam 8 Practice Questions--Answer Key and
Explanations

Exam 8 Test Questions
1. You have overheard two functional managers arguing about the impacts
   that your project will have on their departments. What is your best
   response?

       A. Do nothing.
       B. Analyze and report to each manager the impact your project will
          have on their departments in terms of time and resources required,
          and the relative enterprise priority of your project.
       C. Inform the managers that the project sponsors had already
          considered this impact when they decided to implement the project.
       D. Put in advance requests for resources from each department.

2. A large construction project for a logistics company will require the
   expenditure of a large amount of capital. The finance group works with the
   project manager to project set limits when expenses will be incurred in a
   given project, and determine if there are ways to smooth out or level the
   spending to avoid a single large expenditure one quarter and none the next.
   This is an example of:

       A.   Levelized Billing
       B.   Funding Limit Reconciliation
       C.   A financial review
       D.   Rescheduling

3. Calculation of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted
   portion of the project is called____________.

       A.   Schedule compression
       B.   An arrow diagram
       C.   A backward pass
       D.   A forward pass

4. The following text is an example of ___________________. "WBS
   Element 2.3.1.8. - System Deployment Testing Planning - This element
   includes the effort to identify requirements for and methodology of testing
   systems to be deployed."

       A.   a resource breakdown structure
       B.   a scope baseline
       C.   a bill of materials
       D.   a WBS dictionary entry

5. Susan is currently developing her project's stakeholder register. She wants
    to identify the internal and external parties that are involved in the project.
    Which of the following documents can provide this information to Susan?

       A.   Scope management plan
       B.   Project charter
       C.   Stakeholder management plan
       D.   Project management plan

6. While rating a proposal, one of the requirements was "The proposed project
   manager needs to be a certified Project Management Professional, PMP(R) "
   This is an example of:

       A.   Constraints
       B.   Source Selection Criteria
       C.   Assumptions
       D.   Good practice

7. Which of the following is Deming's formula for continuous improvement?

       A.   Plan-Act-Check-Do
       B.   Plan-Do-Check-Act
       C.   Check-Plan-Do-Act
       D.   Plan-Check-Do-Act

8. A decision tree is a Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis technique that is
   structured around using a Decision Tree Diagram. It describes a situation
   under consideration and the implications of each of the available choices
   and the possible scenarios. A Decision Tree Diagram shows how to make a
   decision between alternative capital strategies known as:

       A.   Alternative nodes
       B.   Questionpoints
       C.   Decision nodes
       D.   Checkpoints

9. As part of the Close Procurements process, the project manager prepared a
   complete set of indexed contract documentation, including the closed
   contract, to include with the final project files. This is called a:

       A.   Procurement file
       B.   Documentation file
       C.   Closure report
       D.   Closure file

10. Michael is managing a multi-million dollar project. The project is in the
    planning phase and has a big number of key stakeholders. During an
    analysis, Michael finds out that there are big gaps between the current and
    desired engagement levels for most of the key stakeholders. What should
    Michael do next?

        A. Immediately escalate the situation to the project sponsor.
        B. Brainstorm on the stakeholder management strategies that can close
           these gaps.
        C. Propose to terminate the project.
        D. Prepare a business case for the project.

11. A project manager determines that there are 15 communication channels in
    the project. The number of stakeholders in the project must then be:

        A.   15 stakeholders
        B.   6 stakeholders
        C.   8 stakeholders
        D.   105 stakeholders

12. A summary milestone schedule would normally be part of which
    document?

        A.   Project sign-off document
        B.   Project charter
        C.   Project requirements document
        D.   Project scope statement

13. Which of the following processes deals with maintaining the integrity of
    baselines by releasing only approved changes for incorporation into the
    project management plan?

        A.   Perform Integrated Change Control
        B.   Direct and Manage Project Work
        C.   Develop Project Management Plan
        D.   Monitor and Control Project Work

14. Defense Dynamics has been awarded a fixed price project to design and
    build a military cargo jet. The design team is looking at ways to increase
    the cargo capacity of the plane while keeping manufacturing costs and the
    fuel efficiency of the final product within specific limits. The engineers on
    this team have identified factors that affect capacity, costs, and fuel
    efficiency and have created a statistical model of how these factors impact
    each other. The outcome of this model is a design with the highest cargo
    capacity and fuel efficiency at the lowest cost possible. What type of
    mathematical model is this called?

        A.   Outcome-based Hypothesis
        B.   Basis Benchmarking
        C.   Cost of Quality
        D.   Design of Experiments

15. Organizational process assets are key inputs to the Manage Stakeholder
    Engagement process. The key elements of the organizational process assets
    utilized during this process are organizational communication requirements,
    issue management procedures and the change control procedures. Which of
    the following is also a key organizational process asset that must be
    considered during this process?

        A.   Process audit procedures
        B.   Human resource policies
        C.   Historical information about previous projects
        D.   Project document templates

16. Sometimes the broader, more comprehensive summary activity is also
    referred to as:

        A.   Critical Activity
        B.   Hammock Activity
        C.   Milestone
        D.   Group Task

17. The formula for Cost Variance is:

        A.   CV=EV-AC
        B.   CV=AC-EV
        C.   CV=BAC-(AC-EV)
        D.   CV=SV-BC

18. Select the best answer: Continuous process improvement reduces
    _____________ and ________, which allows processes to operate at
    increased levels of efficiency and effectiveness.

        A.   Process and policy overhead.
        B.   Departmental and organization processes
        C.   Cost and scope
        D.   Waste and non-value added activities.

19. A detailed milestone list is created as an output of what process?

        A.   Sequence Activities
        B.   Define Activities
        C.   Develop Project Charter
        D.   Develop Schedule

20. You have just learned that your project's sole equipment supplier has gone
    out of business. This is an unanticipated risk, and will cause a delay in the
    project until a new vendor can be selected and contracts put in place. What
    do you do?

        A. Continue working on non critical path tasks.
        B. Put out on RFP for new vendors.
        C. Notify the project stakeholders.
        D. Consult with legal counsel.

21. You are managing the communication requirements for your project. You
    find that certain general management skills come into play as part of
    managing stakeholder requirements and that there are different dimensions
    to communication that you have to plan for as the sender of information.
    Which of the following is not a dimension of communicating?

        A.   Vertical / Horizontal communication
        B.   Forward / backward communication
        C.   Formal / Informal communication
        D.   Internal / external communication

22. Accounting for the limited resources in the project schedule is called:

        A.   Forward pass
        B.   Critical chain method
        C.   Backward Pass
        D.   Critical Path Method

23. You find out that a project team member has been stealing some material
    from the work place. You accidentally discover this and he says that he is
    very sorry about it, and will not repeat it again. You will:

        A. Get a statement in writing from the project team member saying that
           he will not repeat such an activity.
        B. Document the matter for your archives.
        C. Inform your HR department about the matter
        D. Keep quiet until it repeats for a second time

24. As part of the Develop Team process, the project manager of a project has
    planned for some Team Building activities. Team Building Activities
    should take place throughout the project life cycle, but have greater benefit
    when conducted:

        A.   On a need-basis.
        B.   At the end of the project life cycle
        C.   Early in the project life cycle
        D.   In the middle of the project life cycle.

25. During a project status meeting, a new project manager has reported that
    there is a two week delay in acquiring a key resource for a task on the
    critical path in her project. She also states that she has built 3 weeks of float
    into the project schedule. What do you do?

        A. Create a proposal for the other project manager for alternate
           resources.
        B. Notify appropriate management that the new project manager has
          made a scheduling error that could cause an impact to the project
          outcome.
       C. Do nothing.
       D. Volunteer a resource from your team.

26. Collect Requirements, Develop Schedule and Perform Qualitative Risk
    Analysis are all part of what process group?

       A.   Planning
       B.   Scope Planning
       C.   Monitor and Controlling
       D.   Executing

27. You have assembled a group of subject matter experts (SMEs) to perform
    an exercise where they are going to complete a probability and impact
    matrix chart. You and your team are still in what process group?

       A.   Risk
       B.   Monitor and Controlling
       C.   Quantitative Analysis
       D.   Planning

28. Stakeholders can be identified in which management process group(s)?

       A.   Planning
       B.   Planning and Monitoring & Controlling
       C.   Initiating and planning
       D.   All

29. A project is being done for an external customer. Which of the following is
    not an input to the Develop Project Charter process?

       A.   Agreements
       B.   Business Case
       C.   Project Statement of Work
       D.   Stakeholder register

30. A project manager is currently performing the Control Stakeholder
    Engagement process for his project. The stakeholder management plan has
    not been delivering the desired results so far. The project manager is now
    struggling to come up with a new strategy to manage his project
    stakeholders. Which of the following can provide some guidance to the
    project manager in this situation?

       A.   Project management plan
       B.   Communication management plan
       C.   Work performance information
       D.   Expert judgment
31. You have the project management responsibility of a virtual team
    comprising team members from the same company who live in widespread
    geographic areas; employees who work from home-offices and employees
    with mobility handicaps. Virtual teams are formed as a result of which of
    the following processes?

       A.   Acquire Project Team
       B.   Plan Human Resource Management
       C.   Estimate Activity Resources
       D.   Develop Schedule

32. The term ________ indicates the degree to which a particular product or
    service meets requirements, while _____________ indicates a category or
    rank used to distinguish that item from other similar items.

       A.   Quality, grade
       B.   Grade, standard
       C.   Grade, quality
       D.   Quality, standard

33. Visiting a construction site to ensure the work being done is the same work
    called out in the requirements is called:

       A.   Milestone
       B.   Scope validation
       C.   Variance Analysis
       D.   Requirements traceability

34. A Responsibility Assignment Matrix illustrates the connections between the
    work that needs to be done and the project team members. A RACI chart is
    a type of Responsibility Assignment matrix where the names of the roles
    being documented are:

       A.   Responsible, Administration, Check and Inform
       B.   Reportable, Actionable, Check and Inform
       C.   Responsible, Accountable, Consult and Inform
       D.   Reportable, Actionable, Consult and Implement

35. While reviewing project procurement and accounting records for your
    project, you discover that there is a pattern of unauthorized expenses by a
    specific resource. These expenses are not within the scope of the project,
    and have been somewhat camouflaged within a number of large and
    complicated expense reports. What do you do?

       A. If the total expenses are less than 1% of the project budget, do
          nothing.
       B. Fire the resource.
       C. Notify the appropriate management immediately.
        D. Confront the resource.

36. Due to the unexpected release of a similar product from a competitor, the
    Widgets International executive team has stepped up the pressure on the
    product team to release the Widget product 3 months earlier. The project
    manager uses what technique to shorten the schedule but maintain the
    project scope?

        A.   Schedule compression
        B.   Rolling wave planning
        C.   Schedule network analysis
        D.   Schedule management planning

37. Which of the following indicates the required cost performance in order to
    completed the project on budget?

        A.   TCPI
        B.   CPI
        C.   EAC
        D.   SPI

38. A project to design and build a new aircraft is cancelled after the project has
    been underway for some time. What process is invoked to document what
    work was done, and to what extent it was completed?

        A.   Manage Scope
        B.   Close Scope
        C.   Perform Quality Control
        D.   Close Project or Phase

39. The project manager of a large construction project is responsible for
    ensuring that all changes to the building plans are approved and tracked
    before they are implemented. These activities form part of which process?

        A.   Manage Scope
        B.   Perform Configuration Management
        C.   Perform Integrated change control
        D.   Perform Quality Control

40. Vendor selection and management and documentation of lessons learned
    are tasks that fall under this process area:

        A.   Procurement management
        B.   Deliverable management
        C.   Conduct Procurements
        D.   Scope management

41. The Conduct Procurements process receives bids or proposals and applies
    criteria to select one or more sellers who are both qualified and acceptable
    as a seller. Which of the following techniques is not a valid technique for
    this process?

        A.   Make-or-buy analysis
        B.   Proposal Evaluation Techniques
        C.   Advertising
        D.   Bidder Conference

42. You are managing a project which requires an environmental permit to do
    work. The approval is in the final stages of being granted when a
    confidential, reliable report is brought to your notice which indicates that
    there is a high risk of an environmental hazard due to the project. Your
    manager tells you that it is better to keep quiet at this stage since the loss
    due to non-starting/execution of the project is very high. You will:

        A. Send an email to your manager documenting the matter and
           disowning ownership of the project.
        B. Inform the necessary authorities of the hazard, even if it means that
           the project will be cancelled.
        C. Wait for the project to start and see if the information in the report
           was true.
        D. Keep quiet about the matter since you will follow your manager's
           instructions.

43. A Work Breakdown Structure is a hierarchical illustration of all the work to
    be done in a project. A WBS component does not represent:

        A.   products
        B.   results
        C.   services
        D.   project activities

44. Performance reporting is a tool and technique of which of the following
    processes?

        A.   Validate Scope
        B.   Manage Communications
        C.   Control Risks
        D.   Control Scope

45. The business case to justify a project typically contains:

        A.   BAC and ETC of the project.
        B.   Cost Benefit Analysis
        C.   Project WBS
        D.   Variance Analysis

46. Which of the following is not a Risk-Diagramming Technique?
       A.   Influence diagrams
       B.   Control charts
       C.   Cause-and-Effect diagrams
       D.   System flowcharts

47. The Cost of Quality principle includes:

       A.   The costs of ensuring conformance to requirements.
       B.   The costs involved when changes are made to the requirements.
       C.   The cost of deploying a project Configuration Management System
       D.   The costs associated with eliminating requirements.

48. The most recent analysis of Microcorp's new fabrication facility renovation
    shows a CPI value of less than 1.0 What does this indicate?

       A.   The cost has overrun estimates.
       B.   The cost has underrun estimates.
       C.   The project is running ahead of schedule.
       D.   The schedule has slipped.

49. The degree to which the amount or volume of risk than an organization will
    withstand is:

       A.   Risk appetite
       B.   Risk tolerance
       C.   Risk mitigation
       D.   Risk management

50. Probability distributions are frequently used in Perform Quantitative Risk
    Analysis. Which of these is not a valid example of such a distribution?

       A.   Sigma distribution
       B.   Logarithmic distribution
       C.   Triangular distribution
       D.   Beta distribution

51. Project performance measurements are used to assess the magnitude of
    variation from the original scope baseline. Once the degree of scope
    variation is known, what step is performed next?

       A.   Audit the project team
       B.   Upgrade the configuration management database with new controls.
       C.   Replanning
       D.   Root cause analysis of the cause of the variance relative to the scope
            baseline.


Answers
1.    B - Analyze and report to each manager the impact your project will have on
      theirs. This will not only assist the functional managers proactively plan for
      those times their resources will be require by your project, it will also ease
      hostility and lack of cooperation between staff. PMI's Code of Conduct
      mandates that project managers act in good faith and provide timely and
      accurate information to affected stakeholders. [Reference: PMI Code of
      Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 3, 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
2.    B - Large variations in the periodic expenditure of funds are usually
      undesirable for organizational operations. Therefore, the expenditure of
      funds is reconciled with the funding limits set by the customer or performing
      organization on the disbursement of funds for the project. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 212] [Project Cost Management]
3.    C - Calculation of late finish dates and late start dates for the uncompleted
      portion of the project is called a backward pass. [PMBOK Page 529] [Project
      Time Management]
4.    D - The WBS dictionary is a companion document to the WBS. The detailed
      content of the components contained in the WBS, including work packages
      and control accounts, can be described in the WBS dictionary. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 132] [Project Scope Management]
5.    B - Since Susan is currently developing her project's stakeholder register,
      she is carrying out the Identify Stakeholders process. The information she is
      looking for should be provided by one of the inputs of this process. The
      project charter is one of the inputs to this process and can provide
      information regarding the internal and external parties involved in the
      project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6.    B - This is an example of source selection criterion used to rate or score
      proposals. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 368] [Project Procurement
      Management]
7.    B - Deming's model is Plan-Do-Check-Act. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 229]
      [Project Quality Management]
8.    C - The decision points are known as Decision nodes. The decision tree
      incorporates the cost of each available choice, the possibilities of each of the
      available choices and possible scenarios. It shows how to make a decision
      between alternative capital strategies (decision node) when the environment
      is not known with certainty. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 339] [Project Risk
      Management]
9.    A - This detailed set of documentation is called a procurement file. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 389] [Project Procurement Management]
10.   B - Since the project is already in the planning phase, there is no need to
      prepare a business case at this stage unless mandated by the management. It
      is safe to assume that a business case would have already been prepared and
      approved during the project's initiating phase. Proposing termination or
      escalation can be possible actions. However, Michael must first analyze all
      the available options that can help close these gaps. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 402] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   B - The correct answer is 6. The number of channels = n(n-1)/2 where n is
      the number of stakeholders. The answer cannot be 105 since the number of
      stakeholders will be less than the communication channels. The option is
      eliminated since it is the same as the number of stakeholders. Options
      remaining are 6 and 8. Calculating with gives 6 X 5 / 2 = 15 and with 8
      gives X 7 /2 = 28. So the answer is 6. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292]
      [Project Communications Management]
12.   B - The summary milestone schedule is normally included as part of the
      project charter which documents the business need, understanding of
      customer's needs and other high-level items. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 72]
      [Project Integration Management]
13.   A - Maintaining the integrity of baselines is done in the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process. This process is conducted from project inception
      through project completion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94] [Project
      Integration Management]
14.   D - Design of Experiments is a statistical method that helps identify which
      factors may influence specific variables of a product or process under
      development or in production. [PMBOK 5th edition, 239] [Project Quality
      Management]
15.   C - All of the given choices are organizational process assets. However, the
      organizational polices and templates are more relevant during the planning
      phase of the project. For the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process, a
      process from the executing process group, historical information about
      previous projects is considered a critical input from the organizational
      process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 407] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
16.   B - A broader more comprehensive summary activity is sometimes referred
      to as a hammock activity. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 182] [Project Time
      Management]
17.   A - CV equals earned value (EV) minus actual cost (AC). [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 218] [Project Cost Management]
18.   D - Continuous process improvement reduces waste and non-value-added
      activities, which allows processes to operate at increased levels of efficiency
      and effectiveness. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 244] [Project Quality
      Management]
19.   B - A detailed milestone list is created as an output of the Define Activities
      process and includes information on whether the milestone is mandatory or
      optional. Note that the project charter also contains milestone information,
      but at a higher level. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 149] [Project Time
      Management]
20.   C - Notify the project stakeholders immediately that there is a significant
      impact to the project. Once they have been notified, a plan forward can be
      developed. The Code of Ethics requires project managers to provide timely
      and accurate information to stakeholders about events and situations that
      affect the project's scope, cost, schedule, or success. [Reference: PMI Code
      of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   B - General management skills include the art of managing stakeholder
      requirements. The sender is responsible for making the information clear
      and complete so that the receiver can receive it in its entirety and correctly.
      There are different dimensions to communicating, but the response
      "Forward/Backward communication" is an invalid response. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 287] [Project Communications Management]
22.   B - The Critical Chain Method is a schedule network analysis technique that
      modifies the project schedule to account for limited resources. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 178] [Project Time Management]
23.   C - The correct option is to inform your company's HR department. This is a
      disciplinary matter and the project manager needs to let the company
      guidelines handle the situation. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
24.   C - Team Building Activities should take place throughout the project life
      cycle, but have greater benefit when conducted early in the project life cycle.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 276] [Project Human Resource Management]
25.   B - Notify the appropriate management immediately. PMI's code of ethics
      requires project managers report errors and omissions they observe or
      commit. Failure to do so is a violation of the code. [Reference: PMI Code of
      Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   A - All activities listed are planning activities. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      61] [Project Framework]
27.   D - The probability and impact matrix chart prioritizes risks according to
      their potential implication for having an effect on the project's objectives and
      is done in the planning phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 330] [Project Risk
      Management]
28.   D - Stakeholder identification is a continuous process throughout the entire
      project life cycle. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 31] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
29.   D - The stakeholder register is not an input to the Develop Project Charter
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 66] [Project Integration Management]
30.   D - Since the current stakeholder management plan is not delivering the
      desired results, the communication management and the project
      management plans cannot provide any further assistance to the project
      manager. Work performance information relates to the facts about the
      project's health and cannot help much in determining the right stakeholder
      management strategy. The project manager should now seek expert
      judgment to come up with a more effective stakeholder management
      strategy. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 412] [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   A - Virtual teams are formed as a result of the Acquire Project Team
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 271] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
32.   A - Grade is a category or rank used to distinguish items that have the same
      functional use; Quality indicates the degree to which items have meet
      requirements. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 228] [Project Quality
      Management]
33.   B - Inspection is a scope validation technique that includes activities such as
      measuring, examining, and verifying to determine whether work and
      deliverables meet requirements and product acceptance criteria. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 135] [Project Scope Management]
34.   C - In a RACI chart, the names of roles are documented as Responsible,
      Accountable, Consult and Inform. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 262] [Project
      Human Resource Management]
35.   C - Notify the appropriate management of the unauthorized expenses.
      Project managers are required by PMI's Code of Ethics to report any
      unethical or illegal behaviors or activities to the appropriate management.
      Not doing so violates the PMI code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   A - Schedule compression is the technique of shortening the project
      schedule duration without reducing scope. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181]
      [Project Time Management]
37.   A - The To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI) indicates the required cost
      performance in order to completed the project on budget. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 221] [Project Cost Management]
38.   D - If the project is terminated early, the Close Project or Phase process
      should establish and document the level and extent of completion. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 101] [Project Integration Management]
39.   C - Integrated change control includes maintaining the integrity of baselines
      by releasing only approved changes for incorporation into project products
      or services, and maintaining their related configuration and planning
      documentation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94] [Project Integration
      Management]
40.   C - The Conduct Procurements process involves collecting sellers responses,
      seller selection and the contract award. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 371]
      [Project Procurement Management]
41.   A - The Make-or-Buy analysis is not a valid technique in the Conduct
      Procurements process. All the other three choices are valid techniques.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 371] [Project Procurement Management]
42.   B - The best option is to inform the necessary authorities about the report so
      that the right decision can be taken, even if it means the project will be
      cancelled. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page
      2] [Prof. Responsibility]
43.   D - Upper level WBS components are decomposed into more easily
      managed elements, and can be process or product oriented. The lowest level
      of the WBS are the work packages. The project activities are obtained by
      further decomposing the work packages. The activities become a part of the
      project schedule and not the WBS. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 131] [Project
      Scope Management]
44.   B - Performance Reporting is a tool and technique of the Manage
      Communications Process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 301] [Project Risk
      Management]
45.   B - The business case for any project includes the cost benefit analysis.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 69] [Project Integration Management]
46.   B - Control chart is not a valid risk management technique. The rest of the
      choices are risk diagramming techniques. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 325]
      [Project Risk Management]
47.   A - Quality costs are the total costs incurred by investment in preventing
      nonconformance to requirements, appraising the product or service for
      conformance to requirements, and failing to meet requirements (rework).
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 229] [Project Quality Management]
48.   A - A CPI value of less than 1.0 indicates a cost overrun of the estimates. A
      CPI value greater than 1.0 indicates a cost underrun of the estimates.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219] [Project Cost Management]
49.   B - The degree to which the amount or volume of risk than an organization
      will withstand is the organization's risk tolerance. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 311] [Project Risk Management]
50.   A - The response 'Sigma distribution' is not a valid distribution. Continuous
      probability distributions represent the uncertainty in values, such as
      durations of schedule activities and costs of project components. Triangular,
      Beta, Logarithmic, Normal and Uniform distributions are other examples of
      commonly used distributions. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 337] [Project Risk
      Management]
51.   D - Project performance measurements are used to assess the magnitude of
      variation. Important aspects of project scope control include determining the
      cause of variance relative to the scope baseline. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      139] [Project Scope Management]
Exam 9 Test Questions
1. You are a non-technical project manager. Two highly skilled and
   knowledgeable resources on your project are in conflict over the best
   technical solution to meet a project requirement. It is not impacting the
   project schedule, however. Who is initially responsible for the conflict
   resolution?

       A. The project sponsor is initially responsible for the conflict
          resolution.
       B. The project manager is initially responsible for the conflict
          resolution.
       C. Both team members are initially responsible for the conflict
          resolution.
       D. Either of team members is responsible for the conflict resolution.

2. You have been assigned as project manager of a software development
   project. One of the requirements is to use a remote team and you find that
   that the remote team has limited technical communications capabilities.
   This is an example of:

       A.   An assumption
       B.   A hindrance
       C.   A show-stopper
       D.   A constraint

3. A project manager presented Earned value analysis data in a tabular format
   while providing a performance report. An alternative way in which the
   project manager could have presented the Earned value analysis data is by
   using:

       A.   A linear graph
       B.   An S-curve
       C.   A logarithmic curve
       D.   An Epsilon graph

4. Which of the following endeavors is unlikely to be a project?

       A. A research paper on "The next generation of high-speed internet
          connectivity"
       B. Updating of data in an HR database.
       C. A new business function to support production.
       D. A new model of a laser printer.

5. Mary is managing a process improvement project. She is currently
   identifying her project stakeholders and populating the stakeholder register.
   The project sponsor has asked Mary to use the project's procurement
   documents as an input to this process as well. What could be the reason
    behind this request?

       A. This is an internal project and the sponsor wants to ensure that the
          project doesn't involve any procurement activity.
       B. The project sponsor is not a supporter of the project and wants to
          place impediments.
       C. The customer of this project is an external party and this project is
          based on an established contract.
       D. Procurements documents are mandatory inputs of the Identify
          Stakeholder process for any project and the sponsor wants to ensure
          compliance.

6. An issue log or action-item log is a tool that can be used to document and
   monitor the resolution of issues. At a minimum, the issue log should
   contain:

       A.   A target resolution date.
       B.   An owner name.
       C.   An owner name and a target resolution date.
       D.   An owner name, a target resolution date, financial impact on the
            project, impact on schedule.

7. As the project manager of a large project, you have just completed the
   Estimate Costs process. As you begin the Determine Budget process, which
   of the following would you require as inputs?

       A.   Activity cost estimates, Basis of estimates
       B.   Activity cost estimates, Activity resource estimates
       C.   Resource breakdown structure, Agreements
       D.   Activity cost estimates, Staff management plan

8. The Direct and Manage Project Work process has three tools and
   techniques. Two of them are Expert Judgment and Meetings. What is the
   third one?

       A.   Scheduling System
       B.   Configuration Management System
       C.   Project Management Information System
       D.   Change Control System

9. A project manager is trying to plan for a contingency reserve as part of the
   cost estimates for the project. Which of these would be an incorrect way to
   plan for contingency reserves?

       A.   Start the project with a zero value for contingency reserve.
       B.   Plan for contingency reserve as a fixed number.
       C.   Plan for contingency reserve as a percentage of the estimated cost.
       D.   Use quantitative analysis methods to arrive at the contingency
             reserve.

10. Sam has been assigned to build a new office facility for his organization.
    Sam finds out that there are a big number of key stakeholders that are
    neutral to the project. Sam's stakeholder management strategy must focus
    on?

        A. Reducing the number of project stakeholders.
        B. Ensuring these neutral stakeholder remain neutral till the project
           closure.
        C. Ensuring these neutral stakeholders do not convert to resistant
           stakeholders till the project closure.
        D. Converting these neutral stakeholders to supportive stakeholders.

11. A collection of formally documented procedures that define how project
    deliverables and documentation are controlled, changed and approved is
    called:

        A.   An authorization system
        B.   Project documentation
        C.   A change control board
        D.   A change control system

12. A cost, time, quality, technical or resource value is used as a parameter and
    included in product specifications. Crossing this value triggers some action
    such as an exception report. This value would be called:

        A.   A turning-point
        B.   A threshold
        C.   An exception-point
        D.   A trigger

13. The costs on a project are typically classified as direct and indirect costs.
    The cost of electric utilities for the office would be considered as:

        A.   An indirect cost
        B.   Appraisal cost
        C.   A specific cost
        D.   A direct cost

14. Which of the following is not an activity related to the Direct and Manage
    Project Work process?

        A. Inspect the project deliverables for completeness.
        B. Provide, train, and manage the team members assigned to the
           project.
        C. Create project deliverables to meet the planned project work.
        D. Perform activities to accomplish project objectives.
15. Barbara is managing an educational program design project. The project is
    in a very early phase of the project lifecycle. This is a multi-million dollar
    project and active involvement of the project key stakeholders is critical for
    the success of the project. Barbara has formed a board of project
    stakeholders so that all the key stakeholders can be kept engaged. Most of
    the key stakeholders have been conflicting with each other in the recent
    past. Most of the times, the nature of these conflicts have been personal
    rather than professional. However, no conflicts have yet arisen on the
    current project. Which of the following management skills must be applied
    by Barbara during the initial board meetings?

        A.   Change management
        B.   Active listening
        C.   Conflict resolution
        D.   Trust building

16. Which of the following is considered an output from the Direct and Manage
    Project Work process?

        A.   Budgeted costs
        B.   Project charter
        C.   Work performance data
        D.   Execution plan

17. Long hours to meet a looming deadline and immense pressure for success
    from management is causing a downturn in team morale. Occasionally
    there are conflicts between team members over priorities and resources.
    How should these non-disruptive conflicts be handled?

        A.   Use of disciplinary actions
        B.   Private, direct and collaborative approach should be used first
        C.   Escalation to senior management
        D.   Arbitration

18. One of the senior team members, who is the best performer in your project
    plays 'favorites' and a few of the team members who work closely with him,
    have got very good appraisal reports in the past, even though they may not
    have deserved it. As the project manager, what would you need to
    proactively do?

        A. Ask all the members of your team who are appraisers of other team-
           members, to be liberal in their appraisals. This will help compensate
           for the appraisals done by the senior team member.
        B. Speak to the senior team member and ask for appraisals to be done
           fairly, in accordance with the appraisal guidelines.
        C. Ignore the matter since you would otherwise lose a senior team
           member who is key to your project.
        D. Ensure that the senior team member does not get to appraise
           anybody.
19. Which type of risk analysis ranks risks for future action or analysis by
    evaluating their probability of occurrence and impact?

        A.   RBS
        B.   Assumptions analysis
        C.   Qualitative analysis
        D.   Quantitative analysis

20. Your manager is presenting a status report of all projects being run in his
    division. He reports that all projects are showing a positive CV. However,
    you know that your status reports for the last several weeks have been
    reporting a negative CV. What do you do?

        A. Do nothing.
        B. Offer to review all your manager's combined status reports before he
           presents them.
        C. Notify the appropriate management immediately.
        D. Ask your manager if that information was simply a typographical
           error.

21. A project manager from a buyer organization is invited to lunch by the
    manager of a seller organization. The project manager's organization does
    not permit receipt of gifts from vendors. The project manager should:

        A. Go out for lunch and refrain from informing his / her managers
           about the lunch.
        B. Avoid going out to lunch with anyone from the seller organization.
        C. Insist on paying for his / her lunch.
        D. Permit the manager from the seller organization pay for his / her
           lunch since it has a very small value.

22. The accuracy of estimates of the cost of a project will
    ____________________ over the life of a project.

        A.   be mitigated
        B.   remain neutral
        C.   decrease
        D.   increase

23. The development of requirements in the Collect Requirements process
    begins with an analysis of the information contained in the _________ and
    _________.

        A.   Project charter, Stakeholder register
        B.   Scope baseline, Requirements traceability matrix
        C.   Scope baseline, Stakeholder register
        D.   Project charter, Project scope statement

24. What do buyers and seller have in common with regards to Control
    Procurements?

       A. Each party ensures that both it and the other party meet their
          contractual obligations and that their own legal rights are protected.
       B. Both parties have specific resources that can be idle.
       C. Both parties have a contract change management plan.
       D. Each party has its own project plan and legal team

25. Your most recent quality control chart shows that all data points measured
    fall within the control range. However, there is a group of 8 consecutive
    data points sitting above the mean. What do you do?

       A. Do nothing. The control processes are working as designed.
       B. Change the standard deviation by +/- 1.
       C. Tell the stakeholders there is a possible quality control issue and
          you are investigating the cause.
       D. Use project contingency funds to pay for the rework of these items.

26. Melissa is managing a hardware deployment project, and is creating a risk
    management plan. Which of the following would NOT be included in this
    plan?

       A.   Templates
       B.   Roles and responsibilities
       C.   Budgeting
       D.   Methodology

27. You are decomposing your WBS into smaller pieces of work. What is one
    item that does NOT describe how far the work should be decomposed?

       A.   Until it can be realistically estimated
       B.   Can't be subdivided any further
       C.   Until a meaningful conclusion
       D.   Cannot be decomposed more than 10 levels

28. A fellow project manager is retiring and moving to the mountains, you will
    be taking over his project. Before he leaves he tells you the project is on
    schedule, but only because he has had to "put the hammer down" on his
    project team and push them relentlessly. Pushing the team to perform
    activities to accomplish project objectives is a part of:

       A.   Direct and Manage Project Work
       B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
       C.   Control Quality
       D.   Control Scope

29. A technique which enhances brainstorming with a voting process used to
    rank the most useful ideas so that they can be taken up for further
    brainstorming is:

       A.   Six thinking hats
       B.   Nominal group technique
       C.   Affinity diagram
       D.   Mind mapping

30. Ian's project is in execution. During the monitoring and controlling of the
    project, Ian finds out that the current stakeholder management strategy
    needs to be thoroughly reviewed. He invites selected key stakeholders and
    some subject matter experts to brainstorm on new ideas and approaches that
    can be used. Ian is planning to facilitate the session himself. The planed
    session in this scenario is an example of?

       A.   Project status update meeting
       B.   Integrated change control
       C.   Project quality control
       D.   Expert judgment obtained through a focus group

31. Your project team is having a dispute with a vendor about whether a
    specific task is within the scope of the project. The scope statement does
    not provide implementation level details that would resolve this discussion.
    There is not a WBS however, because the project sponsor insisted that the
    project be started right away, without pausing to create standard project
    planning documentation. Who is at fault?

       A.   The project manager
       B.   The project sponsor
       C.   The project stakeholders
       D.   The project vendor.

32. Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Manage
    Stakeholder Engagement process?

       A.   Technical skills
       B.   Management sills
       C.   Communication methods
       D.   Interpersonal skills

33. Factors that influence conflict resolution methods include EXCEPT:

       A.   Position taken by persons involved.
       B.   Relative importance and intensity of the conflict.
       C.   Political influence of the persons involved.
       D.   Time pressure for resolving the conflict.

34. You are the project manager for a Fortune 100 IT company and you are
    currently engaged in an important project. You want to choose the best
    contractor for a specialized task. What should you do to evaluate potential
    contractors?

        A.   Create a lessons learned document
        B.   Conduct a performance review
        C.   Evaluate proposals
        D.   Perform a Make-or-Buy analysis

35. Your have recently finished an advanced project management training
    course that was paid for by your project budget. Because the budget for
    your project is not large enough to train any other resources on the project,
    your manager has asked you to make copies of the course materials and
    distribute them to the rest of the staff. What do you do?

        A. Make the copies.
        B. Provide a single copy of the materials.
        C. Scan the materials and place them on the corporate intranet for easy
           access.
        D. Refuse the request.

36. A project manager is performing Reserve Analysis as a technique in one of
    the project management process that he is currently working on. Which of
    these is likely to be that process?

        A.   Estimate Reserves
        B.   Report Costs
        C.   Estimate Costs
        D.   Plan Costs

37. You are forming a virtual project team that includes members from four
    different countries around the world. What is NOT an obstacle that you
    must overcome to build an effective team?

        A.   Different time zones
        B.   Communication issues
        C.   Cultural differences
        D.   Members wanting to work from home

38. Joe is attempting to calculate the average financial impact of some future
    uncertain scenarios. What method could he use?

        A.   Pareto analysis
        B.   Earned value analysis
        C.   Variance analysis
        D.   Expected monetary value analysis

39. A RAM diagram shows the relationship between ______________ and
    _____________ in a tabular format.

        A. Cause and effect
       B. Risks and mitigation plans
       C. Deliverables and costs
       D. Work packages and project team members

40. You took over a project from an individual who was let go. You are reading
    the project documentation and found the project charter was signed by five
    managers. What should be your primary concern at this time?

       A.   Determining reporting structure
       B.   Communicating in a matrix organization
       C.   Getting a single sponsor
       D.   Identifying who can represent the project for change control

41. As part of Define Activities, you are looking at dependencies used to define
    the sequence among the activities. Which of these is not a valid type of
    dependency?

       A.   Linked dependency
       B.   External dependency
       C.   Discretionary dependency
       D.   Mandatory dependency

42. A company is looking for an experienced Project Manager to manage a
    large construction project. You meet all of the requirements for the position
    except for one. The organization is looking for a certified PMP with five
    years of experience and you have four years of experience managing
    similar projects. What is the BEST way to fill out your application?

       A. Show how you meet the requirements but include your actual years
          of experience
       B. Do not fill out that particular section.
       C. Explain why years of experience should not matter.
       D. Since you have plenty of experience, embellish your actual years of
          experience.

43. Hillbrand Dairies is structured so project managers share responsibility with
    the functional managers for assigning priorities and directing the work of
    persons assigned to the project. This is an example of a
    ____________organization.

       A.   Dotted line
       B.   Hierarchical
       C.   Traditional
       D.   Matrix

44. When are risk identification activities performed?

       A. During the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process
       B. During the Plan Risk Management process
        C. During the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process
        D. Ongoing throughout the project

45. Bill is the project manager of a software project that is originally estimated
    to complete in 12 months. 2 months into the project, it is discovered that the
    original estimating assumptions were fundamentally flawed. The Estimate
    at Completion (EAC) in such a project will be:

        A.   EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC
        B.   EAC = BAC/CPI
        C.   EAC = AC + [BAC - EV]/CPI
        D.   EAC = AC + BAC - EV

46. How would you calculate your EAC if the ETC work will be performed at
    the budgeted rate?

        A.   EAC = BAC/CPI
        B.   EAC= BAC-EV
        C.   EAC = AC + BAC - EV
        D.   EAC=(BAC-EV)*CPI

47. A project consists of multiple phases. Which of the following is a valid
    statement and applies to each phase of the project?

        A. Each phase is generally concluded with a review of the work
           accomplished but is only closed if the next phase has already been
           started.
        B. Each phase of the project is considered complete when the project
           sponsor signs off on that phase of the project.
        C. Each phase of the project is generally concluded with a review of
           the work accomplished and deliverables to determine acceptance
           and whether the phase should be considered closed.
        D. Each phase is generally concluded with a review of the work
           accomplished. A phase is never considered complete until the end of
           the project when the entire project can be deemed complete.

48. Which of the following is not an example of data that may be presented in a
    performance report?

        A.   Earned value
        B.   Quality metrics
        C.   Schedule variance
        D.   Project charter

49. Risks may be identified during the entire lifecycle of a project. Identify
    Risks is what type of process?

        A. Qualitative
        B. Effort driven
       C. Discrete
       D. Iterative

50. The most effective method of resolving conflict or other issues with
    stakeholders is____________.

       A.   Ignore
       B.   Arbitrate
       C.   Collaborate
       D.   Avoid


Answers

1. C - Initially both the team members are responsible for the conflict resolution. If
   the conflict escalates, the project manager should help facilitate a satisfactory
   resolution. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource
   Management]
2. D - This is an example of a constraint. Constraints are factors that limit a project
   management team's options. Examples of constraints include team members
   situated in different geographical locations, incompatible communication
   software versions or limited technical communications capabilities. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 124] [Project Communications Management]
3. B - The correct response is 'S-curve'. Both S-curves and Tabular formats can be
   used to represent Earned value analysis data. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219]
   [Project Cost Management]
4. B - The endeavor "Updating of an HR database" is not likely to have been a
   project. It is part of ongoing operations in the HR department. The other three -
   writing of a research paper, creation of a new business function and development
   of a new laser printer, are likely to have been projects. Projects can create a
   product or artifact, a capability to perform a service or a result such as documents
   from research. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
5. C - Procurement documents are input to the Identify Stakeholders process when a
   project is the result of a procurement activity or is based on an agreement or
   contract between two parties. It seems likely that the customer of the project is an
   external party and the sponsor wants to ensure that none of the key project
   stakeholders gets missed during this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. C - An issue log should at a minimum contain the owner name and a target
   resolution date. An issues should be clarified in a way that it can be resolved.
   Unresolved issues can be a major source of conflict and project delays. Having
   just the owner name or target resolution date leaves the issue log incomplete.
   Providing additional details such as financial impact on the project, impact on
   schedule, number of days the issue is unresolved etc. are 'nice-to-have's beyond
   the minimum requirement of just the owner name and target resolution date.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 305] [Project Communications Management]
7. A - Activity Cost estimates are quantitative assessments of the probable costs
   required to complete project work. The Basis of estimates consists of additional
   details supporting the cost estimate. These include documentation of the basis for
      the estimate, documentation of all assumptions, documentation of any known
      constraints and indication of the range of possible estimates. These form inputs to
      the Develop Budget process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 208] [Project Cost
      Management]
8.    C - The three tools and techniques of the Direct and Manage Project Work
      process are: Expert Judgment, Project management information system, and
      Meetings. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 79] [Project Integration Management]
9.    A - It would be incorrect to start the project with a zero value for contingency
      reserves. One of the three methods listed could be used to arrive at a contingency
      reserve number. As more precise information about the project is available, the
      contingency reserve may be used, reduced or eliminated. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 206] [Project Cost Management]
10.   D - The neutral stakeholders usually don't pose any risk to the project. However,
      as a project progresses, stakeholders' needs and expectations may change. It
      would be great if Sam can ensure that an effective stakeholder management
      strategy is in place that ensures that these neutral stakeholders remain neutral till
      the project closure. However, it will be even better if an effective stakeholder
      management strategy is in place that ensures conversion of these neutral
      stakeholders to supportive stakeholders. That way, the probability of success of
      the project will be higher. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 402] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
11.   D - The correct response is 'change control system'. A collection of formally
      documented procedures that define how project deliverables and documentation
      are controlled, changed and approved is called a change control system. This is a
      subsystem of the configuration management system. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      531] [Project Integration Management]
12.   B - This is called a threshold. It is a cost, time, quality, technical or resource value
      used as a parameter and may be included in product specifications. Crossing the
      threshold generally triggers an action such as generating an exception report
      which can get appropriately escalated. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 565] [Project
      Quality Management]
13.   A - The cost of electric utilities for the office would be considered as an indirect
      cost. Indirect costs are also known as overhead and general and administrative
      costs. They are the costs allocated by the project team as a cost of doing business.
      Ex: Salaries of management indirectly involved in the project, cost of electric
      utilities etc. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 365] [Project Procurement Management]
14.   A - Deliverables inspections are part of the Validate Scope process. The rest of
      the choices are activities relating to the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 80] [Project Integration Management]
15.   D - Since the stakeholders have established a bad reputation in the recent past, the
      first thing Barbara has to focus on is 'trust building'. This will be a proactive
      measure to mitigate the inter-stakeholder conflict risks in the future. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 407] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   C - The Direct and Manage Project Work process involves the management of the
      direction of the planned project activities. Work Performance Data is routinely
      collected as part of this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 79] [Project
      Integration Management]
17.   B - Conflicts should be addressed early and usually a private, direct and a
      collaborative approach should be adopted first. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
18.   B - As project manager, you would need to proactively speak to the senior team
      member and ask for all appraisals to be done in an objective manner. The other
      options are incorrect. Ignoring the matter will not help solve it. Likewise the other
      two options are impractical. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 3, 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
19.   C - Qualitative analysis examines risks from the risk register and analyzes its
      probability of occurrence and the impact it would have on the project deliverables
      if it did occur. It ranks risks for future action or analysis by evaluating their
      probability of occurrence and impact. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 329] [Project
      Risk Management]
20.   C - You should notify the appropriate management immediately that incorrect
      information has been presented for your project. The PMI Code of Ethics requires
      that managers report the errors of others, and provide accurate and truthful
      information to project stakeholders at all times. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics
      and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   C - The correct action is for the project manager to insist on paying for his / her
      lunch. Avoiding going out to lunch with anyone from the seller organization is
      drastic as it may be an opportunity to build relationships and to understand the
      seller's position for a project, better. Going out for lunch and not informing his /
      her managers about the lunch is unethical. Allowing the seller organization to pay
      for the lunch since it is a small value may be okay in certain organizations. For
      example some organizations have a limit on the nature of "gifts" that may be
      received by their employees and permit gifts not exceeding a certain value (ex: $
      50). In such a case, a lunch may be within limits. However, in the current
      situation, the data only reflects that the buyer organization does not permit its
      employees to receive any gifts. Hence this option is not acceptable. [Reference:
      PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
22.   D - The accuracy of a project estimate will increase as the project progresses
      through the project lifecycle. In the initiation phase, a project could have a rough
      order of magnitude estimate in the range of -25% to +75%. Later as more
      information is known, estimates could narrow to a range of -5% to +10%.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 201] [Project Cost Management]
23.   A - Collect Requirements is the process of defining and documenting
      stakeholders' needs to meet project objectives. The development of requirements
      begins with an analysis of the information in the project charter and the
      stakeholder register. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 111] [Project Scope
      Management]
24.   A - Both the buyer and the seller administer the contract for similar purposes.
      Each party ensures that both it and the other party meet their contractual
      obligations and that their own legal rights are protected. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 380] [Project Procurement Management]
25.   C - Tell the project stakeholders that there is a possible quality control issue and
      that you are investigating the cause. Using the rule of seven as a guideline, these
      data points indicate that something could be out of control. Project managers are
      required to report timely and accurate project information. Failing to do so is a
      violation of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. [Reference -
      PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238 & PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
      Page 4, 5] [Project Quality Management]
26. A - Templates is not a valid response. The rest of the choices are typical
    components of a Risk Management Plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 316] [Project
    Risk Management]
27. D - WBS components are decomposed until work packages are identified that can
    be estimated easily. There is no hard and fast rule regarding the number of levels
    in a WBS. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 128] [Project Scope Management]
28. A - Performing activities to accomplish project activities is one of the goals of the
    Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 80] [Project
    Integration Management]
29. B - The nominal group technique enhances brainstorming with a voting process.
    This then allows the most useful ideas to be prioritized and taken up for further
    brainstorming. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 547] [Project Scope Management]
30. D - Brainstorming with the key stakeholders and subject matter experts is an
    example of obtaining expert judgment. Since the objective of this session is to
    identify new ideas and approaches, this is an example of a focus group. This is not
    a project update meeting because the project manager is not presenting the
    project's status to the key stakeholders. The quality control involves inspecting the
    deliverables, which is not the case here. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 114, 412]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]
31. A - The project manager is at fault. The project manager must follow all project
    processes required for the success of the project, regardless of insistence by others
    that those processes are unnecessary and time consuming. Failing to do so is a
    violation of PMI's Code of Conduct, and can lead to increased project cost and
    schedule slips. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page
    2, 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
32. A - Technical skills is not a valid tool or technique. The rest of the choices are the
    tools and techniques of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 404] [Project Stakeholder Management]
33. C - The political influence of the persons should not influence the project
    manager facilitating a resolution. This is against the PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct. The rest of the choices are valid factors that influence
    conflict resolution methods. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
34. C - An input to the Conduct Procurements process, seller proposals are prepared
    by sellers in response to a procurement document package. These are then
    evaluated by the buyer to perform source selection. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    373] [Project Procurement Management]
35. D - Refuse the request. If training the staff is a requirement, it should be
    adequately budgeted and scheduled. Making unauthorized copies of the
    intellectual property of others is unethical and may also be illegal. PMI's Code of
    Conduct and Processional Responsibility demands that project managers protect
    the intellectual property rights of others. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct, Page 2, 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
36. C - Many cost estimators include reserves (also called contingency allowances),
    as costs in their schedule activity cost estimates. Contingency reserves are
    estimated costs to be used at the discretion of the project manager to deal with
    anticipated but not certain events. These events are "known unknowns" and are
    part of the project scope and cost baselines. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 206]
    [Project Cost Management]
37. D - Virtual teams share a common project goal but share little time in a
    traditional, face-to-face business environment. The virtual team concept is made
    possible with electronic communication and one of the benefits of such teams is
    the ability of members to work from home. The rest of the choices are potential
    issues that can happen as a result of forming a virtual team. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 271] [Project Human Resource Management]
38. D - Expected monetary value (EMV) analysis is a statistical concept that
    calculates the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that may or
    may not happen. The EMV of opportunities will generally be positive values,
    while risks will result in negative values. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 339] [Project
    Risk Management]
39. D - A responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) chart is used to illustrate the
    connections between work packages and project team members. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 262] [Project Human Resource Management]
40. C - A charter should be issued, signed and updated by the project sponsor. Your
    immediate concern should be find a single sponsor for the project. Note though,
    that the sponsor can be a single person or group. [PMBOK 5th edition, 68]
    [Project Integration Management]
41. A - Linked dependency is not a valid example of a dependency. The other three
    choices are valid examples of dependencies. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 157, 158]
    [Project Time Management]
42. A - For project management professionals, honesty is the best policy. You should
    never mislead others in regard to your experience in the field and your knowledge
    of the project management processes. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct, Page 4, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
43. D - In a matrix organization, the project manager shares responsibility with the
    functional managers for assigning priorities and for directing the work of persons
    assigned to the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 23] [Project Framework]
44. D - Identify Risks is the process of determining what risks can affect the project.
    Many different stakeholders usually participate in the Identify Risks process. The
    process of Identify Risks is iterative because unknown risks can be discovered
    throughout the life cycle of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 321] [Project
    Risk Management]
45. A - The correct response is: EAC = AC + Bottom-up ETC. Estimate to Complete
    (ETC) based on a new estimate must be used because the original assumptions are
    fundamentally flawed. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost
    Management]
46. C - If the remaining project work is expected to be performed at the budgeted
    rate, the formula for EAC is AC + (BAC - EV). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220]
    [Project Cost Management]
47. C - A project phase is generally concluded with a review of the work
    accomplished and the deliverables to determine acceptance, whether extra work is
    still required and to decide whether the phase should be considered closed. The
    other options are not valid. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 41] [Project Framework]
48. D - The project charter is not a valid response. The rest of the choices are the data
    that can be presented in a work performance report. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    93] [Project Integration Management]
49. D - Identify Risks is an iterative process because new risks may become known as
    the project progresses through its lifecycle. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 321]
    [Project Risk Management]
50. C - Collaboration requires incorporating multiple viewpoints from different
    perspectives; requires a cooperative attitude and open dialogue and typically leads
    to consensus and commitment. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
                                Knowledge Area Quiz Project Quality Management
                                Practice Questions--Answer Key and Explanations


Test Questions
1. Gordon has recently
   taken over a project as
   the project manager. The
   project is already halfway
   through the execution.
   Reviewing the project
   management plan,
   Gordon found outs that
   the project's WBS is not
   aligned with the project
   management plan and the
   100% rule was ignored.
   What does this mean?

       A. The WBS doesn't
          contain all of the
          project and
          product work
          mentioned in the
          project
          management plan.
       B. The project is not
          halfway through
          the execution.
       C. The project
          management plan
          can never be
          100% complete.
       D. The project
          cannot be
          completed on
          time.

2. What is a control chart?

       A. A type of a RACI
          chart
       B. A chart that
          shows the root
          cause of a
          problem
       C. A type of a
          fishbone diagram
       D. A chart that
          shows the
          stability of a
          process

3. A project manager is
   unsure of the difference
   between precision and
   accuracy and asks for
   your help in
   understanding the
   difference between the
   two terms. Which of
   these responses would be
   the best response to such
   a question?

       A. Precision is
          consistency that
          the value of a
          repeated set of
          measurements are
          clustered and
          have little scatter
          whereas accuracy
          is correctness that
          the measured
          value is very
          close to the true
          value.
       B. Accuracy is
          consistency that
          the value of a
          repeated set of
          measurements are
          clustered and
          have little scatter
          whereas precision
          is correctness that
          the measured
          value is very
          close to the true
          value.
       C. Accuracy and
          Precision are
          equivalent and
          normally
          specified in the
          SOW by the
          customer who
          issues the SOW.
       D. Accuracy is more
          important than
          precision. The
          project
          management team
          must decide the
          level of accuracy
          required.

4. The technique of
   comparing actual or
   planned project practices
   to those of other projects
   to generate ideas for
   improvement and to
   provide a basis by which
   to measure performance
   is known as:

       A.   Workbench
       B.   Benchmarking
       C.   Quality control
       D.   Dependency

5. There is a serious defect
   in the finished product of
   a project that was
   completed a few months
   back and this results in a
   recall campaign to recall
   the defective products.
   What would be the best
   classification for these
   types of costs?

       A. To complete
          performance
          index (TCP)
       B. Cost variance
       C. Cost of
          conformance
       D. Cost of non-
          conformance

6. You are the project
   manager of a project and
   have come up with a bar
    graph of problems and
    their frequencies. This
    kind of a chart is called a:

        A.   Deming chart
        B.   Pareto chart
        C.   Ishikawa diagram
        D.   Control chart

7. What is the process of
   random selection and
   inspection of a work
   product?

        A. Control Charting
        B. Flow Charting
        C. Statistical
           Sampling
        D. Benchmarking

8. Which of the following
   relates to Root Cause
   Analysis?

        A. Process Analysis
        B. Performance
           Measurements
        C. Pareto Chart
        D. Quality Control
           Measurements

9. Which of the following
   tools is used during
   Trend Analysis?

        A. Decision Tree
           Analysis
        B. Scatter Diagram
        C. Earned Value
           Analysis
        D. Cause and Effect
           Diagram

10. An automotive designer
    uses a certain technique
    to determine which
    combination of
    suspension and tires will
    produce the most
    desirable ride
    characteristics at a
    reasonable cost. In order
    to do this, she works with
    a statistical framework
    and systematically
    changes all of the
    important parameters
    instead of changing the
    factors one at a time. This
    is known as:

       A. Design of
          Experiments
       B. Nominal Group
          Technique
       C. Statistical
          Sampling
       D. Force Field
          Analysis


Answers

1. A - The WBS must contain
   all of the project and product
   work including the project
   management work. This is
   also called as 100% rule.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
   131] [Project Scope
   Management]
2. D - A control chart shows the
   stability of a process over
   time. [PMBOK 5th edition,
   Page 238] [Project Quality
   Management]
3. A - Precision is consistency
   that the value of a repeated
   set of measurements are
   clustered, and have little
   scatter, whereas accuracy is
   correctness that the measured
   value is very close to the true
   value. Precise measurements
   are not necessarily accurate.
   A very accurate measurement
   is not necessarily precise.
   The project management
      team must determine how
      much accuracy or precision
      or both are required.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      228] [Project Quality
      Management]
4.    B - Benchmarking is the
      technique of comparing
      actual or planned project
      practices to those of other
      projects to generate ideas for
      improvement and to provide
      a basis by which to measure
      performance. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 239] [Project
      Quality Management]
5.    D - The correct response is
      Cost of Non-Conformance.
      This includes all costs
      incurred due to internal and
      external failures. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 235]
      [Project Quality
      Management]
6.    B - This is an example of a
      Pareto chart or Pareto
      diagram. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 237] [Project
      Quality Management]
7.    C - Statistical sampling is the
      process of random selecting
      and inspection of a work
      product. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 240] [Project
      Quality Management]
8.    A - The process analysis
      includes root cause analysis.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      247] [Project Quality
      Management]
9.    C - Earned value analysis is
      used as a trend analysis
      technique for monitoring
      overall project performance.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      352] [Project Risk
      Management]
10.   A - The correct response is
      Design of Experiments and
this plays a key role in
optimization of products or
processes. [PMBOK 5th
edition, Page 240] [Project
Quality Management]
Exam 10 Test Questions
1. At division project status meeting, a dashboard of cost metrics for each
   project is distributed to all attendees, and each project manager is
   presenting the status of their project. The metrics for one project show a
   BAC of $1100, an EV of $998, and a EAC of $1099. However the project
   manager is reporting an ETC of $354 in her presentation. What do you do?

        A. Notify the appropriate management there is a calculation error.
        B. Nothing.
        C. Advise the project manager to take the additional funds from her
           project contingency budget.
        D. Congratulate the project manager for being under budget.

2. The key components of the basic model of communication between two
   parties are:

        A.   Encode, message, medium, noise, decode
        B.   Encode, send, receive, replicate, reply
        C.   Encode, send, receive, distribute, respond
        D.   Encode, send, interference, decipher, acknowledgment

3. Which of the following methods of forecasting EAC and ETC is the most
   accurate?

        A.   ETC based on CPI
        B.   ETC based on BAC
        C.   ETC based on CPI and SPI
        D.   ETC based on new estimate

4. Your team has built an exotic sports car for a wealthy client. Every
   deliverable has been verified by the project team against the quality
   requirements and accepted by the client. Now the Project Manager is
   reviewing the car to ensure it meets the specifications of the client, as
   agreed to in the project plan. What project management process is
   represented here?

        A.   Closing
        B.   Monitoring and Controlling
        C.   Planning
        D.   Execution

5. Jonathan has recently been hired in a company as a business improvement
   manager. Jonathan has been asked to reorganize the company's meetings
   and reporting structure. Jonathan is currently identifying all key project
   stakeholders. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors is
   least likely to be used as an input to this process?

        A. Organizational culture and structure
       B. Existing human resources
       C. Project management information system.
       D. Industry standards

6. Skills such as empathy, influence, creativity, and group facilitation are
   valuable assets when managing the project team. These skills are often
   referred to as ______________.

       A.   Effort based management
       B.   Feedback based skills
       C.   Ad hoc skills
       D.   Soft skills

7. The cost of running a project management office is an example of what
   type of cost?

       A.   Reimbursable
       B.   Fixed
       C.   Direct
       D.   Indirect

8. Gary is a project manager wrapping up the construction of a new office
   building. He creates several documents during this process. Which of the
   following is not applicable to the Close Procurements process?

       A.   Lessons learned documentation
       B.   Formal written notice of acceptance of deliverables
       C.   Closed contracts
       D.   Project charter

9. A project risk manager distributes anonymous questionnaires to project
   team members to help identify risks. This is called ___________.

       A.   Game Theory
       B.   The Consensus Method
       C.   Interviewing
       D.   The Delphi Technique.

10. Bill is managing a simple construction project. For this project, the
    stakeholder register exists, but the stakeholder management plan was not
    developed during the planning phase of the project. During the project
    execution, a big number of change requests came in and got approved. Bill
    now believes that a formal stakeholder management plan should be in place
    in order to guarantee the project's success. What must Bill do?

       A. Continue with the project and delegate the plan development to one
          of the project team members.
       B. Terminate the project and start the project from scratch.
       C. Go ahead and develop the project's stakeholder management plan.
        D. Hold the project work till the management prepares the new
           stakeholder management plan.

11. Tim is the project manager of a project that has a timeline of 18 months.
    Tim has planned for daily status reports to be sent out to all stakeholders.
    After receiving two such reports, the project sponsor informs Tim that she
    would only like to have fortnightly reports. Tim had done an analysis of
    communications requirements and considered various attributes for the
    communications management plan. What aspect has he missed out, which
    resulted in a daily status report being sent out instead of fortnightly status
    reports?

        A.   He has not considered the frequency of information distribution.
        B.   He has not considered the purpose for distribution of information.
        C.   He has not considered the timeline of the project.
        D.   He has not considered the content of the information to be
             distributed.

12. A software development project team has determined the best way to
    mitigate the risk of not having the computational resources to complete all
    bug testing on schedule is to add 3 more servers to the test bed. However,
    the network may not have enough capacity to handle the extra load of those
    three servers and could fail. This type of risk is called a _______________
    risk.

        A.   Secondary
        B.   Simulation
        C.   Bottleneck
        D.   Hidden

13. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors is not applicable to
    the Plan Human Resource Management process?

        A.   Organizational culture and structure
        B.   Existing human resources
        C.   Personnel administration policies
        D.   Lessons learned

14. As part of the quality control in your project, you are looking at a technique
    which shows the history and pattern of variation. This is a line graph which
    shows data points plotted in the order in which they occurred. You are most
    likely looking at a:

        A.   Control chart
        B.   Pareto diagram
        C.   Histogram
        D.   Cause and effect diagram

15. Elizabeth is managing a software development project. During one of the
    project update meetings, one of the key stakeholders raised a serious
    concern about the new project management approach being applied on the
    project. The rest of the stakeholders are comfortable with the new project
    management approach being used. What should Elizabeth do?

        A. Use coercive power to convince the stakeholder to accept the new
           approach.
        B. Request stakeholders to vote for the right approach.
        C. Have a separate one-to-one meeting with the stakeholder if the issue
           is not resolved during the update meeting.
        D. Remove the troublesome stakeholder from the stakeholder register.

16. You are assisting another project manager interview candidates for a
    resource position on his project. While reviewing your interview notes
    together, the other project manager sorts the candidate's resumes into two
    groups: one for further interviews, the other for candidates that did not meet
    the requirements for the position. You notice that he has placed several of
    the highly qualified candidates in the second pile, stating that those
    interviewees "did not fit the corporate profile." Upon further review, you
    discover that these candidates are all of the same ethnic group. What do you
    do?

        A.   Excuse yourself from the interviewing process.
        B.   Report this to the appropriate management.
        C.   File a complaint with PMI
        D.   Do nothing.

17. You are a PMP reviewing project files to help you write a lessons learned
    document on a software project you are finishing. Which of the following is
    not a part of a project file?

        A.   Change management documentation
        B.   Project calendars
        C.   Project management plan
        D.   Project deliverables

18. Which of the following processes gives the project management team
    insights into the health of the project?

        A.   Develop Project Management Plan
        B.   Perform Integrated Change Control
        C.   Monitor and Control Project Work
        D.   Determine Budget

19. Organizational process assets are an input to all of the following
    Stakeholder Management processes EXCEPT:

        A. Identify Stakeholders
        B. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
        C. Plan Stakeholder Management
        D. Control Stakeholder Engagement

20. After receiving some news about a delay on one of your project tasks, you
    reviewed the schedule to determine how it will impact the project. While
    there is a substantial delay on this task, it is not a critical path item and will
    not impact delivery of any of your milestones. Another project manager
    advises you to only present the milestone chart during your meeting with
    the project stakeholders and tell them the project is progressing as planned.
    What do you do?

        A. Present the project as a milestone chart and advise that the progress
           is tracking according to plan.
        B. Present the schedule in a milestone chart and disclose full details of
           the delay.
        C. Present the schedule in a network diagram and advise that the
           project is tracking according to plan.
        D. Present the schedule as a bar chart and advise that the project is
           tracking according to plan.

21. The project manager in charge of a new credit card software project has
    asked the product manager to create a checklist to assist with the
    identification of risks. A risk checklist can be created from which of the
    following sources?

        A.   Agreement templates
        B.   Earned value measurements
        C.   Project Management Information System
        D.   The lowest level of the Risk Breakdown Structure

22. A planning technique used to provide products, services and results that
    truly reflect customer requirements by translating those customer
    requirements into the appropriate technical requirements for each phase of
    project product development is called:

        A.   Six Sigma
        B.   PDCA
        C.   Voice of the Customer
        D.   ISO

23. You have utilized 360-degree feedback techniques for your information
    gathering and are in the process of giving formal feedback to team
    members. You will be setting specific goals for employees for the
    remainder of the project. Which technique are you utilizing?

        A. Project Performance Appraisals
        B. Co-location
        C. Issue Log
       D. Observation and Conversation

24. You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for your
    company. The project includes producing widgets for your customer. Data
    has been collected to help identify the greatest causes of defects in the
    overall process. Which technique should you use to determine the
    correlation between two variables being analyzed?

       A.   Statistical sampling
       B.   Pareto chart
       C.   Scatter diagram
       D.   Control chart

25. During the planning phase of your project, your team decided to procure a
    certain brand of hardware because it had the lowest price and free shipping
    and installation. This approach saved $6,000 over the other brands being
    considered. Since that purchase, however, it has been discovered that the
    annual maintenance costs for this hardware are $2,500 per year, and
    $12,500 over the life of the hardware. These costs were not budgeted in the
    project, nor were they included in the TCO analysis that was done as part of
    the project business case. What should you do?

       A.   Request a new budget.
       B.   Notify the stakeholders immediately.
       C.   Revise the business case.
       D.   Do nothing. This will not impact the project budget.

26. In a sender-receiver model for communication, information is sent and
    received between two parties, defined as the sender and the receiver. In
    such a model, anything that interferes with the transmission and
    understanding of the message is called:

       A.   Noise
       B.   Constraint
       C.   Medium
       D.   Decode

27. Which of the following is not an appropriate method for dealing with a
    negative risk?

       A.   Avoid
       B.   Exploit
       C.   Transfer
       D.   Mitigate

28. Statistical sampling involves choosing part of a population for inspection.
    Appropriate sampling can often ___________the cost of quality control.

       A. neutralize
       B. reduce
       C. increase
       D. mitigate

29. A risk with a positive outcome is called an ___________.

       A.   Unlikely risk
       B.   Objective risk
       C.   Opportunity
       D.   Obsolete risk

30. During a project status review meeting, some of the project team members
    have raised a concern over the complexity of the project performance
    information reporting requirements. The project team is of the view that the
    work performance data should be sufficient for reporting. Which of the
    following is the best response that should be given to team members?

       A. The work performance information is necessary for the conversion
          of the resisting project stakeholders to supportive project
          stakeholders.
       B. Compliance to the PMBOK(r) requires transforming the work
          performance data to work performance information.
       C. This is a non-negotiable requirement and the project manager is not
          required to convince the team.
       D. The work performance data alone is not sufficient for effective
          decision making.

31. You are an inexperienced project manager who has been appointed to
    manage a project in a matrix organization. Because of this you can expect
    the communication in this project to be:

       A.   Open and Accurate
       B.   Easy to Automate
       C.   Simple
       D.   Complex

32. Predicting future performance based on historical events is called
    ___________.

       A.   Historical analysis
       B.   Trend analysis
       C.   Parametric analysis
       D.   Pareto analysis

33. Which of the following estimating techniques will cost less, but is also
    generally less accurate?

       A. Parametric Estimating
       B. Analogous Estimating
        C. Resource cost based Estimating
        D. Bottom-up Estimating

34. A project manager is using a Risk Diagramming technique that is a
    graphical representation of situations showing causal influences, time
    ordering of events and other relationships among variables and outcomes.
    This would be:

        A.   A System flow chart
        B.   An Influence Diagram
        C.   Pareto chart
        D.   Risk flow diagram

35. You are authorized to approve expenditures above $15,000. For the last
    several weeks you have been negotiating the terms and pricing of a contract
    with a vendor, and you want to keep costs as low as possible. This has been
    a very difficult negotiation process. A colleague suggests you tell the
    vendor you can only approve expenses below $10,000 as a way to keep the
    price low. What do you do?

        A. Ask for binding arbitration.
        B. Tell the vendor you are only authorized to approve expenses under
           $10,000.
        C. Do not follow the colleague's advice.
        D. Put a deadline on the negotiation completion.

36. A project manager wants to understand a project goal in relation to the steps
    for getting to that goal. Which of the following is a useful method for
    contingency planning that aids a team in anticipating intermediate steps that
    could derail achievement of a project goal?

        A.   Affinity diagram
        B.   Process decision program charts (PDPC)
        C.   Interrelationship digraphs
        D.   Tree diagrams

37. You are a project manager for Enormous Co. and are currently engaged in a
    highly visible project. The company is about to implement an independent
    review to ensure that the project work is continuing to comply with the
    project's policies, processes, and procedures. During which process would
    this review occur?

        A.   Close Project or Phase
        B.   Control Quality
        C.   Control Risks
        D.   Perform Quality Assurance

38. A project comprises of a virtual team with team members located in
    different offices in the same city as well as across different cities. The
    project manager wishes to built trust and good working relationships. One
    of the best ways to do this is:

        A. To use team-building strategies.
        B. Write a memo to the team, detailing out the need for good working
           relationships.
        C. Plan for job-rotation on a weekly basis.
        D. To encourage the use of telephonic conversations as much as
           possible.

39. Which process group corresponds to the "act" component of the plan-do-
    check-act cycle?

        A.   Executing
        B.   Monitoring and Controlling
        C.   Planning
        D.   Initiating

40. Which option is NOT representative of the inputs, tools and techniques, and
    outputs of the Direct and Manage Project Work process?

        A. PMIS, Project Management Plan, and Deliverables
        B. Deliverables, Approved Change Requests, and Project Management
           Information System
        C. Approved Change Requests, Validated Changes, and PMIS
        D. Approved Change Requests, Project Management Plan, and Work
           Performance Data

41. As part of the Risk Response planning for your project, you are trying to
    come up with a strategy to deal with negative risks or threats. In order to
    eliminate the impact of a particular risk, you relax the objective that is in
    jeopardy by extending the project schedule. This is an example of

        A.   Transference
        B.   Mitigation
        C.   Avoidance
        D.   Postponement

42. You are the Project Manager for the production of an exotic car. You have
    completed the Define Scope process for your project. Which of the
    following may be generated through this process?

        A. Project scope statement, Project charter
        B. Project scope statement, Updates to Requirements traceability
           matrix
        C. WBS, Updates to Requirements traceability matrix
        D. Project scope statement, WBS

43. Perform Qualitative analysis of a risk is a quick way to prioritize how a
    project team will respond to risks. It is based on risk _________________
    and _________________.

       A.   Probability and exposure
       B.   Probability and impact
       C.   Probability and focus
       D.   Exposure and cost

44. A project manager was assigned to a project as the project charter was
    being developed. Which of the following is an input that the project
    manager will utilize to develop the project charter?

       A.   Make-or-Buy analysis
       B.   Organizational Process Assets
       C.   Project Acceptance Criteria
       D.   Project Scope Statement

45. The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented
    hierarchical decomposition of the work to be executed by the project team,
    to accomplish the project objectives and create required deliverables. The
    'Create WBS' is a process under which Knowledge Area?

       A.   Project Time Management
       B.   Project Integration Management.
       C.   Project Scope Management
       D.   Project Cost Management

46. Gene is the project manager of a large highway expansion project. He has a
    number of stakeholders with competing priorities and agendas, and often
    has to resolve conflicts between stakeholders. Which knowledge area
    manages communications with the project stakeholders?

       A.   Project Quality Management
       B.   Project Stakeholder Management
       C.   Project Communications Management
       D.   Project Human Resource Management

47. There are 10 stakeholders in Megamart's ERP deployment project. How
    many potential communications channels are there?

       A.   25
       B.   10
       C.   45
       D.   30

48. Which of the following is NOT considered a method in the Manage
    Communications process?

       A. Change control systems
       B. Communication technology
       C. Performance reporting
       D. Information management systems

49. A project team is trying to solve a moderately complex problem. The have
    generated data using affinity diagrams. That data possess intertwined
    logical relationships. Which of the following tool can help the team analyze
    these intertwined relationships?

       A.   Interrelationship digraph
       B.   Fishbone diagram
       C.   Histogram
       D.   Tree diagram

50. Reporting performance about scope to stakeholders is a part of which
    knowledge area?

       A.   Project Communications Management
       B.   Project Scope Management
       C.   Project Quality Management
       D.   Project Integration Management


Answers

1. A - If ETC is being reported, then EAC should be AC + ETC. You must notify
   the appropriate management that there is a calculation error. Project managers are
   required by the PMI Code to accept ownership of their own errors, and report to
   the appropriate management errors they have observed being made by others.
   [Reference - PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220 & PMI Code of Ethics and
   Professional Conduct, Page 2]. [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - A basic model of communication demonstrates how ideas or information is
   sent and received between two parties, defined as the sender and the receiver. The
   key components of the model include encode, message, medium, noise, decode,
   acknowledge and response. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 293] [Project
   Communications Management]
3. D - The bottom-up ETC gives the most accurate results. [PMBOK 5th edition,
   Page 220] [Project Cost Management]
4. A - It must be noted that the car has been built and the Control Quality and
   Validate Scope processes have been performed for every deliverable. The
   question is asking about PRODUCT verification, which occurs during the closing
   process. [PMBOK 5th edition,Page 100] [Project Integration Management]
5. C - All of the given choices are enterprise environmental factors. However the
   project management information system is not used during the initiating stage of a
   project. The rest of the choices are important enterprise environmental factors that
   need to be considered at this stage. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 395] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
6. D - Interpersonal skills, sometimes known as "soft skills" are particularly
   important to team development. By understanding the sentiments of project team
      members, anticipating their actions, acknowledging their concerns, and following
      up on their issues, the project management team can greatly reduce problems and
      increase cooperation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 275] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
7.    D - Indirect costs are those costs that cannot be directly traced to a specific
      project. These costs are accumulated and allocated equitably over multiple
      projects by an approved and documented accounting procedure. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 202] [Project Cost Management]
8.    D - The project charter is not an input to the Close Procurements process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 386] [Project Procurement Management]
9.    D - The Delphi Technique is a way to reach a consensus of experts. Participants
      indicate their ideas about the important project risks on an anonymous
      questionnaire. The responses are summarized and are then recirculated to the
      experts for further comment. Consensus may be reached in a few rounds of the
      process. This techniques helps reduce bias in the data and keeps any one person
      from having undue influence on the outcome. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 324]
      [Project Risk Management]
10.   C - If a need is felt to develop the stakeholder management plan, it should be
      developed regardless of the stage of the project. Further, it is the duty of the
      project manager to develop the project plans. Bill should start the Plan
      Stakeholder Management process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 399] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
11.   A - Tim has most likely not considered the frequency of distribution of
      information. He should have analyzed the stakeholder requirements and planned
      for distribution of the status report accordingly. It is unlikely that on an 18 month
      project, the project sponsor would want to receive daily status reports. It is
      possible that at the end of the project, with a few days or weeks to go, the project
      sponsor might request for daily reports, in order to monitor the project closely, or
      in case there are issues with the project. Hence Tim should have considered
      stakeholder requirements and planned the frequency of the status report
      accordingly. The other choices are incorrect. The choice that Tim has not
      considered the timeline of the project may be one of the factors which influence
      the frequency of information distribution, but is not a complete response by itself.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 296] [Project Communications Management]
12.   A - A secondary risk arises as a direct result of implementing a risk response.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 343] [Project Risk Management]
13.   D - Lessons learned from historical projects are important inputs to the Plan
      Human Resource Management process. However, these are classified as
      organizational process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 260] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
14.   A - This is most likely to be a control chart. A control chart shows the trends in a
      process over a period of time. The rest of the choices are not line-based graphs.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
15.   C - If any conflict or issue arises, it's the project manager's responsibility to
      address and resolve it. Elizabeth must address the issue during the meeting.
      However, if the issue is not resolved during the meeting, she should hold a one to-
      one meeting with the stakeholder to address his concerns. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 283, 407] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   B - Report this to the appropriate management immediately. Discrimination based
      on nationality is prohibited by the PMI Code of Ethics, and may also be illegal,
      depending on local laws. PMI requires project managers to report discriminatory
      behavior to the appropriate management; not doing so is a violation of the Code
      of Ethics. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
17.   D - The project deliverables are not part of the project file. The rest of the choices
      are components of the final project file. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 104] [Project
      Integration Management]
18.   C - It must be a process from the Monitoring & Controlling process group. The
      correct response is 'Monitor and Control Project Work'. This is the process
      necessary for collecting, measuring, and disseminating performance information
      and assessing measurements and trends to effect process improvements.
      Monitoring includes status reporting, progress measurement, and forecasting.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 86] [Project Integration Management]
19.   D - Organizational process assets are not input to the Control Stakeholder
      Engagement process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 392] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
20.   B - Present the schedule as a milestone and disclose the details of the delay.
      Concealing delays is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct. Project Managers must provide accurate and timely information.
      Providing half-truths about a project's schedule is not permitted. [Reference: PMI
      Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   D - The lowest level of the RBS can be used as a risk checklist. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 325] [Project Risk Management]
22.   C - The correct response is 'Voice of the Customer'. This is one of the non-
      proprietary approaches to quality management. In this planning technique, the
      customer's requirements are exactly met in the finished product during each phase
      of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 566] [Project Quality Management]
23.   A - Project Performance Appraisal is a technique of the Manage Project Team
      process. In a Project Performance Appraisal, team members get feedback from
      project work supervisors. The supervisors can gather information from those who
      interact with the team member using 360-degree feedback principles. The term
      360 feedback principles, simply means that information is gathered from multiple
      sources such as the workers supervisors, peers, and subordinates. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 282] [Project Human Resource Management]
24.   C - Scatter diagrams are used to determine if a correlation exists between two
      variables. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
25.   B - Notify the project stakeholders of this situation immediately. Once they have
      been notified of the lifecycle costing, a path forward can be developed. Project
      managers are responsible for providing accurate and timely information. Even
      though this cost will not impact the project budget directly, it is a critical
      component of the ongoing operation of the project's product. Failing to
      communicate this information is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
      Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   A - In a sender-receiver model, the key components include encoding of thoughts
      or ideas, a message as the output of encoding, a medium to convey the message
      and decoding the message back into meaningful thoughts or ideas. Anything that
      interferes with the transmission and understanding of the message is termed as
      noise (for example: distance). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 293] [Project
      Communications Management]
27.   B - Exploitative strategies are selected for risks with positive impacts where the
      organization wishes to ensure the opportunity is realized. This strategy seeks to
      eliminate the uncertainty associated with a particular upside risk by making the
      opportunity happen. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 345] [Project Risk Management]
28.   B - Appropriate sampling can often reduce the cost of the quality control. In some
      application areas, it may be necessary for the project management team to be
      familiar with a variety of sampling techniques. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 240]
      [Project Quality Management]
29.   C - Risks can pose a threat or an opportunity to a project. Positive risks are called
      opportunities. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 310] [Project Risk Management]
30.   D - If some of the project team members have some concerns, it is the project
      manger's duty to address them. A reasonable response must be given to the team
      in the given situation. Compliance to the PMBOK(r) can be a desire, but it is not a
      reasonable justification. The conversion of the resisting project stakeholders to
      supporting stakeholders needs a lot of communication and demonstration of quick
      wins; the work performance information alone is not sufficient. The best response
      that can be given to the team is that the work performance information is required
      by the key stakeholders for effective decision making, which is crucial for the
      success of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 413] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
31.   D - Matrix organizations have don't have linear communications lines (e.g., top-
      down), therefore communication goes across many different "silos". [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 23] [Project Framework]
32.   B - Trend analysis is an analytical technique that uses mathematical models to
      forecast future outcomes based on historical results. It is a method of determining
      the variance from a baseline of a parameter by using prior progress reporting
      periods' data and projecting how much that parameter's variance from baseline
      might be at some future point in the project if no changes are made in executing
      the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 188] [Project Time Management]
33.   B - Analogous cost estimating is generally less costly than other cost techniques,
      but is also generally less accurate. It uses the actual cost of previous, similar
      projects as the basis for estimating the cost of the current project. It is more
      reliable when the previous projects are similar in fact, and not just in appearance,
      and the persons estimating have the needed expertise. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      204] [Project Cost Management]
34.   B - A Diagramming technique that is a graphical representation of situations
      showing causal influences, time-ordering of events and other relationships among
      variables and outcomes is known as an Influence Diagram. The Cause-and-effect
      diagram also identifies the causes of risk, but does not have the time-ordering of
      events. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 325] [Project Risk Management]
35.   C - Do not follow your colleague's advice. Providing false or misleading
      information for any reason is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics. [Reference:
      PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   B - Process decision program charts (PDPC) are used to understand a project goal
      in relation to the steps for getting to that goal. It is a useful method for
      contingency planning that aids a team in anticipating intermediate steps that could
      derail achievement of a project goal. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 245] [Project
      Quality Management]
37.   D - Quality audits are performed during the Perform Quality Assurance process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 247] [Project Quality Management]
38.   A - Use of team-building activities helps in building trust and establishing good
      working relationships. Among the other choices - encouraging the use of
      telephone calls can also help in building relationships, especially in distributed
      teams. However, this cannot be an alternative to email communication. Job-
      rotation within the team may also help team-morale, however doing it on a
      weekly basis may be counterproductive and inefficient. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 276] [Project Human Resource Management]
39.   B - The "act" component of the plan-do-check-act cycle relates to the Monitoring
      and Controlling process group. The plan-do-check-act cycle was created by
      Shewhart and modified by Deming to illustrate how different results from one
      cycle become an input to another cycle. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 231 [Project
      Quality Management]
40.   C - Validated Changes are not input, tools and technique, or output for the Direct
      and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 79] [Project
      Integration Management]
41.   C - This is an example of avoidance. It involves changing the project management
      plan to eliminate the threat posed by an adverse risk, isolating the project
      objectives from the risk's impacts or to relax the objective that is in jeopardy, such
      as extending the schedule or reducing scope. Transference involves shifting the
      negative impact of a threat along with the ownership of the response. Mitigation
      implies a reduction in the probability and/or impact of an adverse risk.
      Postponement is not a valid strategy since it does not address the risk. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 344] [Project Risk Management]
42.   B - The Define Scope process will result in development of the Project Scope
      statement and updates to project documents such as stakeholder register,
      requirements documentation and the requirements traceability matrix. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 123, 125] [Project Scope Management]
43.   B - Perform Qualitative risk analysis is usually a rapid and cost-effective means
      of establishing priorities for Plan Risk Responses. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      328, 329] [Project Risk Management]
44.   B - When developing the project charter, the project manager can draw from the
      assets that are part of the organizational process assets. There may be formal /
      informal policies, procedures, plans, and guidelines whose effects must be
      considered. Organizational process assets also represent the organization's
      learning from previous projects such as completed schedules, risk data and earned
      value data. These are invaluable in developing the project charter. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 66] [Project Integration Management]
45.   C - The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical
      decomposition of the work to be executed by the project team, to accomplish the
      project objectives and create required deliverables. The 'Create WBS' is a process
      under the 'Project Scope Management' Knowledge Area. The WBS subdivides the
      project into smaller, more manageable pieces of work, with each descending level
      of the WBS representing an increasingly detailed definition of the project work.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 125] [Project Scope Management]
46.   C - The Manage Communications is the process of producing and distributing
      project information to the project stakeholders. This process is a part of project
      communications management knowledge area. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 297]
      [Project Communications Management]
47.   C - The total number of communications channels is n(n-1)/2, where n=number of
      stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project Communications
      Management]
48.   A - The change control system is not a tool and technique of the Manage
      Communications process. The rest of the choices are valid tools and techniques of
      this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 297] [Project Communications
      Management]
49.   A - The interrelationship digraphs provide a process for creative problem solving
      in moderately complex scenarios that possess intertwined logical relationships for
      up to 50 relevant items. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 245] [Project Quality
      Management]
50.   A - Performance Reporting is a tool and technique of the Manage
      Communications Process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 301] [Project
      Communications Management]
Human Resource Test Questions
1. Ken is managing a project where the morale of the team is very low. The
   team members have been on the project for more than a year and though the
   project is due to end in a few weeks' time, they do not know what is in store
   for them. What should Ken have planned better to avoid such a situation?

       A.   Ground rules
       B.   360-degree feedback
       C.   Job rotation within the project.
       D.   Staff release plan

2. You are the project manager of a project whose team has interacted with a
   number of stakeholders. You feel that in order to have a very objective
   project performance appraisal, you would like to obtain feedback for the
   project team members from all the people they have worked with, including
   superiors, peers and subordinates. Project performance appraisals are
   carried out during which of the following processes?

       A.   Close Project or Phase
       B.   Acquire Project Team
       C.   Manage Project Team
       D.   Develop Project Team

3. Which of the following is not a tool and technique of the Plan Human
   Resource Management process?

       A.   Organizational theory
       B.   Networking
       C.   Organization charts
       D.   Rewards and recognition

4. Which of these is not an Enterprise environmental factor that can influence
   the Plan Human Resource Management process?

       A.   Organizational culture
       B.   Lessons learned on organizational structures
       C.   Marketplace conditions
       D.   Personnel administration policies

5. Which of the following is not provided by the communications
   management plan?

       A.   Stakeholders communication requirements
       B.   Frequency of communication
       C.   Person responsible for communicating the information
       D.   Desired and current engagement levels of key stakeholders
6. You are managing a project. An audit team wants to know where they can
   find information on training plans for the project team members and
   certification requirements. This would be found in the:

       A.   Resource Breakdown Structure
       B.   Staff Release Plan
       C.   Staffing Management Plan
       D.   Communications Management Plan

7. You are managing a project and find that you need to apply resource
   leveling. Which of the following tools can help you identify resources that
   are over allocated?

       A.   Resource Assignment Matrix
       B.   Network diagram
       C.   Resource Histogram
       D.   Resource Breakdown Structure

8. Which of the following is not among the processes of Project
   Communications Management?

       A.   Control Communications
       B.   Identify Stakeholders
       C.   Plan Communications Management
       D.   Manage Communications

9. Ground rules are established to set clear expectations regarding acceptable
   behavior by the project team members. Whose responsibility is it to enforce
   ground rules?

       A. The project manager
       B. All project team members share the responsibility for enforcing the
          rules once they are established
       C. The HR team
       D. The project manager and senior team members

10. Conflict management is a tool and technique of which of the following
    processes?

       A.   Control Procurements
       B.   Identify Stakeholders
       C.   Close Project or Phase
       D.   Manage Project Team


Answers

1. D - The correct response is the staff release plan. While job rotation is a good way
   of ensuring high morale within the team, it is more of an ongoing effort and
      within the project team. The project manager needs to determine the method and
      timing of releasing team members (release criteria). Smooth transitions to
      upcoming projects helps improve the morale. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 266]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
2.    C - Project performance appraisal are carried out during the Manage Project Team
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 282] [Project Human Resource Management]
3.    D - Rewards and Recognition is a tool and technique used in the Develop Project
      Team process and not in the Plan Human Resource Management process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 257] [Project Human Resource Management]
4.    B - Lessons learned on organizational structures are used as inputs to the Plan
      Human Resource Management process. However, these are organizational
      process assets and not enterprise environmental factors. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 260] [Project Human Resource Management]
5.    D - The desired and current engagement levels of key stakeholders are
      documented in the stakeholder management plan. The rest of the choices are the
      components of the communications management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      296, 403] [Project Communications Management]
6.    C - The correct response is the Staffing Management Plan. This lists the time
      periods that team members are expected to work on the project along with
      information such as training plans, certification requirements and compliance
      issues. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 265, 266] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
7.    C - The Resource Histogram is a tool for charting human resources and illustrates
      the number of hours that a person, department or entire project team will be
      needed each week or month over the course of the project. The chart can include a
      horizontal line that represents the maximum number of hours from a particular
      resource. This can be used for a resource leveling strategy. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 265] [Project Human Resource Management]
8.    B - The Identify Stakeholders is a process from the Project Stakeholder
      Management knowledge area. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287, 391] [Project
      Communications Management]
9.    B - All project team members share responsibility for enforcing the rules once
      they are established. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 277] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
10.   D - Conflict Management is a tool and technique of the Manage Project Team
      process. The Control Procurements process has Claims Administration that
      somewhat relates to conflict management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 282]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
Exam 11 Test Questions
1. Your project is nearing completion, but a previously unidentified risk has
   been discovered and it could significantly affect one of the project
   deliverables. What do you do?

        A.   Transfer the risk.
        B.   Develop a risk mitigation plan.
        C.   Include the issue in the project risk log.
        D.   Notify the project stakeholders immediately.

2. A team of engineers is reviewing the architecture diagram for a new ERP
   system being deployed at a large accounting firm. The engineers are
   discussing the impact of the failure of each node in the diagram on overall
   availability of the final product. The intent of the discussion is to minimize
   the likelihood of failure and the effects of any failure. What is this called?

        A.   SWOT Analysis
        B.   Quantitative Analysis
        C.   Failure Mode and Effect Analysis
        D.   Deming Cycle

3. As a project manager based at the customer location for a performing
   organization, you strike up a rapport with a customer manager. As the
   project progresses, the manager asks you to make certain changes to the
   project scope and wants this to be handled on an informal basis. You
   should:

        A. Contact your manager in your organization and ask for this work to
           be done without payment, as a goodwill gesture.
        B. Comply with the manager's request. It is important to continue to
           maintain a good relationship with the manager.
        C. Refuse to take up any changes since the manager has asked you to
           do it informally.
        D. Explain to the manager that you would need to formally document
           these as part of project scope change and put it through the change
           management process.

4. You are in the midst of a major code roll out for a new software module.
   However, it has come to your attention that the resources promised for the
   roll out are not going to be available. As the Project Manager, what is the
   BEST thing to do?

        A.   Explain the impact of the lost resources to the stakeholders
        B.   Replan the project without the resources
        C.   Have the current staff work extra hours
        D.   Fast Track the schedule

5. The Identify Stakeholders process is an initiating process. At this stage,
    which of the following organizational process assets is the most crucial
    input to this process?

        A.   Change control procedures
        B.   Lessons learned from previous projects.
        C.   Financial control procedures
        D.   Risk control procedures

6. The project management team performed activities such as measuring
   examining and verifying to determine whether work and deliverables met
   requirements and product acceptance criteria. Which of the following
   choices refers to a different set of activities than the ones just mentioned?

        A.   Walkthroughs
        B.   Prevention
        C.   Inspection
        D.   Reviews

7. ___________________ is performed on risks that have been prioritized by
   the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process as potentially and
   substantially impacting the project.

        A.   Perform Risk Cost Analysis
        B.   Perform Risk Exposure Analysis
        C.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
        D.   Perform Risk Outcome Analysis

8. Which of the following documents will help trace the requirements to
   product design?

        A.   Requirements traceability matrix
        B.   Design traceability matrix
        C.   Project scope statement
        D.   Product traceability matrix

9. As the Project Manager for Midway Carnival Rides, you are starting off on
   the Define Scope process. Which of the following is a key input to the
   process?

        A.   Risk Management Plan
        B.   Quality Management Plan
        C.   Project Charter
        D.   Staffing Management Plan

10. Neil is the project documents controller for a multi-million dollar telecom
    network deployment project. Neil has just received a document from the
    project manager. This document contains the project stakeholders'
    communication requirements for the current project phase. Neil should
    update which of the following project documents with this information?

        A.   Work breakdown structure
        B.   Stakeholders engagement assessment matrix
        C.   Stakeholder management plan
        D.   Stakeholder register

11. A key output of Plan Human Resource Management is a list of project roles
    and responsibilities. What should this document include?

        A.   Work packages, Effort, Authority, Duties
        B.   Role, Responsibility, Authority, Risk
        C.   Role, Title, Resource Cost, Responsibility
        D.   Role, Authority, Responsibility, Competency

12. What is the best way to show, at a glance, all the work packages or project
    activities assigned to a specific organizational department?

        A.   Organizational Breakdown Structure
        B.   RACI chart
        C.   Work Breakdown Structure
        D.   Roles and Responsibilities Chart

13. RACI stands for______________, ________________, ___________,
    _______________.

        A.   Review, Analyze, Calculate, Implement
        B.   Responsible, Actual, Complete, Informative
        C.   Roles, Activities, Costs, Instructions
        D.   Responsible, Accountable, Consult, Inform

14. As the project manager of a high-visibility project, you are in the process of
    Identifying risks. You are concerned that the data you collect might be
    biased. A technique that helps keep the bias out of the data and keeps any
    one person from having undue influence on the outcome is:

        A.   Interviewing
        B.   Round-robin technique
        C.   Ishikawa technique
        D.   Delphi technique

15. A project manager is giving a project update to the key stakeholders.
    During the meeting, he finds out that most of the stakeholders are busy
    checking and replying to their emails. Which of the following is the best
    action that could have eliminated this issue?

        A. A meeting ground rule on active listening
        B. Providing snacks to the stakeholders during the meeting
        C. Including the company's code of conduct in the presentation
          handouts
       D. Asking sudden unexpected questions outside the scope of the
          project

16. You are a Project Manager working on a project to create high efficiency
    electric motors for a company introducing a new electric golf cart. Your
    company's president is keenly interested in the project and requests a chart
    that shows the number of defects by type ordered by their frequency of
    occurrence. Which type of chart would BEST meet this request?

       A.   Pareto diagram
       B.   Control chart
       C.   Statistical sampling
       D.   Scatter diagram

17. What term defines the work needed to complete a product, service, or
    result?

       A.   Product scope
       B.   Scope creep
       C.   Scope verification
       D.   Project scope

18. During a weekly status meeting a team member suggests adding a
    component to the project. As the project manager, you indicate that all
    focus should be put on the current scope and don't worry about any
    enhancements. Focusing on the current scope is an example of?

       A.   Gold plating
       B.   Scope verification
       C.   Scope management
       D.   Change control

19. What type of method can be used to eliminate personal bias during the
    process of selecting a seller?

       A.   Independent estimates
       B.   Source Selection Criteria
       C.   Vendor rankings
       D.   Screening

20. You have been offered a position managing a project that will last 12
    months. However, you know that in 6 months you will be relocating to
    another state for family reasons. What should you do?

       A. Turn down the position.
       B. Accept the position and provide 4 weeks notice before leaving the
          job.
       C. Accept the position and compress the schedule to complete the
          project in 6 months.
       D. Disclose your relocation plans to the hiring manager.

21. A project manager wants to proactively monitor a manufacturing process in
    order to determine if the quality level is within acceptable limits for that
    process. What tool will help with this?

       A.   Control charts
       B.   Ishikawa diagram
       C.   Histogram
       D.   PERT chart

22. You are planning a storage device migration in a data center. During this
    phase of the project, who should be controlling the project?

       A.   Project Manager
       B.   SME's
       C.   Sponsor
       D.   Management

23. As project manager, you find you are constantly dealing with conflict
    amongst your team members. Everyone argues over sharing available
    project resources so you plan to use a conflict resolution method to alleviate
    the tension between team members. What conflict resolution method is
    NOT recognized by the Project Management Institute?

       A.   Forcing
       B.   Withdrawal
       C.   Elaboration
       D.   Smoothing

24. In a project that was yet to begin, many of the project team members were
    known in advance. This is called:

       A.   Proactive-planning
       B.   Skill-matching
       C.   Pre-assignment
       D.   Staffing-assignment

25. You have been managing a construction project in a developing country
    and are closing down the project. The tools and equipment that was used on
    the project has to be returned to your company's European headquarters. A
    non-governmental organization that builds and repairs medical facilities in
    this country has come to you to request that this equipment be donated to
    them. What should you do?

       A. Donate all tools and equipment.
       B. Refuse the request.
       C. Donate only the tools and equipment whose value is below your
          purchase approval limit.
       D. Notify the appropriate management.

26. All of the following are components of an effective change control,
    EXCEPT:

       A.   Variance analysis
       B.   Expert judgment
       C.   Change control tools
       D.   Meetings

27. What similarity exists between a cost-reimbursable contract and a time and
    material contract?

       A.   They are open ended
       B.   The closure date is part of the contract.
       C.   They have fixed bonus rates.
       D.   They can never grow in value.

28. Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) is a non-proprietary approach to
    Quality Management. This is an analytical procedure in which:

       A. The effect of varying the various parameters that make up a process
          is determined by trying out various combinations of the parameters.
       B. Each potential failure mode in every component of a product is
          analyzed to determine its effect on the reliability of that component
          and, by itself or in combination with other possible failure modes,
          on the reliability of the product.
       C. A set of experts are asked to provide inputs on the reasons for
          failure of a product and corrective action is then taken.
       D. A list of historical causes for failure of a similar product is analyzed
          to determine the possible failure modes.

29. A team of engineers is reviewing a scatter diagram to determine how the
    changes in two variables in a new type of automobile tire are related. The
    closer points on the diagram are to a diagonal line, _______________.

       A.   the more likely a control group will be required
       B.   the more closely they are related
       C.   the less likely they are to be related
       D.   the less likely a control group will be required

30. A project team collects project work performance data and transforms that
    into work performance information for the key project stakeholders on a
    monthly basis. Which of the following does not provide a good platform to
    share this information with the stakeholders?

       A. Project file updates
       B. Project update meetings
       C. Information management system
       D. Status review meetings

31. You are a project manager who is in charge of an important project for your
    company. The project is 40% complete after 3 months and has cost
    $350,000. The budget for the project is $950,000 and is scheduled to last 8
    months. How is the project performing?

       A.   The project is behind schedule and over budget.
       B.   The project is ahead of schedule and under budget
       C.   The project is behind schedule and under budget.
       D.   The project is ahead of schedule and over budget

32. How will an organization with a weak matrix organization structure affect
    the Plan Human Resource Management process?

       A.   The project manager will have no authority on the project.
       B.   The project manager will have a stronger role.
       C.   The project manager will have a relatively weaker role.
       D.   The project manager will have full authority.

33. Product scope is measured against the product requirements whereas
    project scope is measured against:

       A. The WBS and WBS dictionary
       B. The project scope statement and its associated WBS and WBS
          dictionary
       C. The project requirements and WBS.
       D. The acceptance criteria

34. In the procurement process, the seller may be viewed initially as a bidder,
    then as the selected source and then as the contracted supplier. The seller
    will typically manage the work as a project. In such an instance, which of
    the following is not true?

       A. The Buyer becomes the customer and is thus a key project
          stakeholder for the seller.
       B. Terms and conditions of the contract become key inputs to many of
          the seller's management processes. (ex: major deliverables, key
          milestones, cost objectives)
       C. There need not be a contractual relationship between the buyer and
          the seller
       D. The Seller's project management team is concerned with all the
          processes of project management and not just Procurement
          management.

35. The product design your project team developed was very well received by
    the customer. There were two key contributors to this design. The customer
    calls you to tell you how pleased he is with the design. What do you tell
    him?

        A. Ask to negotiate a bonus payment.
        B. Thank the customer.
        C. Thank him on behalf of the team and call out the contributions made
           by two of the team members.
        D. Tell the customer that you worked very hard on the design and that
           you are happy he is pleased.

36. Lori is managing a project in a Functional organization. In this
    organization, she can expect to find that:

        A. She wields considerable authority and can make independent
           decisions related to the project.
        B. Management systems are designed to support projects and project
           management is easy.
        C. Management systems are not designed to support project needs
           efficiently, and project management is difficult.
        D. There are no barriers to communication between cross-functional
           teams. She is able to easily reach out to other teams without needing
           to go through the Functional manager.

37. Tom is a project manager who is assigned to a foreign country to manage a
    project. The project is a large one and comprises of smaller sub-teams,
    contributing to the entire project. As part of rewards and recognition within
    the project, Tom plans for a team award for the best sub-team. The
    Recognition and Rewards is associated with which of the following
    processes?

        A.   Close Project or Phase
        B.   Develop Project Team
        C.   Control Quality
        D.   Manage Project Team

38. A first-time project manager was assigned to a project that had a duration of
    3 months. In order to gain a head start in the project, she took an older,
    completed project and incorporated all the tools, techniques and checklists
    from that project in their entirety into the current one. The older project had
    been completed in 14 months' time and was very similar in nature. The
    most appropriate comment on this would be:

        A. This is an excellent example of reuse of artifacts from prior projects.
        B. This may be unnecessary. The project management team needs to
           decide what is appropriate for the project.
        C. This is not the correct procedure. The project manager should
           always create processes and documents afresh for new projects.
        D. This is not correct. The project manager is violating copyright and
           intellectual property rights of the organization's prior customers.
39. A first-time project manager decided that he would have a 'perfect project'.
    He informed the customer that this project would not accept change
    requests of any kind and the scope would need to be detailed out accurately
    right at the start of the project. The customer agreed to this request. What
    would your comment on this situation be?

        A. The is a good example of how the project management team can
           decide what is and what is not necessary for the project. Not
           allowing changes is a good way of ensuring that the project meets
           requirements as detailed out in project scope.
        B. This is unrealistic and impractical. Change is inevitable and rather
           than look at a 'no change' project, it would be more in the project
           interests to plan for a robust change control process.
        C. This indicates that the project manager is very aggressive and is
           likely to take the project to successful completion. Since he has
           announced the 'no change requests' policy, the customer manager
           can no longer request changes.
        D. This is unrealistic and impractical. The project manager should not
           have announced his intentions to the customer. He should have had
           an unofficial policy of rejecting all change requests.

40. A project manager has scheduled technical training for her project team
    members in order to increase their skills. During which of the following
    processes these trainings will be delivered to the team members?

        A.   Perform Quality Assurance
        B.   Acquire Project Team
        C.   Develop Project Team
        D.   Plan Human Resource Management

41. You have identified a risk that will negatively affect your security project.
    You and your team have decided to use an older encryption technology
    because of the high risk associated with the new technology. What type of
    risk strategy are you using?

        A.   Mitigation
        B.   Exploitation
        C.   Avoidance
        D.   Transfer

42. A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract.
    The targeted cost is US$ 200,000 with a fee of US$ 30,000. If the project
    comes in at US$ 170,000, what would be the cost of the total contract?

        A.   US$ 195,500
        B.   US$ 230,000
        C.   US$ 200,000
        D.   US$ 170,000
43. A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) type of
    contract. The project is negotiated such that if the final costs are less than
    expected costs, the sharing formula for cost savings is 80:20. The targeted
    cost is US$ 500,000 with a 10% fee. If the project comes in at US$
    450,000, what would be the cost of the total contract?

        A.   US$ 495,000
        B.   US$ 510,000
        C.   US$ 505,000
        D.   US$ 550,000

44. A project is contracted as a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract
    with a fee of 10% of estimated costs. The estimated cost is US$ 50,000. If
    the project comes in at US$ 75,000 with no changes in project scope, what
    would be the total cost of the contract?

        A.   US$ 55,000
        B.   US$ 125,000
        C.   US$ 75,000
        D.   US$ 80,000

45. Creating a sense of community is a benefit of what type of strategy?

        A.   Group based management
        B.   Hoteling
        C.   Co-location
        D.   Virtual teams

46. You are fairly new to project management, but have been successfully
    managing a small project and now management has given you another
    project to manage, which you are excited about. However, the new project
    is growing exponentially everyday, you have also learned a project manager
    you work with managed a similar project last year. What should you do?

        A. Wait to see if the scope of the project continues to grow
        B. Get the project assigned to the PM who managed the similar project
        C. Obtain Historical Records and get guidance from the project
           manager
        D. Speak to the other project manager to develop your project plans

47. You are the project manager from a seller organization, based at the
    customer location. One of your team members is involved in certain
    unacceptable activities at the customer location. The HR manager of the
    customer team organizes a meeting between you, the team-member, your
    customer-manager and HR wherein the team member apologizes for his
    activities and agrees not to repeat them. You should:

        A. Ignore the incident since the team member has agreed not repeat
           such activities.
        B. Report this incident immediately to HR of your organization and to
           your managers.
        C. Warn the team-member that this is the last opportunity and future
           incidents will lead to strict action.
        D. Document the issue for your project records.

48. You have been asked by your project manager to help them create a chart
    that illustrates the project resources that will be working on each work
    package. What would be the best type of chart to use?

        A.   Milestone chart
        B.   RACI chart
        C.   Project organization chart
        D.   WBS

49. As the project manager of a development project, you are aware that there
    is a slight defect in the product developed, as a result of which it will fail to
    meet certain regulatory standards. This was due to faulty requirements. You
    are also aware that the product will continue to function properly even
    though it fails to meet that standard. Your customer manager asks you to
    certify that the product meets the necessary regulatory standards, stating
    that this will not be verified when the report is submitted to the necessary
    authorities, so there is no issue with your certifying. Your stance is that:

        A. You certify the product. Regulations are anyway guidelines in the
           industry. Not meeting a regulation does not mean anything.
        B. As a one-off instance, you will certify the product to make sure the
           project goes through successfully.
        C. You will not certify that a product meets certain regulations when it
           does not, even though the product continues to function well.
        D. You certify the product, but you document your conversation with
           your customer manager for future purposes.

50. The selection of life cycle for the project, the processes to be applied to
    each phase, and the results of the tailoring by the project management team
    are usually found in the:

        A.   Project scope statement
        B.   Project management plan
        C.   Project schedule
        D.   Project charter


Answers

1. D - Notify the project stakeholders immediately about the new risk. Once the
   stakeholders have been made fully aware of the circumstances and potential
   impacts, a plan to deal with this risk can be developed. The PMI Code of Ethics
   and Professional Conduct requires project managers to provide accurate and
      timely project information at all times, and to follow all project processes and
      policies. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
2.    C - Failure Mode and Effect Analysis is an analytical procedure in which each
      potential failure mode in every component of a product is analyzed to determine
      its effect on the reliability of that component and the reliability of the product or
      system as a whole. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 540] [Project Risk Management]
3.    D - The correct response is that you would explain to the manager that you would
      need to formally document these as part of project scope change and put it
      through the change management process. Complying with the manager's request
      is incorrect and violates the code of ethics and professional responsibility that you
      have towards your organization. Refusing to take up changes may be too drastic a
      step. Contacting your manager in your organization may be considered after you
      have tried to get this formally included in the change management process.
      However, the decision to do work without payment involves financial
      considerations, and will be a more involved one. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics
      and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
4.    A - The first thing that should be done is to communicate the impact to the
      stakeholders and then make decisions on the project from the feedback. It is the
      project managers duty to provide accurate project information to the stakeholders
      and take the best decision in favor of the project and the organization. [PMI Code
      of Ethics & Professional Responsibility, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
5.    B - The change control, financial control and the risk control procedures are the
      organizational process assets more applicable during the execution of a project.
      The Identify Stakeholders is an initiating process, and at this stage, lessons
      learned from the previous projects serve as critical inputs to the process. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 395] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6.    B - The activities such as measuring examining and verifying to determine
      whether work and deliverables met requirements and product acceptance criteria
      are variously referred to as inspections, audits, reviews, product reviews, and
      walkthroughs. Prevention is not a valid term to describe these activities. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 229] [Project Quality Management]
7.    C - Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis is performed on risks that have been
      prioritized by the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process as potentially and
      substantially impacting the project's competing demands. Perform Quantitative
      Risk Analysis analyzes the effect of those risk events and assigns a numerical
      rating to those risks. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 334] [Project Risk Management]
8.    A - The requirement traceability matrix provides a structure to trace requirements
      to product design. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 118] [Project Scope Management]
9.    C - The Project Charter is the document that formalizes the project. It gives the
      Project Manager the authority to lead the project. It is a key input to the Define
      Scope process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 120] [Project Scope Management]
10.   C - This information needs to be updated in one of the project plans. The work
      breakdown structure and the stakeholders engagement assessment matrix do not
      record this information. The stakeholder register contains the high-level
      information about the project stakeholders. This information must be updated in
      the project stakeholder management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 403]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   D - The following items should be addressed when listing the roles and
      responsibilities of team members needed to complete the project: role, authority,
      responsibility, competency. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 264] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
12.   A - The organizational breakdown structure (OBS) looks similar to the WBS, but
      instead of being arranged according to a breakdown of project deliverables, it is
      arranged according to an organization's existing departments, units, or teams.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 261] [Project Human Resource Management]
13.   D - RACI stands for Responsible, Accountable, Consult, Inform. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 262] [Project Human Resource Management]
14.   D - The Delphi technique is a way to reach a consensus of experts. Project risk
      experts participate in this technique anonymously. A facilitator uses a
      questionnaire to solicit ideas about the important project risks. The responses are
      summarized and then recirculated to the experts for further comment. Consensus
      may be reached after a few rounds of the process. Thus the Delphi technique
      helps reduce bias in the data and keeps out any one person from having undue
      influence on the outcome. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 324] [Project Risk
      Management]
15.   A - Meeting ground rules are very helpful in setting the right behavior and the
      right tempo for the meeting. A meeting ground rule on active listening
      requirements would have eliminated the issue. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 277,
      407] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   A - A Pareto diagram is a style of histogram used as a tool within the Control
      Quality process. They display how many defects were produced by type or
      category of cause and ordered by their frequency. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 237]
      [Project Quality Management]
17.   D - Project scope describes the work that must be performed to deliver a product,
      service, or result to the stakeholders. Product scope describes the features and
      functions that characterize a product, service, or result. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      105] [Project Scope Management]
18.   C - This is an example of scope management. Gold plating would be if the team
      actually implemented the change. Scope verification is done near the closure of
      the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 105] [Project Scope Management]
19.   B - A weighting system is a method for quantifying qualitative data to minimize
      the effect of personal prejudice on seller selection. This is a part of the source
      selection criteria. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 368] [Project Procurement
      Management]
20.   D - Disclose your relocation plans to the hiring manager upfront. The hiring
      manager can then determine what sort of impact this could have on the project
      and if it would be appropriate to move ahead with hiring you. Failing to disclose
      this information upfront with the intention of not completing the project or
      modifying the project schedule to meet your needs runs counter to the PMI Code
      of Ethics and Professional Conduct. This code requires project managers put the
      needs of the project ahead of their own, and to fulfill the commitments they
      undertake. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 5]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   A - Control charts can be used to monitor any type of output variable and process
      performance. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
22.   A - Once the project manager is assigned to the project he should be in control.
      However, it is the sponsor who ultimately has the responsibility to ensure the
      project is completed successfully. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 16, 17] [Project
      Integration Management]
23.   C - Elaboration is not one of the five conflict-resolving methods that are
      recognized and endorsed by the Project Management Institute (PMI). The five
      methods recognized and endorsed by PMI include Forcing, Smoothing,
      Compromising, Collaborating and Withdrawing. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283]
      [Project Communications Management]
24.   C - This is known as pre-assignment. This situation can occur if the project is the
      result of specific people being promised as part of a competitive proposal, if the
      project is dependent on the expertise of particular persons, or if some staff
      assignments are defined within the project charter. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      270] [Project Human Resource Management]
25.   D - Notify the appropriate management about the donation request. Management
      can then evaluate the request and make a determination how to proceed. If the
      request is approved, at that point you can modify the project plan as needed to
      accommodate the request. However, making a decision that runs counter to
      project processes and policies by disposing these materials in a manner other than
      what had been previously defined is a violation of the PMI Code of Ethics.
      [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
26.   A - Variance analysis is not a tool and technique of the Perform Integrated
      Change Control process; the rest of the choices are valid tools and techniques of
      this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94] [Project Integration Management]
27.   A - Time and material contracts resemble cost-reimbursable type arrangements in
      that they are open ended. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement
      Management]
28.   B - Each potential failure mode in every component of a product is analyzed to
      determine its effect on the reliability of that component and, by itself or in
      combination with other possible failure modes, on the reliability of the product or
      system. For each potential failure, an estimate is made of its effect on the total
      system and of its impact. In addition, a review is undertaken of the action planned
      to minimize the probability of failure and to minimize its effects. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 540] [Project Quality Management]
29.   B - A scatter diagram shows the pattern of relationship between two variables.
      The closer the points are to a diagonal line, the more closely they are related.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
30.   A - The work performance information can be shared with the project team during
      the status review meetings; and with the key stakeholders during the project
      update meetings. The information management system can also be used to store
      this information where this can be easily accessed by the project stakeholders.
      The work performance information is also achieved in the project file that is a
      part of the organizational process assets. However, just the updates to the project
      file do not ensure that this information is also communicated to the project
      stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 412, 413, 415] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
31.   B - CPI=EV/AC CPI=(950,00*40%)/350,000 CPI=380,000/350,000
      CPI=1.09(under budget);SPI=EV/PV SPI=380,000/(950,00 x 0.375)
      SPI=380,000/36,250 SPI=1.07(ahead of schedule). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      224] [Project Cost Management]
32. C - An organization whose basic structure is a weak matrix means a relatively
    weaker role for the project manager. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 23] [Project
    Human Resource Management]
33. B - The project scope is measured against the project scope baseline which
    consists of the project scope statement, its associated WBS and the WBS
    dictionary. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 131, 132] [Project Scope Management]
34. C - The statement that there need not be a contractual relationship between the
    buyer and the seller is incorrect. Whenever the seller is external to the
    organization, there needs to exist a contractual relationship between the buyer and
    the seller. The rest of the statements are correct. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 357]
    [Project Procurement Management]
35. C - Thank the customer on behalf of the team and call out the contributions made
    by two of the team members. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
    requires project managers to act fairly and truthfully. Accepting the credit due to
    another person, or failing to denote where credit is actually due is dishonest and a
    violation of this code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
    Page 3, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
36. C - Lori will find that the Functional organization in which she is managing the
    project will typically lack management systems to support project needs. The
    absence of a project-oriented system will make it difficult for her to run the
    project efficiently. She will need to spend considerable time on managing the
    communications needs of the project. Communication will generally cascade
    upwards to the Functional manager who will then communicate with other
    Functional managers. They in turn cascade the communication down into their
    departments. The return communication follows the reverse path. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 22] [Project Framework]
37. B - Recognition and Rewards are the tools and techniques of the Develop Project
    Team process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 277] [Project Human Resource
    Management]
38. B - The correct response is that this may be unnecessary. The project management
    team needs to decide what is appropriate for the project. Since the prior project
    had a duration of 14 months and the current one is of 3 months' duration, it is
    unlikely that the current project will have exactly the same processes applied.
    Some amount of tailoring will be required. The other responses are not valid. It
    cannot be said with certainty that the project manager will not be violating
    copyright and intellectual property rights of prior customers. Most organizations
    have very clear guidelines on what information can go into their organizational
    assets' database. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 47] [Project Framework]
39. B - The correct response is that this is unrealistic and impractical. Change is
    inevitable and rather than look at a 'no change' project, it would be more in the
    project interests to plan for a robust change control process thereby handling any
    uncontrolled changes. "Mandating" that there will be no changes will be
    ineffective. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 137] [Project Scope Management]
40. C - Trainings are part of the Develop Project Team process. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 275] [Project Human Resource Management]
41. C - In this scenario, you decided to avoid the risk by using an older technology
    because there is too high of a risk if you use the new technology. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 344] [Project Risk Management]
42. C - In a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract, the seller is reimbursed for
      allowable costs and receives a fixed fee payment calculated as a percentage of the
      estimated project costs. The fixed fee does not vary with actual costs unless the
      project scope changes. In the current scenario, the fixed fee is fixed up as US$
      30,000. Although the actual project comes in at 170,000, the fixed fee remains the
      same. Hence the total cost to the project will be 170,000 + 30,000 = 200,000.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement Management]
43.   B - In a Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee (CPIF) type of contract, the seller is reimbursed
      for allowable costs for performing the contract work and receives a predetermined
      fee. In some cases, if the final costs are less than the expected costs, then both the
      buyer and the seller benefit from the cost savings based on a pre-negotiated
      sharing formula. In the current situation, the predetermined fee is 10% of US$
      500,000 = US$ 50,000. Since the project came in at US$ 450,000, the savings is
      500,000 - 450,000 = 50,000. The sharing formula is 80:20, hence the additional
      payout to the seller = (20/100) * 50,000 = 10,000. Hence the value of the total
      contract = 450,000 + 50,000 + 10,000 = US$ 510,000. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      364] [Project Procurement Management]
44.   D - In the Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee (CPFF) type of contract, the seller is reimbursed
      for allowable costs for performing the contract work and receives a fee calculated
      as an agreed-upon percentage of the costs. The costs vary depending on the actual
      cost. The fee is based on estimated costs unless the scope of the project changes.
      For the current project, the agree-upon percentage of costs is 10%. The actual cost
      is US$ 75,000 even though the initial estimate was US$ 50,000. However, the fee
      is calculated as 10% of 50,000 = (10/100) x 50,000 = 5,000. The total cost of the
      contract is 75,000 + 5,000 = US$ 80,000. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364]
      [Project Procurement Management]
45.   C - Co-location involves placing many or all of the most active project team
      members in the same physical location to improve their ability to perform as a
      team. Co-location strategy can include a team meeting room, places to post
      schedules, and other conveniences that enhance communication and a sense of
      community. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 277] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
46.   C - The historical records will give you an understanding of the past project;
      however you should also obtain guidance from the project manager. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 76] [Project Integration Management]
47.   B - Unacceptable behavior is a disciplinary issue and the HR department of your
      organization needs to take the necessary action which could involve include
      recalling the team-member from the project, or any other disciplinary action. The
      other choices listed do not do not signify correct responses in this matter.
      [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
48.   B - RACI stands for responsible, accountable, consult, and inform. This is a type
      of responsibility assignment matrix that is used to illustrate the relationship
      between work that needs to be completed and team members. In a RACI chart, a
      matrix is created with work packages making up the rows, and team member roles
      in the columns. Typically, a RACI chart assumes that one person will be
      accountable for a work package and more than one person may be responsible for
      completing the work package. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 262] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
49.   C - Your stance will be that you will not certify that a product meets certain
    regulations when it does not, even though the product continues to function well.
    It is possible that the customer manager might not be happy with this stance,
    however as a Project Manager, you have an obligation to uphold ethical practices
    and cannot certify a product that fails to meet the regulations. [Reference: PMI
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
50. B - Details of the life cycle, processes selected, and results of tailoring by the
    project management team are found in the project management plan. This plan
    integrates and consolidates all the subsidiary management plans from the
    planning processes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 77] [Project Integration
    Management]
Exam 12 Test Questions
1. You are managing a project for your company constructing an office
   complex in another country. The construction work on 2 of the buildings is
   complete and is ready for move-in. However, the construction foreman
   informs you that a fee must be paid to a local government agency in order
   to be issued an occupancy permit for all new construction in that country.
   What should you do?

       A.   Pay the fee.
       B.   Ask your legal department if this is legal.
       C.   Notify project stakeholders that you have been asked to pay a bribe.
       D.   Do not pay the fee.

2. You are a Project Manager for a company that designs and develops
   automation systems for car companies. You are in the Close Project process
   for a project in which a new automation system has been designed and
   created for a car company located in Korea. You need to obtain formal
   acceptance for the new automation system. All of the following statements
   are true with respect to the final acceptance of the new system EXCEPT?

       A. Performance tests on the new automation system should be
          completed by the car company.
       B. A formal statement is issued indicating that the new automation
          system meets the terms of the contract.
       C. Final acceptance for the new automation system can be informal or
          formal.
       D. A checklist can be used to determine whether the new automation
          system meets the car company's specifications

3. Which of the following is NOT a valid statement regarding the critical path
   method?

       A. The early start and finish dates and late start and finish dates are
          calculated without factoring in resource limitations.
       B. A forward pass and backward pass are performed through the
          project network paths.
       C. The resulting late start and finish dates will be the project schedule
          baseline.
       D. The flexibility of the schedule is measured by the difference
          between early and late dates.

4. You are the Project Manager of a large IT project. A manager from a
   company contracted to work on the project offers you free tickets to a local
   sporting event. The tickets are expensive but your organization has no
   formal policy regarding gifts. What is the BEST way to handle the offer?

       A. Refuse the tickets and report the offer to your employer.
       B. Accept the tickets but notify your employer.
        C. Politely refuse the tickets.
        D. Accept the tickets since there is no policy.

5. Susan is managing a multi-million dollar shopping complex construction
   project. The buyer of the project is an external entity. After identifying all
   the key and major project stakeholders, Susan is now planning to carry out
   a comprehensive stakeholder analysis. Which of the following is not
   involved with the stakeholder analysis?

        A.   Identifying potential stakeholders
        B.   Identifying stakeholder relationships
        C.   Resolving stakeholder conflicts
        D.   Determining stakeholders' interests and expectations

6. As project manager, you scheduled a status update meeting. During the
   meeting, a problem developed and the group discussed it. The day after the
   meeting, Kevin approached you and expressed his concern that the problem
   was not really resolved. After thinking about it, he felt that his concerns
   were still valid and should be addressed. What conflict resolution method
   was likely used at the status meeting?

        A.   Smoothing
        B.   Forcing
        C.   Withdrawal
        D.   Collaboration

7. You are a project manager for your company. Part of the project requires
   producing 10,000 widgets, which your company will outsource. The
   company has agreed to pay all related costs and 5% of the estimated project
   costs. What type of contract has been negotiated?

        A.   Cost-Plus-Incentive-Fee contract
        B.   Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract
        C.   Time and Material contract
        D.   Fixed-price contract

8. You are the Project Manager for JT's Lumber Yard. You are trying to
   forecast estimates for the last phase of the project you are currently working
   on. Based on the performance of the project to date, which formula can be
   used to estimate the total value of the project when completed assuming
   similar variances will not occur?

        A.   ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI
        B.   SV = EV - PV
        C.   CPI = EV/AC
        D.   EAC = AC + BAC - EV

9. You work as an engineer for a large engineering firm. The last week you
   have been corresponding back and fourth with the supervisor of your
    department about the horizontal stabilizers required for the wings on a new
    aircraft you are designing. Which communication dimension does this
    represent?

       A.   Horizontal
       B.   Formal
       C.   External
       D.   Vertical

10. During the execution of a project, a need is felt to make major changes to
    the project stakeholder management plan. What must the project manager
    do first?

       A.   Ask the project sponsor for an expert opinion.
       B.   Directly make the required changes.
       C.   Issue a change request.
       D.   Move the project back to planning phase.

11. Which of the following statements about team-building activities is
    incorrect?

       A. It can be a 5-minute agenda item in a status review meeting.
       B. It can be a professionally facilitated experience designed to improve
          interpersonal relationships.
       C. The objective of team-building activities is to help team members
          work individually and effectively.
       D. Informal communication and activities help in building trust and
          establishing good working relationships.

12. A measure taken to bring future results in line with the project plan BEST
    describes?

       A.   Change request
       B.   Preventive action
       C.   Corrective action
       D.   Defect repair

13. Which of the following is not a Tuckman's team development stage?

       A.   Confronting
       B.   Forming
       C.   Norming
       D.   Adjourning

14. Which process is MOST responsible for managing changes to the schedule
    components of the Project Management Plan?

       A. Control Schedule
       B. Create WBS
        C. Develop Project Management Plan
        D. Develop Schedule

15. Stacy is producing a documentary on African wildlife. Although the project
    key stakeholders are very supportive of the project, Stacy believes that there
    are some stakeholders' concerns that might become major problems in the
    future. What should Stacy do?

        A. Treat them as project issues and address them immediately.
        B. Wait till these concerns become a problem.
        C. Request the stakeholders if they can resolve these concerns by
           themselves.
        D. Add these concerns to the risks watch list.

16. Your project team works in two different buildings across the city. The
    team has been struggling to perform effectively and has a difficult time
    resolving problems. What would be the BEST team development technique
    to resolve this issue?

        A.   Mediation
        B.   Rewards
        C.   Co-location
        D.   Training

17. You have been asked to create a graphical display of schedule-related
    information listing schedule activities on the left side of the chart, dates on
    the top, and activity durations as date-placed horizontal bars on the right
    side. What would such a chart be called?

        A.   PERT chart
        B.   Gantt chart
        C.   Hunt chart
        D.   GERT chart

18. Which of the following techniques can help clarify the structure,
    requirements, and other terms of the purchases so that mutual agreement
    can be reached prior to signing the contract between a buyer and a seller?

        A.   Independent estimates
        B.   Advertising
        C.   Bidder conferences
        D.   Procurement negotiations

19. A complicated software project was authorized by a project sponsor.
    However, the users who were intended to use the product found it very
    difficult to articulate their requirements. What technique can be employed
    to elicit requirements for such a project?

        A. Job overlaying
        B. Hidden participant
        C. Job duplication
        D. Job shadowing

20. The manager of a project, that your company is running in another country,
    is at the corporate headquarters for a company-wide project management
    meeting. During a break, you overhear the project manager discussing
    payments made to local municipal governments for construction permits for
    his project. Your company has a strict policy about paying or taking bribes.
    What should you do?

        A.   Report him to PMI.
        B.   Report him to his manager.
        C.   Notify his project stakeholders.
        D.   Do nothing.

21. A project has several teams. Team C has repeatedly missed deadlines in the
    past. This has caused team D to have to crash the critical path several times.
    As the team leader for team D, you receive word that the next deadline may
    also be missed. You should meet with the:

        A.   Project Manager alone
        B.   Project manager and Management
        C.   Manager of Team D
        D.   Project Manager and the leader of team C

22. A project manager would find team development to be the MOST difficult
    in which type of organization?

        A.   Functional organization
        B.   Projectized organization
        C.   Weak matrix organization
        D.   Balanced matrix organization

23. Which tool is BEST used to display how a company structures itself
    departmentally?

        A.   WBS
        B.   BOM
        C.   OBS
        D.   RBS

24. Johan is a project manager working for a Norwegian accounting firm. To
    get results, Johan often tells team members that if deadlines are not met, he
    will have to discuss their performance with their functional managers.
    Johan's organization can not be a:

        A. Projectized organization
        B. Weak matrix organization
       C. Functional organization
       D. Strong matrix organization

25. You have recently been successful in passing the Project Management
    Professional exam. Others within the organization you work for are also
    pursuing the certification and have sought your assistance. They have
    requested that you provide them with a detailed list of the questions that
    you had on the exam. What is the FIRST course of action you should take?

       A. Pretend that you do not recall any of the questions.
       B. Indicate that you cannot disclose questions you saw on the exam.
       C. Offer your coworkers a listing of all the questions you recall from
          the exam.
       D. Report the violation to the PMI.

26. The project sponsor asks you to increase budget estimates by 25% to ensure
    that enough funds are budgeted for the project. What should you do?

       A.   Add 25% to your contingency reserves.
       B.   Fast track the project.
       C.   Add 25% to all costs across the board.
       D.   Ask for additional information

27. You are the project manager for a project and have just entered the third
    year of a scheduled four year project. You need to evaluate new risks that
    have emerged since the project began. What should you perform to provide
    this information?

       A.   Variance and trend analysis
       B.   Process Improvement Plan
       C.   Risk audit
       D.   Risk re-assessment

28. What is the BEST tool and technique that provides the expected cost of a
    procurement and helps identify significant variations from cost estimates
    prepared in-house?

       A.   Screening system
       B.   Bidder conferences
       C.   Independent estimates
       D.   Buyer-conducted performance review

29. Which of the following should be done FIRST during the Project Life
    Cycle?

       A. List the key people and organizations that have a stake in the
          project.
       B. Ascertain the stakeholder interests and expectations for the project.
       C. Identify the key people and organizations that have a stake in the
           project.
        D. Select and quantify the stakeholder interests and expectations for the
           project.

30. A project team has recently computed the project's current schedule and
    cost performance indices. They have also calculated the new estimate to
    complete and the TCPI based on the new estimate at completion. The
    project key stakeholders are not fully aware of the earned value
    management process. These measures in this case are an example of?

        A.   Work performance data
        B.   Lessons learned
        C.   Work performance information
        D.   Learning curve for the stakeholders

31. You are the Project Manager for GeoThermal Systems. Which of the
    following must be done FIRST before proceeding with a new project?

        A.   Create the Project Scope Statement
        B.   Stakeholder analysis
        C.   Product analysis
        D.   Obtain Project Charter approval

32. You are a Project Manager for an automotive parts company. Your
    organization has been hired to produce clutches for an exotic car company
    which will involve the design and production of custom clutches. During
    the course of the project you are reviewing a quality control statistics chart
    that examines every clutch produced for the month and notice several cases
    where the spring component of the clutch is expanding with too much force
    and is falling outside the upper control limit. Which type of Quality Control
    tool are you MOST LIKELY making use of?

        A.   Control charts
        B.   Statistical Sampling
        C.   Cause and Effect diagram
        D.   Precedence Diagramming Method

33. You are the Project Manager for Wicked Fast Cars, Corp. You are working
    on a project for the Human Resources department that is scheduled to take
    one year. After three months into the project, you calculate the EV at
    $35,000 and the PV at $45,000. Which option below represents the value
    for the SV?

        A.   -$10,000
        B.   1.29
        C.   0.78
        D.   $10,000

34. You are a Project Manager creating the final project file. Which
    information would you NOT include in this file?

       A.   Project calendars
       B.   Lessons learned from previous similar projects
       C.   Risk response actions
       D.   Scope management plan

35. The sponsor of your facilities upgrade project has left the company to
    another organization. Few weeks later, you are reviewing the business case
    for the project and discover that there are several inconsistencies between
    what is stated in the business case and what is described in the project
    scope. Further research shows that the business case as a whole is based on
    inaccurate information. What do you do?

       A.   Notify your project stakeholders immediately.
       B.   Add this this to the risk log.
       C.   Update the requirements.
       D.   Call the sponsor for clarification.

36. Which statement is NOT true about the configuration management system?

       A. The configuration management system doesn't include change
          tracking system.
       B. It documents the functional and physical characteristics of a
          product.
       C. The configuration management system is a sub-component of the
          overall project management system.
       D. The configuration management system will define procedures to
          control any changes.

37. You are a PMP who is nearing the end of an important project. You have
    spent considerable energy on this project nurturing a cooperative
    relationship between your organization and the customer. What is the
    customer's MOST important role in bringing the project to a close?

       A. The customer is delivered the last shipment of the product, service,
          or result
       B. The customer acknowledges the delivery of the last shipment of the
          product, service, or result
       C. The customer provides formal acceptance of the product, service, or
          result
       D. The customer makes a final payment for the work completed on the
          project

38. All of the following statements are true about the cause and effect diagram
    EXCEPT?

       A. A maximum of six causes are listed on the cause and effect diagram.
       B. Ishikawa is another name for the cause and effect diagram.
       C. The effect being studied is normally stated at the head of the
          diagram.
       D. The cause and effect diagram is one tool that can be used for
          problem solving.

39. You are the Project Manager for Commodities, Inc. You are involved in a
    new project to create an internal web site for the employees of
    Commodities, Inc that will allow them to view events within the company.
    All of the following options listed are project constraints EXCEPT?

       A. The project must be completed by December 31st of the current
          year.
       B. There is a budget of $75,000 for the project.
       C. The navigation menu for the website must be on the top of the page.
       D. Only 3 employees are available to work on the project.

40. The sponsor and the project manager are discussing what type of contract
    the project manager plans to use on the project. The buyer points out that
    the performing organization spent a lot of money hiring a design team to
    come up with the design. The project manager is interested in seeing that
    the risk for the buyer be as small as possible. An advantage of a fixed price
    contract for the buyer is:

       A.   There is no risk at all.
       B.   Risk is shared by all parties
       C.   Cost Risk is Lower
       D.   Cost Risk is Higher

41. What BEST describes the role of the project team members?

       A.   To perform the project work
       B.   To approve the change requests
       C.   To be ultimately responsible for the project's success
       D.   To authorize the project

42. What is the MAIN reason for controlling the project scope?

       A.   To enable scope creep
       B.   To prevent changes from affecting the project
       C.   To ensure timely closure of the project.
       D.   Preventing scope creep.

43. You are a Project Manager and are nearing the end of your project. You are
    now required to provide lessons learned documentation on the project.
    What is the MAIN purpose for preparing lessons learned documentation?

       A. To identify the valued employees who improved efficiencies
       B. To identify the problem employees who reduced efficiencies
       C. To identify instances in which you positively affected the project
       D. To identify improvements for managing similar future projects

44. Which strategy attempts to reduce the probability and/or the impact of a
    risk to the point where the risk can be accepted?

       A.   Mitigation
       B.   Avoidance
       C.   Acceptance
       D.   Transfer

45. You are a Project Manager for Groceries R' US, a supermarket chain, and
    are currently working on a project to build a new outlet. The planned values
    (PV) for the foundation and the frame are $150,000 and $500,000. After
    five months, you do a performance measurement analysis. You are
    currently not ahead of schedule. The actual costs for the foundation and
    frame were $175,000 and $650,000 up to this point where 100% of the
    foundation is complete and only 80% of the frame is complete. Which
    value represents the cost performance index (CPI) to two decimal places at
    this point in the project?

       A.   0.84
       B.   1.5
       C.   0.67
       D.   1.19

46. Due to unforeseen circumstances your supplier has run out of the cement
    needed for your construction project. What is the BEST strategy for dealing
    with this issue?

       A.   Implement a workaround
       B.   Implement the contingency response strategy
       C.   Refer to the risk register
       D.   Transfer the risk

47. You are a Project Manager for a company that has a composite organization
    structure. The current project you are managing is coming to an end. There
    are a number of activities that need to be completed including releasing
    project resources. All of the following statements are examples or true
    statements related to releasing project resources in this company EXCEPT?

       A. Documenting the release date for project resources in the project
          management plan
       B. Transferring project equipment to the regular operations of the
          company
       C. Reassigning project team members to a new project within the
          company
       D. Transferring the documented lessons learned into the lessons
          learned database
48. Which of the following is an output of the Conduct Procurements process?

        A.   Advertising
        B.   Selected Sellers
        C.   Independent Estimates
        D.   Expert Judgment

49. Which technique is NOT commonly used to align the timing of activities
    with available resources?

        A.   Critical Path Method
        B.   Resource Leveling
        C.   Critical Chain Method
        D.   Resource Smoothing

50. You have been asked to determine the logical relationships, leads, and lags
    for the activities that make up a project. What would be the BEST
    technique to use?

        A.   Resource Smoothing
        B.   Critical Path Method
        C.   What-If scenario analysis.
        D.   Resource Leveling


Answers

1. A - Pay the fee to the local agency. Because it is a standard fee for a permit that is
   required of all new construction permits, it is not a bribe. PMI's Code of Ethics
   and Professional Conduct prohibit accepting or paying bribes. [Reference: PMI
   Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. C - Final acceptance for the product deliverables is formal; and must be formally
   signed off on by the customer or sponsor. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 100, 101]
   [Project Integration Management]
3. C - The critical path method is a technique that calculates the earliest and latest
   possible start and finish times for work activities in a project. It uses the estimated
   duration of activities and the dependencies among them to determine limits for
   when each activity can be performed. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 176, 177]
   [Project Time Management]
4. C - The best way to handle this type of offer is to politely reject the offer. Taking
   gifts can be viewed as personal gain and may affect your integrity as a Project
   Manager and open you and your organization to complaints of improper conduct.
   [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
   Responsibility]
5. C - Addressing and resolving stakeholder conflicts are carried out during the
   project execution. During the stakeholder analysis, stakeholders are identified and
   their relationships, influences and expectations are analyzed. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 396] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. A - Smoothing is the method that was most likely used to resolve the conflict that
      arose at the status meeting. Smoothing is a temporary way to resolve conflict.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource Management]
7.    B - This is an example of a Cost-Plus-Fixed-Fee contract. This type of contract
      determines the profit element as a fixed percentage of the estimated project cost.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement Management]
8.    D - The formula EAC = AC + BAC - EV is used to determine the total value of
      the project when completed assuming similar variances will not occur for the
      uncompleted project activities. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost
      Management]
9.    D - In this case, your communication is with your supervisor who would have a
      different level of responsibilities and authority. This is an example of a vertical
      dimension with respect to communications. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287]
      [Project Communications Management]
10.   C - Any major change to the project management plan or any of its components
      must go through the formal change control procedure. To initiate this process, the
      project manager must first issue a change request. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 78,
      399] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   C - The objective of team-building activities is to help team members work
      together and not individually. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 276] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
12.   C - A corrective action is anything that needs to be done to bring the project back
      on track. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 81] [Project Integration Management]
13.   A - Confronting is not a valid choice. The Tuckman ladder's team development
      stages are: forming, storming, norming, performing and adjourning. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 276] [Project Human Resource Management]
14.   A - The Control Schedule is the process of managing the changes to the schedule
      baseline to achieve the project management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 185]
      [Project Time Management]
15.   A - It's the project manager's duty to manage the project stakeholders'
      expectations. Stacy must not wait till the concerns become a problem. Rather, she
      needs to treat them as project issues and immediately address them. A risks watch
      list records low probability risks, transferring this risk to the watch list is not a
      good idea. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 405] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   C - Co-location is an organizational placement strategy where the project team
      members are physically moved or placed next to one another to improve
      communication, working relationships, and productivity. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 277] [Project Human Resource Management]
17.   B - Such a chart would be called a Gantt chart. This is a popular representation of
      project schedule information. Activity start dates, end dates, durations,
      dependencies, and milestones are easily depicted on this chart in a graphical
      manner. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 182] [Project Time Management]
18.   D - Procurement negotiations help clarify the structure, requirements, and other
      terms of the purchases so that mutual agreement can be reached prior to signing
      the contract between a buyer and a seller. The bidders conferences are carried out
      prior to this stage and they are used to ensure that all prospective sellers have a
      clear and common understanding of the procurement requirements. Advertising
      and Independent Estimates can't help in this case. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 377]
      [Project Procurement Management]
19.   D - Job shadowing is a technique that can be employed in this case. It is done
      externally by an observer who views the user doing his or her job. This technique
      is also called observation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 116] [Project Scope
      Management]
20.   D - Do nothing. Fees paid to government organizations to cover the
      administrative costs associated with issuing various type of permits is a common
      practice in many parts of the world. These payments are not considered bribes.
      PMI's code prohibits project managers from engaging in bribery, and to report
      others who do to the appropriate management. In this case, however, there is
      nothing to report. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
      Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   D - Those having the problem should resolve the problem. Having had to crash
      the critical path several times implies that team D has already dealt with these
      problems. In this case, the two team leaders need to meet. The extent of this
      situation requires the project manager's involvement as well. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource Management]
22.   A - A project manager has the least authority in a functional organization. Hence,
      managing team building activities is difficult in such organizations in contrast to
      other organizational types. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 22] [Project Framework]
23.   C - The Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS) is a hierarchical organization
      chart that includes employees, department structures, and associated
      responsibilities. It is organized by the company's teams, or department
      breakdown. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 261] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
24.   A - In a projectized organization the project manager have a great deal of
      independence and authority. From the given scenario, it appears that the project
      manager has limited authority in the organization, hence the organization cannot
      be a projectized organization. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 25] [Project
      Framework]
25.   B - The FIRST course of action is to indicate that you cannot disclose questions
      you saw on the exam. PMI requires that the candidates and those seeking
      certification to maintain and respect the confidentiality of the contents of the PMP
      examination. The PMI code of conducts mandates respecting copyrights of others.
      [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
26.   D - Ask for additional information on the risks that would cause the original
      budget estimates to be too low. Simply increasing the project budget by 25%
      without identifying the underlying reasons means you are providing inaccurate
      information. PMI's Code of Ethics requires project managers to provide accurate
      information at all times. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
27.   D - A risk re-assessment is a technique that involves re-evaluating project risks
      and identifying new risks that arise as the project moves forward. These risks are
      evaluated and placed in the risk register. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 351] [Project
      Risk Management]
28.   C - Independent estimates is a tool and technique for the Conduct Procurements
      process that provides the expected cost of a procurement. It helps identify
      significant variations from cost estimates prepared by the project team. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 376] [Project Procurement Management]
29.   C - It is important to identify stakeholders, the key people and organizations that
      have a stake in the project, as early as possible in the Project Life Cycle so that
      they have a shared sense of ownership in the project and are more likely to accept
      the project deliverables. The "List the key people and organizations that have a
      stake in the project" option is incorrect. Before you can list the stakeholders, you
      need to identify them. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
30.   A - The scenario gives a situation where the project team has calculated some
      measures that need to be transformed into a format that the project stakeholders
      might understand. These measures are work performance data for this project.
      Work performance information is always in a format that can be easily
      understood by the project stakeholders. This is clearly neither an example of
      lessons learned nor is it an example of a learning curve for the stakeholders.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 411] [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   D - When managing a project, you must first make sure the Project Charter is
      signed and approved before proceeding. The Project Charter is the document that
      formalizes the project. It gives the Project Manager the authority to lead the
      project. The Project Charter is created first during the Initiating process. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 66] [Project Integration Management]
32.   A - Control charts graphically display the interaction of process variables on a
      process. Control charts have three lines: a center line which gives the average of
      the process, an upper line designating the upper control limit (UCL) and showing
      the upper range of acceptable values, and a lower line designating the lower
      control limit (LCL) and showing the lower range of acceptable values. Points that
      fall outside of the UCL or LCL are evidence that the process is out of control.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
33.   A - SV = Earned Value (EV) - Planned Value (PV) SV = $35,000-$45,000 SV = -
      $10,000. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 218] [Project Cost Management]
34.   B - The lessons learned from the previous similar projects are used throughout the
      project. These are already part of the organizational process assets, and are not
      recorded in the final project file. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 104] [Project
      Integration Management]
35.   A - Notify your project stakeholders immediately. They can determine the best
      path forward. An incorrect business case could have a serious impact on the
      usability of the final output of your project, or even impact the company's
      strategic goals. Failure to point out this error to the appropriate management is a
      violation of the PMI Code of Ethics. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   A - The configuration management system includes a change tracking system.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 532] [Project Integration Management]
37.   C - It is important that the customer provides formal acceptance of the product,
      service, or result of the project. This should include a written statement that
      identifies that the company has fulfilled all the project requirements. This protects
      the organization and customer over confusion whether all terms within the project
      have been satisfactorily met. The project cannot be closed if a formal acceptance
      is not made. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 134] [Project Scope Management]
38.   A - While listing six causes is possible, there is no rule that states a maximum of
      six causes can be listed. You could list four or eight for example. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 236] [Project Quality Management]
39.   C - Constraints limit the project team's options. Predefined budgets, limits on the
      number of resources available, and imposed dates are project constraints.
      Positioning of the menu for the website is one of the requirements for the project
      and this is not considered a constraint. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 124] [Project
      Scope Management]
40.   C - In a fixed price contract, the seller has the most cost risk and the buyer has
      lower risk. A fixed price contract transfers the risk to the seller. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 344, 362] [Project Procurement Management]
41.   A - Project team members are responsible for performing the actual project work.
      They work with the project manager to complete project activities and achieve the
      goals of the project. The project manager is assigned by an organization to
      achieve specific project objectives. The ultimate responsibility of the project
      success lies with the project manager and the project sponsor, while the project is
      authorized by the sponsor. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 17, 68] [Project
      Framework]
42.   D - The main reason for controlling the project scope is to influence the impact of
      changes on the project. This is done by managing approved changes and
      disregarding rejected changes. This reduces the risk of scope creep on the project.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 108] [Project Scope Management]
43.   D - Lessons learned documentation provides you or other project managers with
      relevant information for similar future projects. The lessons learned from this
      project can reduce risks by enlightening the reader of possible pitfalls. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 104] [Project Integration Management]
44.   A - Risk mitigation is a strategy that seeks to reduce the risk to a level that the
      risk becomes acceptable. A Project Manager may add specific project tasks to the
      work of a project to reduce the level of risk. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 345]
      [Project Risk Management]
45.   C - Get the total for the actual costs by adding the $175,000 and $650,000 for the
      foundation and frame. The total is $825,000. Now calculate earned value. We
      need to identify all of the activities that have been completed or partially
      completed as of the measurement date. If partially completed, we calculate the
      fractional value of the budgeted cost for the activity by the percent completion.
      Add together the budgeted cost for completed or partially completed work
      activities, INCLUDING any work that has been performed ahead of schedule. We
      are told that we are not ahead of schedule. So there is nothing to include for the
      ahead of schedule category. 100% of the foundation is complete and only 80% of
      the frame is complete. So we add 100% of $150,000 and 80% of 500,000, which
      is $400,000, together to get a total earned value of $550,000. Now find the CPI by
      taking the total for EV $550,000 up to this point and dividing it by the total of the
      actual cost $825,000 for the same time period. The result for CPI is 0.67.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219] [Project Cost Management]
46.   A - In this situation, you would need to come up with a workaround. A
      workaround is similar to a contingency response strategy, but differs in that the
      risk was unexpected and a response was not planned prior to the risk event.
      Contingent response strategy is a means to address specific identified risks
      through a formal process and provide resources to meet risk events if they occur.
      The question states the problem was unforeseen. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 567]
      [Project Risk Management]
47.   D - Transferring the documented lessons learned into the lessons learned database
      is not linked with reassigning of project team members or transferring of project
    equipment at the end of the project. Lessons learned track project successes and
    failures, which would include factors that led to the project being cancelled. It's
    important to archive or transfer these records to a lessons learned knowledgebase
    for reference on future projects. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 266] [Project Human
    Resource Management]
48. B - Selected seller is the output of the Conduct Procurements process. The rest of
    the choices are the tools and techniques of this process. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 371] [Project Procurement Management]
49. A - The critical path method is not a technique commonly used to align the timing
    of activities with available resources. The critical path method is a technique used
    to establish a rough timeline fitting the project's work activities within the
    deadlines defined in the scope statement. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 176] [Project
    Time Management]
50. B - The critical path method is a technique that calculates the earliest and latest
    possible start and finish times for work activities in a project. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 176, 177] [Project Time Management]
Communications Test Questions
1. You are holding a kick off meeting for the build out of a new data center.
   This will be the largest, most costly and most complex project you have
   worked on in your career. You have counted up the number of stakeholders,
   vendors and project team members to be 52. In order to stress to the group
   how important and difficult communication will be on the project you want
   to tell them how many channels of communication exist on the project.
   What would you tell them?

       A.   2625 channels exist on the project
       B.   52 channels exist on the project
       C.   2704 channels exist on the project
       D.   1326 channels exist on the project

2. A communications management plan should include all of the following,
   EXCEPT:

       A.   Glossary of Common Terminology
       B.   Escalation List/Contacts
       C.   Person that will issue weekly reports
       D.   Risk Register

3. You are working on a project with a fixed fee contract, therefore
   communications should tend toward?

       A.   Formal Verbal Communication
       B.   Informal Written Communication
       C.   Formal Written Communication
       D.   Informal Verbal Communication

4. A project initially starts out with 3 stakeholders but the number increases to
   7 during the course of the project. How many channels does the project
   manager now need to manage?

       A.   18 channels
       B.   10 channels
       C.   21 channels
       D.   7 channels

5. You are the Project Manager and are responsible for the development of a
   mall. As with any construction project, there will be multiple iterations of
   blueprints and engineering drawings, so you have decided to create an
   online database that can be used to query the documents by name, type,
   date, etc. This is an example of what type of communication tool?

       A. Project Management Information System
       B. Lessons Learned
       C. Project Records
       D. Configuration Management System

6. You are working on a project where all the team members are located in
   geographically different areas, therefore all the communication is done via
   e-mail and chat. It is sometimes hard to get the true meaning of these
   messages because you can't see facial expression or hear tone of voice, this
   is an example of?

       A.   Encoding
       B.   Medium
       C.   Decoding
       D.   Noise

7. You are reviewing a project with Tom, a new project manager. While
   discussing the communication requirements with Tom, you find that he has
   an impression that a project with 'n' number of stakeholders has 'n'
   communication channels. You are aware that this is wrong. What is the
   right answer?

       A.   No of channels = n(n+1)/2 where n = number of stakeholders
       B.   No of channels = (n+1)*(n-1)/2 where n = number of stakeholders
       C.   No of channels = n(n-1)/2n where n = number of stakeholders
       D.   No of channels = n(n-1)/2 where n = number of stakeholders

8. Your project calls for communication with a very large audience. What
   communication method would be appropriate under such circumstances?

       A.   Pull communication
       B.   Interactive communication
       C.   Two-way communication
       D.   Push communication

9. An external auditor is auditing the quality of your project's management
   processes. Which of the following processes this activity relates to?

       A.   Control Quality
       B.   Perform Quality Assurance
       C.   Validate Scope
       D.   Control Procurements

10. Successful project managers generally spend an inordinate of time, doing
    what?

       A.   Updating the Project Management Plan
       B.   Communicating
       C.   Working Scheduled Activities
       D.   Managing Risks
Answers

1. D - Communication Channel formula is: n(n-1)/2. N=Number of people involved
    on the project. 52(52-1)/2 52*51=2652 2652/2=1326 [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    292] [Project Communications Management]
2. D - The Risk Register is part of Risk Management and is not included in the
    Communications Management Plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 296] [Project
    Communications Management]
3. C - Anytime contracts are involved in a project, the project manager/team should
    use formal written communication methods. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 287]
    [Project Communications Management]
4. C - The correct answer is 21. The number of channels = n(n-1)/2 where n is the
    number of stakeholders. Since there are 7 stakeholders now, the number of
    channels is 7 X 6 / 2 = 21. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project
    Communications Management]
5. A - The online database is an example of a Project Management Information
    System. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 554] [Project Communications Management]
6. D - Anything that interferes with the meaning of a message is considered noise.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 293] [Project Communications Management]
7. D - The correct response is n(n-1)/2 where n = number of stakeholders. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 292] [Project Communications Management]
8. A - The situation in the project would call for pull communication. This is suited
    for very large audiences and would allow them to access information content at
    their own discretion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 295] [Project Communications
    Management]
9. B - This is an example of a quality audit by an external auditor. This is a tool and
    technique of the Perform Quality Assurance process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    247] [Project Quality Management]
10. B - Most projects fail because of poor communication. Successful project
    managers spend a great deal of time communicating. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    287] [Project Communications Management]
Exam 13 Test Questions
1. You have completed your estimates for your project and determined that it
   will take 10 months to complete. However, your project sponsor insists that
   it be completed in 9 months. How do you handle this?

       A. Increase the budget by 10%
       B. Inform the sponsor you will have to explore the options before
          committing to that timeline.
       C. Reduce scope
       D. Add resources

2. Lois is a project manager managing a town-development project. She has
   set up a series of interviews with various stakeholders to gather some
   experiential and historical information on risks. Which phase is this likely
   to happen in?

       A.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
       B.   Plan Risk Responses
       C.   Understand Risks
       D.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

3. Which of the following models describes stakeholders based on their
   power, urgency and legitimacy?

       A.   Influence / Impact grid
       B.   Power / influence grid
       C.   Power / Interest grid
       D.   Salience model

4. A project was awarded based on a competitive proposal. Management made
   a commitment that a few key team members would be made posted on the
   project. When such assignments happen, they are termed as:

       A.   Bargaining agreements
       B.   Schedule constraints
       C.   Assignment risk
       D.   Pre-assignments

5. Richard is currently assessing his project stakeholders influences, interests,
   expectations, risk tolerance and engagement levels. This relates to which of
   the following tools and techniques?

       A.   Stakeholder register
       B.   Stakeholder analysis
       C.   Project charter
       D.   Expert judgment
6. Your project team members have just started to work together and are now
   adjusting their work habits and behaviors to support each other. Which
   stage of the Tuckman ladder has your team just entered?

       A.   Norming
       B.   Performing
       C.   Forming
       D.   Storming

7. A project manager had scheduled a number of training programs for his
   team. However, he was aware that apart from planned training, unplanned
   training also took place in a number of ways. Which of these is not one of
   the ways in which unplanned training can happen?

       A.   Classroom
       B.   Observation
       C.   Project performance appraisals
       D.   Conversation

8. As part of the procurement process, the procuring organization elected to
   have an estimate of costs prepared by an outside professional estimator. The
   estimator came up with an estimate of $ 500,000. However, the cost
   estimates prepared by prospective sellers were in the range of $ 200,000.
   How can this be best interpreted?

       A. The procurement statement of work was deficient and ambiguous.
       B. The professional estimator has inflated the estimate of costs.
       C. The prospective sellers do not have the required skills to do the
          project.
       D. Prospective sellers are trying to underbid and win the project.

9. A project manager is working on the Perform Quality Assurance phase of a
   project. He is looking for an iterative means to improve quality and
   eliminate activities that don't add value. Which of the following will help
   him do this?

       A.   Quality control measurements
       B.   Quality checklist
       C.   Continuous process improvement
       D.   Team rewards

10. Mark is managing a water distribution network design project. The project
    is currently in the planning phase. During the Plan Stakeholder
    Management process, Mark feels the need to update the project stakeholder
    register. What should Mark do?

       A. Mark should update the stakeholder register; the stakeholder register
          can be updated during the Plan Stakeholder Management process.
       B. Mark does not have to update the stakeholder register; he can
          capture all the required updates in the stakeholder management plan.
       C. Mark cannot update the stakeholder register during the planning
          phase of the project.
       D. Mark needs to issue a change request in order to update the
          stakeholder register.

11. A project manager included contingency reserves and management reserves
    in the total budget of a high-risk project. He also made certain earned value
    measurement calculations. Which of the following is incorrect?

       A. Contingency reserves are not part of the project cost baseline.
       B. Management reserves are not part of the project cost baseline.
       C. The project manager needs to get approval before spending
          management reserve.
       D. Reserves are usually included in the total budget of a project.

12. Linda is a first-time project manager and is analyzing a project schedule.
    She intends to apply resource leveling and has been given the following
    guidelines on resource leveling. Which of these four statements is
    incorrect?

       A. Resource Leveling can often cause the critical path to change.
       B. Resource leveling is applied to a schedule before it has been
          analyzed by the critical path method.
       C. Resource leveling is applied to keep resource usage at a constant
          level.
       D. Resource leveling is necessary when resources have been over-
          allocated.

13. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct has as its foundation four
    values identified by practitioners from the global project management
    community. They are:

       A.   Respect, fairness, transparency and freedom.
       B.   Responsibility, transparency, fairness and honesty.
       C.   Respect, freedom, honesty and transparency.
       D.   Responsibility, respect, fairness and honesty

14. Risk identification checklists are usually developed based on historical
    information and knowledge accumulated from previous similar projects.
    Which of the following statements about risk identification checklists is
    wrong?

       A. It is impossible to build an exhaustive checklist.
       B. The lowest level of the Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) cannot be
          used as a risk checklist
       C. Quick and simple risk checklists are the least effective ones.
       D. Risk checklists should be reviewed during project closure.
15. Lena is managing the construction of a new office facility for her company.
    The project is half way through the execution. The project sponsor has
    asked Lena to ensure that all they key project stakeholders are still
    committed to the project. How can Lena assess the stakeholders' current
    engagement levels?

        A. By analyzing the most recent issue register
        B. By reviewing the Stakeholders Engagement Assessment Matrix last
           updated during the planning phase of the project
        C. By requesting the key stakeholders to submit a signed declaration of
           commitment
        D. By communicating and interacting with the key stakeholders

16. The list of identified risks is found in the risk register. However, the high-
    level risks are first listed in the:

        A.   Scope statement
        B.   Requirement document
        C.   Project charter
        D.   Risk management plan

17. A number of identified risks occurred early in a project. As a result, most of
    the project objectives ended up in jeopardy. The project manager decided to
    present a case to management that the project be closed down. This is an
    example of:

        A.   Risk Acceptance
        B.   Risk Mitigation
        C.   Risk Avoidance
        D.   Risk Transfer

18. 20% of the work was completed in a project. At this stage the project
    manager determined that the budget at completion (BAC) was no longer
    viable and developed a forecasted estimate at completion (EAC). What
    index can the project manager use to look at the calculated projection of
    cost performance that must be achieved on the remaining work

        A.   Schedule Performance Index (SPI)
        B.   Cost Performance Index (CPI)
        C.   Cost Variance (CV)
        D.   To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI)

19. A project uses rounding of activity estimates data to the nearest $100, uses
    staff hours as the unit of measure for resources, and has a variance
    threshold of 10% deviation from the baseline plan. These would be
    typically documented in the:

        A. Cost management plan
        B. Scope Statement
        C. WBS
        D. Project charter

20. You are two days late on reporting status for a project that you are
    managing. The status report indicates that the project is lagging behind
    schedule. During the current week, you are confident of making up some of
    the lost time. How should you report project status?

        A. Since the status report is already due, do nothing. Send out the status
           report next week when the project is back on track.
        B. Since the status report is already 2 days overdue, you may
           communicate to stakeholders that you will send a consolidated
           status report next week. In this manner, you can avoid being
           untruthful or falsifying reports.
        C. Send out a status report to all stakeholders indicating that the project
           is on track. Once this week goes by, things will be fine and the
           status reports will be back to normal from next week.
        D. You should report project status exactly as it is. You may also
           mention that you expect to make up some of the lost ground, but
           will truthfully represent current status.

21. You are a business development manager at a mid sized automobile
    manufacturing company. Recently, you've been given a project to evaluate
    the possibility of manufacturing light duty trucks in a Southeastern Asian
    country. To develop a cost estimate, you visit the country with a team of
    experts to analyze local resources such as power, labor, and real estate.
    After the visit, you discuss the findings with an automobile manufacturing
    consultant. The consultant notes that the local laws and government
    bureaucracy typically means foreign investors spend more over a year
    obtaining all required permits. To avoid these delays, the consultant advises
    exchanging a small amount of company stock to the son of the country's
    president. In return for the stock, the president's son will personally handle
    and expedite the issuing of all permits required. What should you do?

        A. Add the opportunity costs associated with the year delay in getting
           permitted without local assistance.
        B. Notify your company a that a bribe is necessary to avoid lengthy
           delays in permitting.
        C. Facilitate a meeting with the president's son and your managing
           director to finalize the details of the stock for services arrangement.
        D. Determine the legality of the proposed exchange of stock for
           permitting assistance.

22. A project manager who is a PMP discovered that there had been an error in
    the estimation of a project. A certain cost had been double calculated with
    the result that the budget, which had already been approved, was now in
    excess by a figure of $ 25,000. She is aware that publicizing this
    information will cause her to receive a poor performance appraisal since her
    company is very fastidious about such matters. What should she do?
       A. She does not need to do anything since this will have a positive
          impact on the project's spend and margins.
       B. Since the excess funds won't be required, she can now use the
          funding to make additional investments for the project.
       C. She should bring this to the notice of the appropriate stakeholders
          and have the necessary steps taken to decrease the budget.
       D. She does not need to do anything since the budget has already been
          approved. This situation is okay as long as the extra funds are not
          spent.

23. Conformance to requirements and fitness for use are key concepts in quality
    management. Which of the following tools translates the customer
    requirements into technical requirements?

       A.   Scope creep
       B.   Process mapping
       C.   Voice of the customer
       D.   Quality checklist

24. A project manager uses a Power / Interest grid to identify stakeholders in
    the project and to manage their expectations. Identify which of the
    following statements is wrong in the context of a Power / Interest grid.

       A. Stakeholders with lower power and lower interest need to be
          monitored.
       B. Stakeholders with higher power and lower interest need to kept
          satisfied.
       C. Stakeholders with lower power and higher interest need to be kept
          informed
       D. Stakeholders with higher power and higher interest need the least
          attention.

25. You have just been hired by a waste management company to start a solid
    waste management program in an under-developed country. The project
    will be on a build-operate-transfer basis and have a duration of 2 years. At
    close of the project, the program will be run by local authorities. The
    project has been sponsored by the World Bank and has been awarded to a
    large international consortium. Your company has been subcontracted to do
    this project along with 2 more contractor companies. After the project scope
    was finalized, you developed a cost estimate of USD $5.5 million. The
    sponsor reviews your detailed costing sheets, and is concerned about the
    total cost figure. He tells you that the maximum allowable budget he can
    allocate for this project is USD $5 million. What should you do?

       A. Ask for a reduction in scope.
       B. Evaluate ways that can result in cost savings and re-estimate the
          project.
       C. Advise the sponsor that the project cannot be completed within the
          available budget.
       D. Begin the project with the intention of requesting a budget increase
             at a later point in time.

26. The total planned value (PV) for a project was $ 150,000. During the course
    of the project, the actual cost incurred turned out to be $ 275,000. What is
    the limit that the project manager usually imposes on the actual cost (AC)?

        A.   The AC is usually limited to twice the planned value.
        B.   The AC will not have an upper limit.
        C.   The AC is usually limited to thrice the planned value.
        D.   The AC is usually limited to 1.5 times the planned value.

27. All team members have not yet been acquired for a project. However, the
    project manager went ahead with estimating activity durations, budgeting
    and other activities. What could likely happen to the activity durations?

        A.   The activity durations are likely to decrease.
        B.   The activity durations are likely to change.
        C.   The activity durations will remain the same.
        D.   The activity durations are likely to increase.

28. The senior analyst on a project came up with Activity Duration Estimates as
    follows: Activity A: 10 days + a lag of 2 days; Activity B: 1 week + a lead
    of 3 days. The project manager who reviewed this, came up with some
    objections to these estimates. What would they most likely be?

        A. The analyst should have included % variance information while
           mentioning the Activity Duration Estimate. This would indicate a
           range of possible results.
        B. Activity Duration Estimates should not include any lag or lead
           information.
        C. It is advisable not to mix up units such as days and weeks while
           coming up with Activity Duration Estimates.
        D. The Activity Duration Estimate should have also mentioned the
           predecessor or successor activity to which the lag or lead is
           attached.

29. A requesting organization for a project created a document that included the
    business need and the cost-benefit analysis. What would this document be
    termed as?

        A.   The project statement of work
        B.   The business case
        C.   The project management plan
        D.   The contract

30. Mark is managing a telecom network deployment project. The buyer of the
    telecom network is an external entity. Recently, the customer has requested
    all the future project updates to be automatically posted to their information
    system. In order to implement this, the project team needs to customize
    their project management information system so that it can be integrated
    with the customer's information system. This is a new customer
    requirement that was not a part of the original project's scope. What should
    the project manager do?

        A. Request the customer to terminate the current contract and award a
           new contract.
        B. Ask the project team to customize the project management
           information system.
        C. Ignore the request as this is outside of the scope of the project.
        D. Initiate the formal change control process.

31. Variance analysis refers to cost performance measurements used to assess
    the magnitude of variation in comparison to the original cost baseline. What
    is the trend on the percentage range of acceptable variances as the project
    progresses?

        A. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease
           as the project progresses.
        B. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to increase
           as the project progresses.
        C. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease
           first and then increase as the project progresses beyond 50%
           completion.
        D. The percentage range of acceptable variances remain the same as
           the project progresses.

32. Many organizations treat contract administration as an administrative
    function separate from the project organization. Who carries out the
    function of contract administration in such organizations?

        A.   The Project Manager
        B.   The Procurement Advisor
        C.   The Procurement Administrator
        D.   The Contract Advisor

33. Colocation is also referred to as:

        A.   Strong matrix
        B.   Weak matrix
        C.   Tight matrix
        D.   Balance matrix

34. A project was randomly picked up for a quality audit and a number of
    issues and non-conformances were found by the external auditor. The
    project manager lodged a protest with the quality department that this was
    incorrect procedure and he should have been given notice since an external
    auditor was involved. What is your view?
       A. The project manager is correct. Quality audits need to be scheduled
          when an external auditor is involved so that the project manager has
          time to prepare for them.
       B. The project manager is correct. All quality audits need to be
          performed by the project team.
       C. The project manager has no case. Quality audits may be random and
          performed by internal or external auditors.
       D. The project manager has no case. Quality audits are always carried
          out by external auditors.

35. You are reviewing the response to an RFP issued by your company for a
    project that will last a year and exceed USD $5 million. Three vendors have
    been short listed. The first, Nosteltec Inc. is a relatively new company in
    this industry. It has put together a team of industry experts having a great
    deal of industry experience and qualifications. The second company, Xen
    Contractor, has been in business for 20 years. You and your company have
    a long and positive history working with this vendor. The third company is
    SonoNet LLC. They have been in business for 10 years and have a
    reputation for their extensive expertise and delivery; they are also well
    known as for being one of the more expensive providers in the market. You
    have many relationships with Xen Contractor staff that have been
    established during prior procurement contracts with this company. As a
    result a project manager from Xen Contractor with whom you are friendly
    both personally and professionally, calls you for clarification on a point
    mentioned in the 2nd section of the RFP. What should you do?

       A.   Clarify via email.
       B.   Clarify via phone call.
       C.   Advise the vendor that the RFP is self-explanatory.
       D.   Send the clarification to all three vendors.

36. During the procurement process, a contractual relationship gets established
    between a buyer and a seller. During the contract lifecycle, what is the
    correct sequence in which the following terminology is applied to a seller?
    Vendor, Selected source, and Bidder.

       A. The seller is viewed first as a selected source, then as a bidder and
          then as a vendor.
       B. The seller is viewed first as a vendor, then as a bidder and then as a
          selected source.
       C. The seller is viewed first as a bidder, then as a selected source and
          then as a vendor.
       D. The seller is viewed first as a bidder, then as a vendor, then as a
          selected source.

37. A number of ethical issues came up in a large project consisting of 55 team
    members. The project manager explained to the sponsor that this was a
    common problem in larger teams. Whose responsibility is it to ensure that
    all team members maintain professionalism and follow ethical behavior?
        A.   The project manager
        B.   The sponsor
        C.   The HR department
        D.   The project management team

38. One of the stakeholders of a project initiated a change request which was
    then documented in the change control system. In general, who would be
    responsible for approving or rejecting the change request?

        A. An authority within the project management team or external
           organization.
        B. The sponsor.
        C. The stakeholder who raised the change request.
        D. The project manager.

39. A critical project rollout was delayed because one of the stakeholders did
    not receive necessary communication on time. On further analysis, the
    project manager discovered that communication had been sent out to the
    wrong teams. This would have happened because:

        A. Communication broke down between the project team and the
           stakeholder.
        B. The project manager failed to manage stakeholder expectations.
        C. The stakeholder register was not updated properly to reflect the
           correct stakeholder information.
        D. The stakeholder did not proactively ask for updates.

40. While sequencing activities for a project, the project management team
    applied certain discretionary dependencies. This was based on their
    knowledge of best practices within the project application area. What is the
    potential risk involved in using such dependencies?

        A. They can create fixed float values and create external dependencies.
        B. They can create arbitrary float values and limit later scheduling
           options.
        C. They can create arbitrary float values and create external
           dependencies.
        D. They can create arbitrary float values and create mandatory
           dependencies

41. Activity attributes extend the description of the activity by identifying
    various components associated with the activity. Typically how many
    attributes are associated with each activity?

        A.   They should be between 5 and 10 in number
        B.   The number of attributes varies by application area.
        C.   They should be less than 5 in number
        D.   The number of attributes depends on the activity.
42. Due to a tight project schedule, a project manager did not document lessons
    learned all through the project. However, at the end of the project, he finally
    documented the lessons learned. Your comment on this would be:

        A. This is ok. At a minimum, lessons learned should be documented at
           the end of the project.
        B. This is not ok. Lessons learned must be documented all through the
           project as well as at the end of the project.
        C. This is not ok. Lessons learned need to be documented all through
           the project and must not be done at the end of the project.
        D. This is correct. Lessons learned are intended to be documented only
           at the end of the project.

43. A project manager is preparing the WBS for a software project. The WBS
    includes all the product and project work but excludes the project
    management work. From the following choices, select a statement that
    correctly describes this situation.

        A. This is incorrect. Product work and project management should be
           included as part of the WBS, but project work should be excluded.
        B. This is incorrect. Project work and project management should be
           part of the WBS but product work should be excluded.
        C. This is incorrect. Product work, project work and project
           management work should all be included in the WBS
        D. This is correct. Product and project work should be included as part
           of the WBS, but project management work should be excluded.

44. As part of EVM, a project manager is calculating the to-complete
    performance index (TCPI) based on EAC. The data that he has is: the
    budget at completion for the project is $ 100,000. The earned value for the
    project is $ 25,000. The actual costs to date are 40,000 and the estimate at
    completion is $ 115,000. What is the TCPI that he will obtain?

        A.   1.1
        B.   0.9
        C.   1
        D.   0

45. How can changes be made to a project management plan once it has been
    baselined by the project manager?

        A. By generating a change request and having it approved through the
           Perform Integrated Change Control process.
        B. This is typically done by using a version control system. The project
           manager creates a new version with the changes and baselines it as
           the new baseline.
        C. This is done by maintaining a revision history or log. The project
           manager documents the changes in detail and then baselines it.
        D. A project management plan cannot be changed once it has been
           baselined. An addendum has to be created to incorporate the
             changes.

46. The morale of the team members of a project is very low. The team
    members feel that they were not given opportunities to participate in the
    organizational team development activities due to over allocations to
    project tasks, and hence they missed opportunities to grow. Which of the
    following is a primary factor for this situation?

        A.   Use of zero-sum rewards in the project
        B.   A poorly defined resource calendar
        C.   Too many senior team members
        D.   Poor interpersonal skills in the team

47. Given multiple alternatives, the group decision method that allows the
    largest block in a group to decide (even if more than 50% of the members
    of the group do not support the decision) is called:

        A.   Dictatorship
        B.   Plurality
        C.   Unanimity
        D.   Majority

48. In a multi-phase project, the procurement team decided to close the
    procurements applicable to a particular phase of the project. What happens
    to unresolved claims?

        A. Unresolved claims are usually resolved at the end of all phases of
           the project.
        B. Unresolved claims are also closed when the procurements for that
           phase are closed.
        C. Unresolved claims remain open for a period of 1 year from closure
           of procurements.
        D. Unresolved claims may still be subject to litigation after closure.

49. During the Control Scope phase, analysis of the scope performance resulted
    in a change request to the scope baseline. This change request will be
    processed for review and disposition in the:

        A.   Control Quality phase
        B.   Perform Integrated Change Control phase
        C.   Monitor and Control Project Work phase
        D.   Validate Scope phase

50. A project manager is informed that a limited number of resources are going
    to be available for his project. He creates a project schedule by adding
    buffers to the project to protect the target finish date. What type of schedule
    network analysis is he using?

        A. What-if analysis
       B. Critical path method
       C. Critical chain method
       D. Resource leveling.


Answers

1. B - Inform the sponsor you must explore other options before committing to that
   timeline. Changing the budget, reducing scope, or adding resources are activities
   that must be agreed upon by the project stakeholders before you can proceed. PMI
   requires project managers to provide timely and accurate information, and to
   follow all decision making processes and policies. [Reference: PMI Code of
   Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2,4] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - This is an example of obtaining Expert Judgment during the Perform
   Qualitative Risk Analysis process. The Perform Quantitative Risk analysis
   process numerically analyzes the prioritized project risks obtained through the
   Perform Qualitative Risks Analysis process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 333]
   [Project Risk Management]
3. D - The Salience model describes stakeholders based on their power (ability to
   impose their will), urgency (need for immediate attention) and legitimacy (their
   involvement is appropriate). Based on this classification, the potential impact of
   each stakeholder is then assessed. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
4. D - When team members are assigned to projects in advance of the start of the
   project, they are termed as preassignments. Such assignments can happen when
   resources are promised as part of a competitive proposal, when projects are
   dependent on critical resources, or if some staff assignments have been defined in
   the project charter. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 270] [Project Human Resource
   Management]
5. B - The stakeholder register and the project charter are project documents and not
   project management tools and techniques. What Richard is doing directly relates
   to the stakeholder analysis tool and technique. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. A - During the norming stage, the project team members start to work together
   and adjust their work habits and behaviors to support each other. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 276] [Project Human Resource Management]
7. A - Scheduled training occurs as stated in the Human Resource plan and could
   include online, classroom, on-the-job, etc. Unplanned training takes place through
   conversation, observation and project performance appraisals. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 275] [Project Human Resource Management]
8. A - When prospective bids are significantly different from the estimates prepared
   by a professional estimator, it likely means that the procurement statement of
   work (SOW) was deficient or that the prospective sellers have misunderstood the
   procurement SOW. The other choices jump to conclusions without relevant data.
   It is possible that prospective sellers do not have the skills or are trying to
   underbid, but in this case, all of them are off by a large percentage. Hence it
   points to a deficient statement of work. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 376] [Project
   Procurement Management]
9. C - Continuous process improvement is an iterative means to improve the quality
      of all processes. It reduces waste and eliminates activities that don't add value.
      This allows processes to operate at increased levels of efficiency. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 244] [Project Quality Management]
10.   A - Project document update is the output of the Plan Stakeholder Management
      process. The stakeholder register can be updated during this process. Further, the
      stakeholder register is not a part of the project management plan; updates to the
      stakeholder register do not require a formal change control. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 404] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   A - Contingency reserves are included in the project cost baseline. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 213] [Project Cost Management]
12.   B - Resource leveling is a schedule network analysis technique. It is applied to a
      schedule that has already been analyzed by the critical path method. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 179] [Project Time Management]
13.   D - The values that practitioners from the global project management community
      have identified as being the most important are: responsibility, respect, fairness
      and honesty. These values form the foundation for the Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct. [Refer Section 1.4, Chapter 1, Page 1, PMI code of ethics
      and professional conduct] [Prof. Responsibility]
14.   B - A Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) lists identified project risks hierarchically
      by risk category and subcategory that identifies the various areas and causes of
      potential risks. The lowest level in the RBS can be used as a basic risk checklist to
      cover all identified risks. The other statements are all true. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 325] [Project Risk Management]
15.   D - The stakeholders' current engagement levels can be determined by
      communicating and interacting with them. Reviewing the Stakeholders
      Engagement Assessment Matrix developed during the planning phase of the
      project won't help much if it hasn't been reviewed since then. Analyzing the issue
      register can indicate stakeholder engagement levels but this document alone is not
      sufficient to determine the current engagement levels. Asking the stakeholders to
      sign a declaration of commitment is ridiculous. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 405]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   C - The project charter is a document that authorizes the project. Along with
      details such as the purpose of the project, project objectives, high-level
      requirements etc., it also contains the high-level risks which are used as a starting
      point later on while identifying risks in detail. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 72]
      [Project Integration Management]
17.   C - Risk avoidance involves changing the project management plan to eliminate
      the risk entirely. Although an extreme situation, entirely shutting down a project
      constitutes a radical avoidance strategy. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 344] [Project
      Risk Management]
18.   D - The to-complete performance index (TCPI) is the calculated projection of cost
      performance that must be achieved on the remaining work to meet a specified
      goal such as the BAC or EAC. It is defined as the work remaining divided by the
      funds remaining. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 221] [Project Cost Management]
19.   A - Cost management processes and their associated tools and techniques are
      documented in the cost management plan. These include parameters such as the
      level of accuracy (how much rounding), units of measure (staff hours, weeks
      etc.), and control thresholds (percentage deviation from baseline plan) [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 199] [Project Cost Management]
20. D - As practitioners in the global project management community, it is our
    responsibility to be truthful in our communications and conduct. We need to
    provide accurate information even if it is not favorable to us. [PMI Code of Ethics
    section 5.2, page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21. D - Determine the legality of the proposed exchange of stock for assistance with
    permitting. If this arrangement does not violate the laws of your country, the
    country where you are hoping to begin work, and does not violate corporate
    regulations or industry regulations, the cost of the exchange may well offset the
    opportunity cost of a year long permitting delay. Once the legality has been
    established, a path forward can be developed. [PMI Code of Ethics and
    Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
22. C - She needs to bring this discrepancy to the notice of management and the
    appropriate stakeholders so that corrective action can be taken. She needs to do
    this even at the cost of receiving a poor performance appraisal. [PMI Code of
    Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
23. C - Voice of the customer is a non-proprietary approach to quality management
    and is used to elicit stated as well as unstated customer needs (quality and
    requirements). This technique translates the customer requirements into technical
    requirements. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 566] [Project Quality Management]
24. D - A Power/Interest grid groups stakeholders based on their level of authority
    (power) and their level of concern (interest). Stakeholders with higher power and
    higher interest need to be managed closely and require the most attention.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 397] [Project Stakeholder Management]
25. B - You should evaluate ways that can result in cost savings and re-estimate the
    project. Requesting a change in budget or scope without fully analyzing the
    options, or simply moving ahead with plans to request additional funds in the
    future are violations of the PMI Code of Ethics. This code requires project
    managers to provide accurate, timely, and truthful project information at all times.
    [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4, 5] [Prof.
    Responsibility]
26. B - The actual cost will not have an upper limit. Whatever is spent to achieve the
    earned value will be measured. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 218] [Project Cost
    Management]
27. B - When estimating of activity durations is done when all team members have
    not been acquired, it is possible that the competency levels of the newer team
    members will be different from that planned. So, it can only be said that the
    activity durations will likely change. Whether they will remain the same, increase
    or decrease, will depend on the competency levels of the new team members.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 256] [Project Human Resource Management]
28. B - Activity duration estimates are quantitative assessments of the likely work
    periods to complete an activity. They do not include any lag or lead information.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 172] [Project Time Management]
29. B - The business case usually provides information from a business standpoint so
    that any investment in the project can be justified. Typically it would contain both
    the business need as well as the cost-benefit analysis. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    68] [Project Integration Management]
30. D - Change requests do come. They are never ignored; rather they are managed
    through the integrated change control process. This doesn't require terminating the
    contract. Implementing the new requirement without following the change control
      process is not advisable. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 413] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
31.   A - During the start of the project, larger percentage variances are allowed.
      However, as more work is accomplished, the percentage range of acceptable
      variances will tend to decrease. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 222] [Project Cost
      Management]
32.   C - In many organizations, a procurement administrator is responsible for
      ensuring that the procurement relationship is properly managed. The procurement
      administrator may be on the project team, but typically reports to a supervisor
      from a different department. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 380] [Project
      Procurement Management]
33.   C - Colocation is also referred to as "tight matrix". The rest of the choices are
      incorrect as they are different organizational structures. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 277] [Project Human Resource Management]
34.   C - The project manager has no case. Quality audits may be scheduled or random
      and may be conducted by internal or external auditors. It is the responsibility of
      the project manager and the project management to ensure that the project
      documentation is kept up-to-date and available for any quality audit. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 247] [Project Quality Management]
35.   D - Send the clarification to all three vendors. PMI's Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct mandates that project managers provide fair and equal
      access to information, and to apply the rules of the organization without
      favoritism. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   C - During the contract life cycle, the seller can be viewed first as a bidder, then
      as a selected source, and then as the contracted supplier or vendor. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 357] [Project Procurement Management]
37.   D - The project management team needs to be aware of, subscribe and ensure that
      all team members behave professionally and follow ethical behavior. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 256] [Project Human Resource Management]
38.   A - In general, some authority within the project management team or an external
      organization would approve or reject the change request. However, on many
      projects the project manager is given authority to approve certain types of change
      requests. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration Management]
39.   C - The stakeholder register is a list of all relevant stakeholders in the project. It is
      used to ensure that all stakeholders are included in project communications.
      Hence, it is likely that the stakeholder list did not contain the stakeholder's details.
      This resulted in their missing out on project communication. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 398] [Project Stakeholder Management]
40.   B - Discretionary dependencies are established based on the knowledge of best
      practices within a specific application area. This is done to achieve a specific
      sequence even though there are other options. The risk is that they may create
      arbitrary float values and later limit scheduling options because of the specific
      sequencing chosen. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 158] [Project Time Management]
41.   B - Activity attributes generally vary by application area. Components for each
      activity evolve over time. Initially they may include Activity ID, WBS ID and
      Activity name. Later, they may include activity codes, activity description,
      predecessor activities, successor activities, logical relationships, leads, lags,
      resource requirements, imposed dates, constraints and assumptions. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 153] [Project Time Management]
42.   A - Lessons learned need to be documented throughout the project cycle, but at a
      minimum should be documented at the end of the project. Since the project
      manager was unable to do it during the course of the project, he has done it at the
      end of the project, which is the minimum requirement. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      104] [Project Integration Management]
43.   C - The WBS is a deliverable-oriented decomposition of all the work to be done
      by the project team to accomplish project objectives. It organizes and defines the
      total scope of the project. Hence it includes product work, project work and the
      project management work required to complete the project. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 131] [Project Scope Management]
44.   C - TCPI based on EAC = (BAC-EV)/(EAC-AC) = (100000 - 25000) / (115000 -
      40000) = 75000/75000 = 1 [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 221] [Project Cost
      Management]
45.   A - Once the project management plan has been baselined, it may be changed
      only when a change request is generated and approved through the Perform
      Integrated Change Control process. In order to keep track of changes, a version
      control system or a revision log will also be maintained. However, the changed
      version can be baselined only after approval. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94]
      [Project Integration Management]
46.   B - Resource calendars identify times when the project team members can
      participate in team development activities. If the team members are unable to find
      time for such activities because they are over allocated, it is likely that the
      calendar has been poorly planned out. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 265] [Project
      Human Resource Management]
47.   B - This group decision making technique is called Plurality. Even if a majority
      (where more than 50 % of the members support the decision) is not achieved, the
      largest block in the group makes the decision. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 115]
      [Project Scope Management]
48.   D - In multi-phase projects, although the procurements for a particular phase may
      have been closed, the unresolved claims are still subject to litigation after closure.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 387] [Project Procurement Management]
49.   B - Analysis of Scope performance is done as part of the Control Scope phase.
      Determining the cause and degree of variance relative to the scope baseline is an
      important aspect of this activity (called Variance Analysis). Change requests that
      result from this activity are processed in the Perform Integrated Change Control
      phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 94] [Project Integration Management]
50.   C - Critical chain is a schedule network analysis technique that is used when a
      project schedule has to account for limited resources. In this technique, duration
      buffers that are non-work schedule activities are added to manage uncertainty.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 178] [Project Time Management]
Exam 14 Test Questions
1. You are an electrical engineer with extensive experience in managing
   transmission projects, but limited experience with electronic design
   projects. However, in a stretch assignment, you have been recently
   transferred to another department in your company that focuses on
   electronic design. Further, you have been asked to lead a very important
   project involving both transmission and electronic design. In preparation for
   a meeting with your manager to discuss this opportunity, you review the
   initial project design brief. There are a number of items within this
   document that are unclear to you because of your lack of background in
   design. When you arrive at your meeting, your manager asks if you will be
   leading the project. How do you respond?

       A. Accept the project and note your manger that your expertise in
          transmission makes you an ideal manager for this project.
       B. Decline the project, citing your lack of experience in electronics
          design.
       C. Accept the project, but do not discuss your qualifications or lack
          thereof.
       D. State that you would like to lead the project, but you must disclose
          that your primary domain of expertise is transmission, and that you
          may need supplementary training in electronics design.

2. A seller started out a project on the basis of a Time and Material contract.
   The initial contract amount based on the agreed-upon rates and effort was $
   100,000 over a 1 year period. However, when the project was completed,
   the total contract value turned out to be $ 350,000 over a 2 year period.
   What mechanism could the buyer have used to prevent this unlimited cost
   growth and schedule change?

       A.   Use of a not-to-exceed value and a time limit on the contract.
       B.   A service level agreement.
       C.   A penalty based on the increased cost and timeline.
       D.   Use of a fixed price contract.

3. The Budget at Completion (BAC) for a project is $50,000. The Actual
   Costs (AC) to date are $10,000. The Earned Value (EV) is $7,000. At this
   stage, the project management team did a manual bottom-up summation of
   costs and forecast an Estimate to Complete (ETC) of $50,000. What is the
   Estimate at Completion (EAC) for the project?

       A.   $57,000
       B.   $40,000
       C.   $60,000
       D.   $53,000

4. Projects, portfolios and programs are different entities in an organization.
    Which of the following choices states a correct relationship between them?

       A. A portfolio consists of a collection of projects or programs that are
          grouped together to achieve strategic business objectives. The
          projects or programs need not be directly related.
       B. A project is a collection of programs and portfolios that are grouped
          together to achieve the project objectives.
       C. A program consists of a collection of projects or portfolios that are
          grouped together to achieve strategic business objectives.
       D. A program is a collection of projects that are grouped together for
          convenience. It may include unrelated work if the work is under the
          same business division.

5. Carole is managing a hotel refurbishment project. She has identified her
   project's key stakeholders. Carole now wants to expand this list of
   stakeholders and convert it to a comprehensive list of project stakeholders.
   What should Carole do?

       A. Do not spend more time on identifying the non-key stakeholders
       B. Seek expert judgment from the identified key stakeholders
       C. Request the project sponsor to provide the details of the remaining
          stakeholders
       D. Carry out a stakeholder analysis with the identified key stakeholders

6. The Risk Management plan will usually contain the definitions of risk
   probability and impact. Which of the following has the highest impact
   (negative) on a project?

       A.   A rating of 1.1 on the impact scale
       B.   A rating of 0.8 on the impact scale
       C.   A rating of 0 on the impact scale
       D.   A rating of 0.1 on the impact scale

7. You are the project manager of a project and are about to conduct a risk
   identification exercise in a few days' time. You would like to proactively
   remind the participants in the exercise of the various sources from which
   risk may arise in the project. What could you use to help you do this?

       A.   A Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)
       B.   A Risk Simulation Structure (RSS)
       C.   A Risk Register
       D.   An Impact Matrix

8. Ron is a project manager handling an Alternate water-supply project.
   During a project performance review, he notices the following: (i) Activity
   A, on the critical path, is delayed by 4 days. (ii) Activity B, not on the
   critical path, is delayed by 9 days. (iii) Activity C, on the critical path is
   delayed by 2 days (iv) Activity D, not on the critical path, is delayed by 5
   days. In what sequence should Ron prioritize his efforts in addressing these
    delays?

       A.   Activity A, Activity B, Activity D, Activity C
       B.   Activity A, Activity C, Activity B, Activity D
       C.   Activity B, Activity D, Activity A, Activity C
       D.   Activity B, Activity A, Activity D, Activity C

9. Which of the following statements about products and projects is true?

       A. Adding new functionality to an existing product cannot be
          considered as a project.
       B. A product life cycle is usually contained within a project life cycle.
       C. One product may have many projects associated with it.
       D. The product life cycle usually consists of non-sequential phases
          whereas the project life cycle consists of sequential phases.

10. Mary has recently finalized her project management plan and has also got it
    approved. She is managing a complex manufacturing process improvement
    project. The project stakeholders' continuous support and commitment is an
    absolute must for the success of the project. Which of the following are the
    most crucial stakeholder management processes at this stage?

       A. Plan Stakeholder Management & Manage Stakeholder Engagement
       B. Identify Stakeholders & Plan Stakeholder Management
       C. Manage Stakeholder Engagement & Control Stakeholder
          Engagement
       D. Plan Stakeholder Management & Control Stakeholder Engagement

11. An important aspect of project management is the handling of stakeholder
    expectations. Typically, at what level are the stakeholders with respect to
    the project manager.

       A. At higher levels and with greater authority
       B. At all levels and with varying degrees of authority.
       C. At higher levels but only the project sponsor has authority greater
          than the project manager.
       D. At the same level with varying degrees of authority.

12. Public recognition of good performance creates positive reinforcement for
    the team members. When is the best time for a project manager to recognize
    team members' performance?

       A.   During the lifecycle of the project
       B.   At the end of every phase of the project
       C.   At the end of the project
       D.   As mandated by the HR department.

13. The requirements elicitation team has obtained a large number of ideas
    during sessions to gather product and project requirements. Which of the
    following techniques is best suited to have these ideas sorted into groups for
    review and analysis?

       A.   Control chart
       B.   Venn diagram
       C.   Affinity diagram
       D.   Brainstorming

14. One of the performance requirements of a Company Website development
    project is that the home page should load in 1 second. Such performance
    requirements are usually part of:

       A.   Customer requirements
       B.   Business requirements
       C.   Project requirements
       D.   Product requirements

15. Anna has recently taken over a project as the project manager. The project
    is early in the executing phase. Although, the project scope statement was
    signed off by all key stakeholders, Anna finds out that some of the key
    stakeholders do not fully understand the project scope. Stakeholders'
    continuous support is very critical for the success of the project. What must
    Anna do?

       A. Email the copy of the scope management plan to the key project
          stakeholders.
       B. Don't do anything as the scope statement has already been signed by
          all the key project stakeholders.
       C. Email the copy of the scope statement to the key project
          stakeholders.
       D. Conduct one-to-one meeting sessions with these key stakeholders to
          ensure that they understand the project scope.

16. You have just joined a new organization as a project manager. You have
    heard a number of rumors about the procurement manager having possible
    underhanded dealings with suppliers. However, you have not been given
    any proof that these rumors are true. Your project requires a large number
    of dump trucks. Company policy mandates that all purchases go through the
    procurement department, rather than being handled by departmental
    employees. The value of the dump truck purchase is USD $395,000 and the
    contract was awarded to a supplier regularly used by your company. Shortly
    after taking delivery of the dump trucks, you learn that the procurement
    manager is driving a new car. What should you do.

       A. Ask the procurement manager about the purchase of her new car
       B. Report this to the appropriate management.
       C. Talk to the supplier to find out if there was a bribe involved in the
          project
       D. Do nothing.
17. The project management team expects that during the course of the project,
    there could be delays in component delivery due to strikes, changes to the
    permitting processes or extensions of specific engineering durations. What
    analysis will help come up with contingency and response plans to mitigate
    these?

        A.   Contingency analysis
        B.   Variance analysis
        C.   What-If scenario analysis.
        D.   Schedule compression

18. In the earned value management technique, the cost performance baseline is
    referred to as:

        A.   Cost Measurement Baseline (CMB)
        B.   Performance Measurement Baseline (PMB)
        C.   Performance Base Value (PBV)
        D.   Performance Cost Baseline (PCB)

19. A seller entered into contract with a buyer. At the end of the project, the
    seller was reimbursed for the cost of the project, but received a very low fee
    based on certain subjective criteria that had been laid down in the contract.
    What type of contract is this likely to be?

        A.   Cost Plus Fixed Fee (CPFF) contract
        B.   Fixed Price Incentive Fee (FPIF) contract
        C.   Cost Plus Incentive Fee (CPIF) contract
        D.   Cost Plus Award Fee (CPAF) contract

20. You've just completed a solid waste management project in an under-
    developed country. The contractor you are working for has a strict policy of
    abiding by local laws and rules, although the local resources working on the
    project have a much more lax approach to following laws and policies.
    Now at the end of the project, you are handing over the operational
    equipment to the local operators and disposing of the leftover inventory and
    other furniture which was used during the project. More than 50% of the
    toxic materials used during the project remains in your inventory. There is
    no law that would prohibit you from disposing of either the type or quantity
    of remaining materials in the local sewage system. What should you do?

        A. Give the material to local resources to dispose of by selling it to a
           recycling facility.
        B. Do not dispose of the materials improperly.
        C. Dispose of the material in the local sewage system, as there is no
           law applicable here
        D. Abandon the materials in the project facility you are handing over to
           the local operators.

21. Progressive elaboration is least applicable to which of the following
    processes?

       A.   Create WBS
       B.   Control Schedule
       C.   Develop Schedule
       D.   Estimate Activity Durations

22. During a cost performance review with certain senior officers from the
    finance department, you discover that there are certain inconsistencies in
    the way cost performance reporting is done, and you obtain data that shows
    these officers are deliberately misleading senior management. What should
    you do?

       A. Write an anonymous letter to senior management about these
          activities.
       B. Bring this to the notice of senior management even though there are
          no formal policies in place for whistle-blowers.
       C. Do nothing, but make sure that the data for your project is clean.
       D. Do nothing. The corrupt behavior of the finance department officials
          has nothing to do with your project.

23. Your company is planning to bid on a project in an application area in
    which you have never worked before. You are aware that your company
    does not have any resources with the necessary expertise. Your
    management is pressurizing you to submit a bid. What should you do?

       A. Refuse to do what your company management asks you to do since
          it violates the code of ethics and professionalism.
       B. Do what your management asks you to do. Your loyalty needs to be
          with your company. As long as management has the confidence that
          the project can be done, you can go with the plan.
       C. Do what your management asks you to do, but inform them that you
          would not like to be associated with the project since it violates the
          code of ethics and professionalism.
       D. Explain the gaps to your management clearly and also explain that
          this will be a stretch assignment. You can further explain to them
          that it is best to reveal to the potential buyer that your company does
          not possess the necessary skills, but are confident of ramping up the
          necessary skills and delivering the project successfully, based on
          your company's track record.

24. Which of the following processes goes beyond the distribution of relevant
    information and seeks to ensure that the information being communicated
    to project stakeholders has been appropriately generated, as well as
    received and understood?

       A. Manage Communications
       B. Control Communications
       C. Manage Stakeholder Engagement
        D. Control Stakeholder Engagement

25. Eric, a project manager, is a certified PMP. He is responding to an RFP
    from a buyer and needs to fill in details on the financial performance of his
    company. His company has performed badly during the current quarter and
    the results will be published in 2 to 3 days' time. However, the company has
    done very well in the previous quarters. The RFP is due in 10 days' time
    and all the other information in the RFP is ready and filled out (except the
    financial information). What should Eric do?

        A. Eric should fill in the financial information for the previous quarter
           and send out the RFP response before the current quarter results are
           published.
        B. Eric should present the previous quarter's results as the latest results.
           This will give his company a better chance to win the project.
        C. Eric should fill in the information for the previous quarter and
           ignore the current quarter. This is an aberration and the company
           will eventually come out of the bad patch.
        D. Eric should wait until the current results are out and update the latest
           financial information before sending out the RFP response.

26. You are managing a project with over 130 procurement contracts. Because
    of the number of contracts, your project team includes a procurement
    manager and a procurement assistant. Company policy requires that certain
    types of procurements be advertised to potential bidders by means of
    newspaper advertisements. The procurement assistant typically reviews the
    bids received and short lists the suppliers for further review by the
    procurement team. During a meeting to review and select a vendor from the
    short listed suppliers, you discover that one of the suppliers is a company
    owned by your cousin. Which of the following is the best course of action?

        A. Because the short list was prepared by the procurement assistant,
           not by you, you do not need disclose your relationship with the
           supplier, and may continue to participate in the selection process.
        B. Disclose your relationship with the provider and continue to
           participate in the selection process.
        C. Ask the procurement manager to lead the vendor selection process
           for this contract and excuse yourself from the review.
        D. Remove the supplier from the short list.

27. A buyer and seller are looking at getting into a long-term relationship
    spanning over 10 years. Both parties would like to be protected from the
    unstable financial conditions of the country that are beyond their control.
    What type of contract is appropriate for such a relationship?

        A.   Fixed Price Incentive Fee (FPIF)
        B.   Firm Fixed Price (FPP)
        C.   Time & Material (T&M)
        D.   Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment Contract (FP-EPA)
28. Which of the following quality control tools and techniques may not be
    used for root cause analysis?

        A.   Fishbone diagram
        B.   Scatter diagram
        C.   Ishikawa diagram
        D.   Cause and effect diagram

29. Midway through the Collect Requirements process, a project manager finds
    that there are lots of unresolved issues. Which of the following is usually
    the best way to discover and resolve issues?

        A.   Interviewing
        B.   Use of a stakeholder register
        C.   Questionnaires
        D.   Facilitated workshops

30. During a project update meeting, one of the key stakeholders expressed his
    displeasure over the recently produced deliverables. 1% of the produced
    deliverables had minor defects. This stakeholder has been a resisting
    stakeholder so far. What must the project manager do in order to bring the
    future project performance in line with the approved quality requirements?

        A. Investigate the root cause and identify the required defect repair.
        B. Investigate the root cause and identify the required preventive
           action.
        C. Investigate the root cause and identify the required corrective action.
        D. Ignore the complaint from the resisting stakeholder.

31. A project manager would like to resolve conflicts with a give-and-take
    attitude rather than using a one-sided approach. Which of these approaches
    is he likely to use?

        A.   Forcing
        B.   Problem-solving
        C.   Directing
        D.   Withdrawing

32. A small project with a limited budget is trying to curtail costs. Which of the
    following processes may be eliminated in such a project?

        A.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
        B.   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
        C.   Identify Risks
        D.   Plan Risk Management

33. A number of deliverables were submitted to the buyer as part of a project.
    Where would the project manager find documentation on the requirements
    for formal deliverable acceptance and how non-conforming deliverables
    can be addressed?

        A.   In the SOW
        B.   In the lessons learned document
        C.   In the deliverable release note.
        D.   In the agreement

34. Late in the project cycle, it was discovered that some of the project human
    resources needed to have been trained on a specific methodology. Ideally,
    where should these training needs have first been documented?

        A.   Staffing management plan
        B.   In the procurement contract
        C.   In the project scope statement
        D.   In the company HR policy

35. You are managing an electronic chip design project for a customer. There
    are a number of engineers and subject matter experts from the customer's
    organization that have been assigned as resources to the project, as well as
    several additional design engineers that have been supplied by your
    company. All the engineers have been involved in the development of a
    prototype chip; a very time consuming and expensive process. Upon the
    completion of the prototype, you submit it for review to ensure that there
    are no patent infringement issues with the design. When the results come
    back, it is determined that there are multiple issues that could result in an
    intellectual property dispute with the patent owners, should the prototype
    design be released commercially. The affected prototype elements were
    developed by resources from your company as well as your customer's
    organization. What should you do?

        A.   Ask the engineers to revise the design and resubmit it.
        B.   Notify the project stakeholders immediately.
        C.   Request permission to use the copyright material
        D.   Submit the prototype as is, as the budget and schedule do not
             accommodate rework.

36. While managing a large project, the project manager decided to include
    indirect costs as part of his cost estimate. If indirect costs are included in an
    estimate which of the following is true?

        A. Indirect costs should be included at the activity level or higher
           levels.
        B. Indirect costs must be included at the activity level only.
        C. Indirect costs should only be included in earned value
           measurements and not in cost estimates.
        D. Indirect costs should not be included in cost estimates.

37. Which of these is not a legitimate model used to analyze stakeholders?
       A.   Influence / impact grid
       B.   Power / influence grid
       C.   Sufficiency model
       D.   Salience model

38. A project manager analyzed the project's communication requirements and
    decided that 10 out of the 30 stakeholders in the project would only need
    voicemail updates of certain information. This type of communication
    method is called:

       A.   Push communication
       B.   Pull communication
       C.   Interactive communication
       D.   On-demand communication

39. A project involved development of a high speed hard disk drive. As part of
    its testing, the hard disk was subjected to continuous operation at a high
    speed and an elevated temperature. At the end of the test, the hard disk was
    destroyed beyond use. The cost of such testing is usually classified as:

       A.   Appraisal costs
       B.   Internal failure costs
       C.   Cost of nonconformance
       D.   Prevention costs

40. Identification of new risks, reassessment of old risks and closing of
    outdated risks are done as part of the Control Risks phase. How often
    should project risk reassessment be scheduled?

       A. It depends on how the project progresses relative to its objectives.
       B. It is left to the discretion of the project manager.
       C. Reassessment needs to be done at the 25%, 50%, and 75% stages of
          project completion.
       D. Reassessment needs to be done at the 20%, 40%, 60% and 80%
          stages of project completion.

41. Which of the following is the process of communicating and working with
    stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address issues as they
    occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement?

       A.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
       B.   Control Stakeholder Engagement
       C.   Manage Communications
       D.   Control Communications

42. Rick has just been assigned as the project manager of a project to develop a
    complex product. The project is in the Define Scope phase. Which of these
    tools / techniques will not be used by Rick in this phase?
        A.   Lateral thinking
        B.   Process analysis
        C.   Product breakdown
        D.   Value engineering

43. Teams go through various stages of development. As per the Tuckman
    ladder of development, the stage during which the least amount of work
    gets done is usually the:

        A.   Storming phase
        B.   Forming phase
        C.   Norming phase
        D.   Performing phase

44. A project manager has been asked to manage a research project. By its very
    nature, this type of project is not very clearly defined and involves a lot of
    uncertainty. What phase-to-phase relationship should the project manager
    use for this project?

        A.   Open-ended relationship
        B.   Overlapping relationship
        C.   Iterative relationship
        D.   Sequential relationship

45. A senior project manager advises a first-time project manager that
    identifying risks is just one step. On a continuous basis, new risks need to
    be identified, and existing risks need to be analyzed, tracked and their status
    reported. All this is done as part of what process?

        A.   Direct and Manage Project Work
        B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
        C.   Perform Integrated Change Control
        D.   Plan Risk Management

46. A project manager has decided to use a decision tree to make a build or
    upgrade analysis. The build requires an investment of $ 200 M (where M
    represents million). On the build decision branch, there is a 60% probability
    of strong demand (yielding a revenue of $ 400 M) and a 40% probability of
    weak demand (yielding a revenue of $150 M). What is the expected
    monetary value (EMV) of the build?

        A.   $ 100 M
        B.   $ 300 M
        C.   $ 140 M
        D.   $ 200 M

47. A project management team came up with certain metrics such as defect
    frequency, failure rate, availability and reliability. These are usually defined
    as an output of what process?

        A.   Plan Quality Management
        B.   Define Scope
        C.   Collect Requirements
        D.   Perform Quality Assurance

48. In order to keep costs low, a project management team decided to apply
    statistical sampling while inspecting some of the work products. They
    decided to select 10 out of 50 engineering drawings for inspection. During
    which process should the sample frequency and sample size be determined?

        A.   Collect Requirements
        B.   Plan Quality Management
        C.   Control Quality
        D.   Perform Quality Assurance

49. A project manager prepared a presentation that included data on utilization
    of resources on her project, improvements in efficiency of the staff on the
    project, and the cost savings. She is doing this as part of what process?

        A.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
        B.   Monitor and Control Project Work
        C.   Control Schedule
        D.   Control Quality

50. A very critical resource is on another project team. It is very important you
    get his time for your project. You have contacted his team's manager
    multiple times, but have received a poor response. What should you
    consider doing next?

        A.   Plan for an alternate resource since this resource is not available.
        B.   Try to use management influence to obtain the resource's time.
        C.   Contact the manager once again to see if he can help.
        D.   Train another resource within your project.


Answers

1. D - State that you would like to lead the project, but disclose that your expertise is
   in transmission, not electronics design. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional
   Conduct mandates that project managers accept only those projects for which they
   have appropriate qualifications and experience. However, if project stakeholders
   are fully informed of the areas where you may be lacking skills or knowledge, and
   they still wish to proceed with you leading the project, this is not a violation of the
   code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2, 4]
   [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - Use of not-to-exceed values and time limits placed in T&M contracts help
   prevent unlimited cost growth or schedule changes. Use of a fixed price contract
      is an option, but that is a decision prior to awarding the project and signing the
      contract. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement Management]
3.    C - When a bottom-up manual forecasting has been done for the ETC, the
      calculation for EAC is given by: EAC = AC + bottom-up ETC Hence, EAC =
      10,000 + 50,000 = $60,000. Note that the BAC is no longer viable at this stage.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost Management]
4.    A - A portfolio is a collection of projects or programs that are grouped together to
      achieve a strategic business objective. Portfolio management focuses on ensuring
      that projects and programs are reviewed to prioritize resource allocation and the
      management of the portfolio is aligned with organizational strategies. The
      projects or programs need not be directly related. A program is a collection of
      projects, but they need to have common objectives, so unrelated work cannot be
      grouped together under a program. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 4, 5] [Project
      Framework]
5.    B - The project manager is responsible for stakeholder identification; this cannot
      be delegated to the project sponsor. Identifying and analyzing the key
      stakeholders is not enough to ensure the success of the project. Other project
      stakeholders can be identified by interviewing the already identified stakeholders.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396, 397] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6.    B - The impact scale will contain the probabilities of certain risks occurring, and
      will contain values from 0 to 1. A value of 0 indicates non-occurrence of the risk
      while 1 is a certainty. Hence, a risk impact of 0.8 represents the highest impact
      among the choices presented. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 317] [Project Risk
      Management]
7.    A - The Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) is a hierarchically organized depiction
      of identified project risks arranged by risk category and subcategory. This may be
      based on a previously prepared categorization framework The RBS serves to
      remind participants in the risk identification exercise of the different sources from
      which risk may project arise. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 317] [Project Risk
      Management]
8.    B - An important part of schedule control is to decide if schedule variation
      requires corrective action. Activities on the critical path are given the first priority
      for immediate action. Larger delays on activities not on the critical path may not
      require immediate attention since they may not affect the overall project schedule.
      Hence Ron will first look into the delays on the critical path and then tackle the
      delays on the other paths. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 176, 188] [Project Time
      Management]
9.    C - One product can have multiple projects associated with it. For example: the
      development of a new product could be a project. Similarly, adding new functions
      or features could be a project. Other possibilities are conducting a feasibility
      study, conducting a product trial in the market, running an advertising campaign,
      etc. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
10.   C - Since the project management plan has been approved, this marks the closure
      of the planning phase of the project. The stakeholder management processes from
      the executing and monitoring & controlling process groups should be the center
      of attention now. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61, 404, 409] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
11.   B - Project stakeholders are persons and organizations having a stake in the
      project. They typically exist at different levels and have varying degree of
      authority. For example, the project sponsor will be at a higher level and have a
      greater authority than the project manager. In contrast, a team member may be at
      a lower level and have lesser authority. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 394] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
12.   A - A good strategy for project managers is to give the team all possible
      recognition during the life cycle of the project rather than after the project is
      completed. This will keep the team members motivated through the duration of
      the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 277] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
13.   C - The affinity diagram allows large numbers of ideas to be sorted into groups
      for further review and analysis. It is a tool used in gathering of requirements.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 115] [Project Scope Management]
14.   D - Performance requirements such as the loading time of websites are usually
      considered as part of product requirements/scope. Project requirements include
      business requirements, project management requirements and delivery
      requirements whereas product requirements include technical, security, and
      performance requirements. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 105] [Project Scope
      Management]
15.   D - It's Anna's duty to ensure that all key project stakeholders understand the
      project scope and are aligned with the project management plan. Anna must
      conduct one-to-one meetings with the key stakeholders that are not fully aware of
      the project scope. Just emailing the copies of the plans is not sufficient. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 406] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   D - No action is required in this situation. Although PMI's Code of Ethics requires
      project managers to report illegal or unethical activity to the appropriate
      management, you have no evidence that there has been any wrongdoing in this
      situation. Therefore, reporting or investigating the procurement manager's new car
      purchase is unwarranted. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
17.   C - What-If scenario analysis is used to assess the feasibility of the project
      schedule under adverse conditions. This in an analysis of the question "What if
      the situation represented by scenario 'X' happens?" It is used in preparing
      contingency and response plans to mitigate the impact of the unexpected
      conditions. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 180] [Project Time Management]
18.   B - The cost performance baseline is an authorized time-phased budget at
      completion (BAC). It is used measure, monitor, and control overall cost
      performance on the project. In the earned value management technique, it is
      referred to as the performance measurement baseline (PMB). [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 218, 223] [Project Cost Management]
19.   D - This is likely to be a Cost Plus Award Fee (CPAF) contract. In such a
      contract, the seller is reimbursed for all legitimate costs, but the fee is based on
      the satisfaction of certain broad subjective performance criteria defined in the
      contract. It is generally not subject to appeals. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 364]
      [Project Procurement Management]
20.   B - Although there is no law restricting disposal, the material is still toxic and
      must not disposed of improperly. Abandoning it or giving it to local recyclers
      may also result in improper disposal. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct requires project managers to make decisions based on the interests of
      public safety and the environment. Failing to ensure proper disposal of toxic
      materials is a violation of this code. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   B - Progressive elaboration applies when only a certain amount of information is
      available initially and additional information is obtained as the project or phase
      progresses. It is the progressive detailing of the project management plan and
      relates more closely to the processes from the planning process group. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 55] [Project Time Management]
22.   B - As practitioners in the global project management community, it is our
      responsibility to report unethical or illegal conduct. We may recognize that it is
      difficult to report such happening since they may have negative consequences, yet
      we need to do so. [PMI Code of Ethics section 2.3.2, page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
23.   D - Since you are aware that your company lacks the necessary skills, you need to
      be truthful while bidding. Rather than outright refusing to do what your company
      management asks you to do, it is better to explain the reasons to them and ensure
      that all stakeholders involved are aware that this will be a stretch assignment but
      you and your company are willing to put in the necessary effort to make the
      project a success. [PMI Code of Ethics section 2.2.2, page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
24.   A - The Manage Communications process goes beyond the distribution of
      relevant information and seeks to ensure that the information being
      communicated to project stakeholders has been appropriately generated, as well
      as received and understood. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 298] [Project
      Communications Management]
25.   D - As a PMP, Eric cannot behave in a manner that will mislead the buyer. Hence,
      given that there are still a sufficient number of days available before the RFP is
      due, it is his responsibility to wait for the current quarter results to be published
      and truthfully provide this information in the RFP. [PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   C - Asking the procurement manager to lead the selection process and excusing
      yourself from the review is the best choice. As per the PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, project managers must disclose any potential conflict of
      interest situation to the appropriate stakeholders, who will determine if it is
      appropriate for the project manager to continue participating the impacted
      processes. Project managers must also act fairly towards others; removing the
      supplier from the list because of a possible conflict of interest on the part of the
      project manager is unfair to the vendor. [Reference: PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
27.   D - The FP-EPA contract is used whenever the buyer-seller relationship spans
      across years. It is a fixed price contract with a special provision allowing for pre-
      defined final adjustments to the contract price due to changed conditions. It is
      intended to protect both the buyer and the seller from external conditions beyond
      their control. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 363] [Project Procurement Management]
28.   B - Of the tools listed, scatter diagram is used to study and identify the possible
      relationship between two variables. The others can be used for root-cause
      analysis. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 236, 238] [Project Quality Management]
29.   D - Facilitated workshops bring key cross-functional stakeholders together to
      define product requirements. Because of their interactive nature, well-facilitated
      sessions lead to increased stakeholder consensus. This ensures that issues can be
      discovered and resolved more quickly than in other forums. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 114] [Project Scope Management]
30.   C - If any stakeholder, resisting or supporting, identifies any issue, it must be
      addressed. Since the defects have already been identified and the scenario is
      talking about an action that would bring the future project performance in line to
      the approved quality requirements, this is a corrective action. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 413] [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   B - Problem-solving involves treating conflict as a problem to be solved by
      examining alternatives. This requires a give-and-take attitude. In contrast the
      other alternatives listed - directing, forcing and withdrawing are more one-sided.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource Management]
32.   B - Availability of budget and time is a key factor that determines the need for the
      Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process. A small project with a limited
      budget may decide to do away with this process if the project management team
      decides that quantitative statements about risk and impacts are not needed.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 335] [Project Risk Management]
33.   D - Requirements for formal deliverable acceptance and how to address non-
      conforming deliverables are usually defined in the agreement. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 377, 378] [Project Procurement Management]
34.   A - Training needs are captured and documented in the project's staffing
      management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 266] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
35.   B - Notifying the project stakeholders immediately is the best choice.
      Unauthorized use of the intellectual property of others is unethical, and is
      prohibited by the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Once the project
      stakeholders are notified of the situation, a plan forward can be developed. This
      plan may include licensing the previously patented technology from the patent
      owner or it may include reworking the design. However, this mitigation plan must
      involve the input of the appropriate project stakeholders. [Reference: PMI Code
      of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
36.   A - Activity cost estimates are quantitative assessments of the probable costs
      required to finish project work. If included in project estimates, indirect costs
      should be included at the activity level or higher levels. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 207] [Project Cost Management]
37.   C - The sufficiency model is not a valid model. The others are valid models used
      to analyze stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
38.   A - Use of voice mails is push communication. In this communication,
      information is distributed to specific recipients who need to know the
      information. However, this method does not certify that it actually reached or was
      received by the intended audience. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 295] [Project
      Communications Management]
39.   A - This type of testing is called destructive testing and it is classified under
      appraisal costs. Along with other tests and inspections, they help in assessing the
      quality of the product. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 235] [Project Quality
      Management]
40.   A - The number of project risk reassessments scheduled depends on the progress
      of the project relative to its objectives. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 351] [Project
      Risk Management]
41. A - Manage Stakeholder Engagement is the process of communicating and
    working with stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations, address issues as
    they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 404] [Project Stakeholder Management]
42. B - Process Analysis is a tool / technique used in the Perform Quality Assurance
    process and not in the Define Scope process. The rest of the choices are valid
    techniques of the Define Scope process. [PMBOK 5th edition, 122, 123] [Project
    Scope Management]
43. B - The forming phase is the phase where the team gets to know each other and
    learns about the project. Teams are usually on their "best Behavior" and little
    tangible work gets accomplished. The project manager needs to guide the team
    and move them through this phase into the performing phase. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 276] [Project Human Resource Management]
44. C - An iterative relationship is one where only one phase is carried out at any
    given time. Planning for the next phase is carried on as work progresses on the
    current phase. This type of relationship is suitable in case of projects with unclear
    scope or changing environments. Hence, in a research type of project, an iterative
    relationship is used. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 45] [Project Framework]
45. B - Identifying new risks, and analyzing, tracking and monitoring existing project
    risks is done in the Monitor and Control Project Work phase. This phase also
    makes sure the status of the risks is properly reported and appropriate risk
    response plans are executed. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 88] [Project Integration
    Management]
46. A - The payoff for the strong demand scenario is: $ 400 M - $ 200 M = $ 200 M
    (since the initial investment is $ 200 M). The payoff for the weak demand
    scenario is: $ 150 M - $ 200 M = - $ 50 M. Hence the EMV is computed as: (0.6
    x 200) + (0.4 x -50) where 0.6 represents the 60% probability of the strong
    demand and 0.4 represents the 40% probability of the weak demand scenario. =
    120 - 20 = $ 100 M. Hence the expected monetary value is $ 100 M. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 339] [Project Risk Management]
47. A - Quality metrics are operational definitions that describe a project or product
    attribute in very specific terms. They also define how the quality control process
    will measure it. These metrics are output of the Plan Quality Management
    process. [PMBOK 5th edition, 242] [Project Quality Management]
48. B - Sample frequency and sizes are determined during the Plan Quality
    Management process so that the cost of quality includes the number of tests,
    expected scrap etc. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 240] [Project Quality
    Management]
49. B - Activities such as project performance analysis and tracking are done as part
    of the Monitor and Control Project Work process. This involves tracking,
    reviewing and regulating the progress to meet performance objectives. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 88] [Project Integration Management]
50. B - Contacting the manager once again will not help since you have already had a
    poor response. The best option is to try and use management influence to obtain
    the resource's time for your project. Planning for an alternate resource or training
    another resource are steps that need to be done as last steps after all options have
    been exhausted. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 268] [Project Human Resource
    Management]
Risk Test Questions
1. Which of these is a valid response to negative risks and not positive risks?

       A.   Exploit
       B.   Mitigate
       C.   Enhance
       D.   Share

2. Which of these is accurate regarding risk management?

       A. Organizations are not likely to perceive risk as a threat to project
          success
       B. It has its origins in the uncertainty present in all projects
       C. The attitudes of individuals and organizations must not be a factor
          affecting risk management
       D. It is a passive activity in project management

3. As the project manager, of a project to construct a city park, you have
   yourself identified 39 risks on the project, determined what would trigger
   the risks, rated them on a risk rating matrix, tested the assumptions and
   assessed the quality of the data used. You now plan to move to the next step
   of the risk management process. What have you missed?

       A.   Overall risk ranking for the project
       B.   Involvement of other stakeholders
       C.   Risk Mitigation
       D.   Simulation

4. Your project sponsor has asked you to present your project's high-level risk
   register to him in the next project update meeting. Which of the following
   processes must be started to have your high level risk register?

       A.   Plan Risk Management
       B.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
       C.   Identify Risks
       D.   Control Risks

5. Which of these is an input of the Control Risks process?

       A.   Risk audits
       B.   Change requests
       C.   Work performance information
       D.   Work Performance Reports

6. Which of the following is true about risks?

       A. The risk register documents all the identified risks in detail
       B. Risk impact should be considered, but probability of occurrence is
           not important
        C. Risks always have negative impact and not positive
        D. Risk Response Plan is another name for Risk Management Plan.

7. During which stage of risk planning are risks prioritized based on their
   relative probability and impact?

        A.   Perform Qualitative risk analysis
        B.   Identify Risks
        C.   Perform Quantitative risk analysis
        D.   Plan Risk Responses

8. If a project has a 60% chance of a U.S. $100,000 profit and a 40% chance
   of a U.S. $100,000 loss, the expected monetary value of the project is?

        A.   $20,000 profit
        B.   $40,000 loss
        C.   $100,000 profit
        D.   $60,000 loss

9. Which of these statements about Risk in a project is correct?

        A. Risks are always negative in nature and are threats that need to be
           managed well
        B. A risk is always induced external to the project.
        C. Risk responses reflect an organization's perceived balance between
           risk taking and risk avoidance
        D. Risks need not be planned for in all projects

10. The Manage Communications process belongs to which of the following
    process groups?

        A.   Planning
        B.   Monitoring & Controlling
        C.   Closing
        D.   Executing


Answers

1. B - Risk mitigation is a valid response to negative risks. [PMBOK 5th edition,
   Page 344, 345, 356] [Project Risk Management]
2. B - Risk management does indeed have its origins in the uncertainty present in all
   projects. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 310] [Project Risk Management]
3. B - The project manager is using a good process, however he/she should have
   involved the other stakeholders to help identify risks. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
   321] [Project Risk Management]
4. C - A high-level risk register contains the identified risks only. The risk register is
   created during the Identify Risks process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 327]
      [Project Risk Management]
5.    D - Work Performance Reports are the inputs to the Control Risks process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 349] [Project Risk Management]
6.    A - The risk register contains details of the identified risks. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 327] [Project Risk Management]
7.    A - Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis assesses the impact and likelihood of
      identified risks. During this process the risks are prioritized based on their relative
      probability and impact. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 329] [Project Risk
      Management]
8.    A - EMV=Probability x Impact .6 x $100,000=$60,000 ... .4 x
      ($100,000)=($40,000) ... $60,000-$40,000=$20,000 profit. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 339] [Project Risk Management]
9.    C - Risk responses reflect an organization's perceived balance between risk taking
      and risk avoidance. The other choices are incorrect. Risks need not be induced
      only external to the project. For example, adopting a fast track schedule may be a
      conscious choice and result in some risks. This may however be in balance with
      the reward gained by taking the risk. Risks need not always be negative in nature.
      They may be positive as well. All projects need to plan for Risks. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 310, 311] [Project Risk Management]
10.   D - The Manage Communications process belongs to the Executing process
      group. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 61] [Project Communications Management]
Exam 15 Test Questions
1. Your company has been awarded a very large software project by a
   government agency. This project has an early completion incentive, and
   your company has a policy of paying a bonus to the project manager if such
   an incentive is awarded. However, this particular government agency has a
   reputation for being very difficult to work with; there is a great deal of
   bureaucracy within this agency and stonewalling and hostile behavior
   toward contractors is very common. The project manager will need to have
   excellent political skills to successfully lead this project. You have been
   asked to lead the project because of your expertise with this type of project.
   However, you have never worked within such a highly charged and
   political environment. What should you do?

       A. Decline the project citing lack of experience.
       B. Accept the project but disclose your lack of experience in this type
          of environment.
       C. Accept the project and request that a corporate liaison be assigned to
          your project.
       D. Accept the project.

2. As part of a strategy to handle negative risk, a project manager decided to
   adopt less complex processes, conduct more tests and choose a more stable
   supplier. What strategy would this be classified as?

       A.   Acceptance
       B.   Transference
       C.   Mitigation
       D.   Avoidance

3. Bill is the project manager of an external project for a customer. The project
   is expected to take about a year to complete. Six months into the project,
   the customer informs Bill that the project needs to be scrapped. During
   which of the following processes would procedures be developed to handle
   early termination of a project?

       A.   Develop Project Charter
       B.   Close Project or Phase
       C.   Define Scope
       D.   Close Procurements

4. During a discussion with the quality department, a project manager was
   given to understand that both prevention and inspection meant the same as
   applied to projects. However, he had a different understanding of the terms.
   What would you comment on this situation?

       A. The project manager is correct. Prevention is about keeping errors
          out of the process whereas inspection is about keeping errors out of
          the hands of the customer.
       B. The project manager is correct. Inspection is about keeping errors
          out of the process whereas prevention is about keeping errors out of
          the hands of the customer.
       C. The project manager is wrong. Both inspection and prevention are
          about keeping errors out of the hands of the customer. They are used
          in different contexts.
       D. The project manager is wrong. Both inspection and prevention are
          about keeping errors out of the process. They are used in different
          contexts.

5. Mark is managing an airport construction project. He is currently
   identifying his project stakeholders and he has already got a huge list of
   stakeholders. Managing expectations of each and every project stakeholder
   is not practical. What should be done in this situation?

       A. Project stakeholders should be prioritized based on their influence
          and interest.
       B. Stakeholder analysis should be outsourced.
       C. Non-key stakeholder should be dropped from the stakeholder
          register.
       D. Stakeholder management processes should not be followed for such
          complex projects.

6. While preparing a human resource plan, a project manager documented that
   one of the senior programmers in the team would make decisions on
   whether the quality of deliverables from the project met the project's
   documented standards. Which of the following aspects of a human resource
   plan does this address?

       A.   Competency
       B.   Responsibility
       C.   Authority
       D.   Role

7. Prioritization matrices are an important quality planning tool. They provide
   a way of ranking a diverse set of problems and/or issues by order of
   importance. How is this list usually generated?

       A.   Through control charts
       B.   Through PERT analysis
       C.   Through brainstorming
       D.   Through variance analysis

8. Sally, a project manager was reconciling expenditure of funds with funding
   limits on the commitment of funds for the project. She found a large
   variance between the funding limits and planned expenditures. As a result,
   she decided to reschedule work to level out the rate of expenditures. This is
   known as:
        A.   Funding limit reconciliation
        B.   Funding limit constraints
        C.   Funding limit expenditure
        D.   Funding limit appropriation

9. A project manager used the services of a trained moderator during the
   Collect Requirements process. Which of the following is likely to have
   required the services of a trained moderator?

        A.   Interviews
        B.   Prototypes
        C.   Questionnaires
        D.   Focus groups

10. Jessica is managing an office refurbishment project. All of the project
    stakeholders have been identified and classified. The stakeholder
    management plan has also been approved. Jessica is managing a project for
    the first time in her life and she is relying on the PMBOK guide as a
    reference to deliver a great project. Which of the following processes would
    provide guidance to Jessica regarding how to execute the approved
    stakeholder management plan?

        A.   Control Stakeholder Engagement
        B.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
        C.   Identify Stakeholders
        D.   Plan Stakeholder Management

11. As part of stakeholder analysis, a project manager drew up a power /
    interest grid. The project manager identified that a stakeholder could be
    classified low on the "interest" scale, and also as low on the "power" scale.
    What strategy should be used for such a stakeholder?

        A.   Monitor
        B.   Manage closely
        C.   Keep informed
        D.   Keep satisfied

12. Which of the following statements accurately describes how the completion
    of project scope and product scope is measured?

        A. The completion of project scope and product scope are both
           measured against the product requirements.
        B. The completion of project scope is measured against the project
           management plan whereas the completion of product scope is
           measured against the product requirements.
        C. The completion of project scope is measured against the product
           requirements whereas the completion of product scope is measured
           against the project management plan.
        D. The completion of project scope and product scope are both
            measured against the project management plan.

13. Bill and Jake are two team members in a project. They do not get on well,
    and are constantly involved in verbal fights. The project manager steps in to
    resolve the situation. As an experienced project manager, he understands
    the characteristics of conflict and the conflict management process. Which
    of the following is not a characteristic of conflict?

       A.   Openness resolves conflict
       B.   Conflict is natural and forces a search for alternatives
       C.   Conflict is inevitable in a project environment.
       D.   The project manager is not responsible for conflict management.

14. The Identify Risks process involves determining which risks may impact a
    project. It is considered an iterative process. What is the frequency of the
    iteration?

       A.   Every month
       B.   Every fortnight
       C.   The frequency of iteration will vary based on the situation
       D.   Every week

15. William is managing a high priority project for his organization. The
    project has recently lost the support of the key stakeholders. Despite a
    number of efforts, William has failed to realign the stakeholders and regain
    their support. What should he do now?

       A. Terminate the project
       B. Continue trying to regain the support but keep progressing on the
          project
       C. Seek the project sponsor's assistance
       D. Remove the stakeholders from the stakeholder register

16. A project manager manages a distributed team with team members located
    in five countries. Due to time-zone differences, he is unable to find a time
    that is acceptable to all team members. Which conflict resolution technique
    is best suited for this situation?

       A.   Compromise
       B.   Force
       C.   Withdraw
       D.   Avoid

17. Acceptance is a strategy adopted because it is not possible to eliminate all
    risks from a project. This strategy indicates that the project management
    team has decided not to change the project management plan to deal with a
    risk. What action does passive acceptance require?

       A. Passive acceptance is no longer adopted in projects and is a poor
           project management practice.
        B. Passive acceptance requires no action except to document the
           strategy and come up with a risk management strategy.
        C. Passive acceptance requires no action.
        D. Passive acceptance requires no action except to document the
           strategy, leaving the project team to deal with the risks as they
           occur.

18. A buyer and seller fixed up the rates for junior engineers, senior engineers,
    architects, and other predefined roles. In what type of a contract would this
    be applicable?

        A.   Fixed price with economic price adjustment contract
        B.   Fixed price incentive contract
        C.   Fixed-price contract
        D.   Time and material contract

19. A project manager is estimating project costs and needs to decide whether
    the estimates will include only direct costs, or whether the estimates will
    also include indirect costs. In which of the following phases does this
    decision need to take place?

        A.   Define Scope
        B.   Estimate Costs
        C.   Plan Expenses
        D.   Determine Budget

20. After conducting a bidder conference, you receive an email from one of the
    bidders requesting additional information. The information was neither
    included in your Request for proposal, nor asked by any one during the
    bidder conference. You realize that answer to this question is critical to
    understanding the scope of the project. If not communicated to bidders,
    they will not be able to accurately size their teams and estimate the total
    duration of the project, and may also have a large impact on cost. However,
    the answer contains some proprietary information that, if disclosed to a
    competitor, may reveal the future product strategy of your company. Such a
    disclosure could be disastrous for a major product launch you are planning
    in the next year. So you decide to send the answer to all of the bidders, but
    realize that one of the bidders is also working closely with one of your
    competitors on a similar project. What should you do?

        A. Don't send this information in writing; instead telephone each
           bidding company.
        B. Send this information to all bidders except the bidder working with
           your competitor.
        C. Send this information to only the supplier that requested it.
        D. Require all bidders to sign a non-disclosure agreement. You may
           then send the information to each company that has signed the
           NDA.
21. During a project status meeting, a project manager presented sensitive
    information related to the project. However, this information was not
    intended to be available to the audience. Which of the following processes
    was incorrectly done resulting in the project manager communicating
    sensitive information to the wrong audience?

        A.   Control Communications
        B.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
        C.   Plan Communications Management
        D.   Identify Stakeholders

22. A project manager drew up a resource histogram. On plotting the
    histogram, he found that some bars extended beyond the maximum
    available hours. What does this usually signify?

        A. This means that the resources on those bars are being underutilized.
        B. This means that a resource optimization strategy needs to be applied
        C. This means that the resources are producing outputs at a rate faster
           than the average rate.
        D. This means that resources need to be reduced from the project.

23. A project manager is planning out the availability of resources as part of the
    Acquire Project Team process. He needs to acquire resources that report to
    a functional manager. What technique will he likely use to obtain these
    resources?

        A.   Pre-assignment
        B.   Authority
        C.   Negotiation
        D.   Coercion

24. Which of the following statements about project teams is incorrect?

        A. The project management team is usually a team external to the
           project team.
        B. The project management team is a subset of the project team.
        C. For smaller projects, the project management responsibilities can be
           shared by the entire team.
        D. For smaller projects, the project management responsibilities can be
           administered solely by the project manger.

25. You are just about to present your project's status to your company's
    executive team. One of your resources hands you an updated report on the
    progress of a critical deliverable as you are leaving your desk for the
    meeting. You review the report as you are walking to the conference room
    and notice that there is an error in the report. What do you do?

        A. Do not report on that part of the project.
        B. Disclose that you have just discovered that there is an error in some
          of the information that you had intended to present, and only present
          the information that you know to be true.
       C. Cancel the meeting.
       D. Present the information as-it-is and revise it in the meeting minutes,
          which will be sent after 2 days

26. Sheila has been assigned as the project manager of a project. After a
    detailed discussion with the project management team, she decides to come
    up with a quality management plan that is informal and broadly framed.
    What would your comment on this be?

       A. This is incorrect. A quality management plan should be formal but
          broadly framed.
       B. This is incorrect. A quality management plan should be formal and
          highly detailed.
       C. This is fine. The style and detail of the quality management plan is
          determined by the requirements of the project.
       D. This is incorrect. A quality management plan should be informal
          and highly detailed.

27. A project manager was involved in preparation of the project charter for an
    external project. One of the inputs to the project charter was a statement of
    work (SOW). The SOW may have been received from the customer as part
    of all of the following except:

       A.   As part of a request for information
       B.   As part of the business case
       C.   As part of a request for proposal
       D.   As part of a contract

28. A project manager is determining dependencies that will require a lead or a
    lag to accurately define the logical relationship. Which of the following
    correctly describes leads or lags?

       A.   A lead allows a successor activity to be delayed.
       B.   A lag directs a delay in the predecessor activity.
       C.   A lag allows an acceleration of the successor activity.
       D.   A lead allows an acceleration of the successor activity.

29. Which of the following scenarios is likely to occur in a project?

       A. Cost and staffing levels are low at the start of the project.
       B. Stakeholders' influence on the project is lowest at the start of the
          project.
       C. Risk and uncertainty are lowest at the start of the project.
       D. Cost of changes are the highest at the start of the project.

30. A project manager is updating her project team over the new project
    management approach selected for the project. This new approach is the
    industry best practice. The project manager is also discussing the potential
    stakeholder impact of trying the new approach. The key stakeholders
    support and involvement is very crucial for the success of the project. If the
    key stakeholders don't buy-in the idea of trying the new approach, the new
    approach will have to be dropped. What must the project manager do in
    order to reduce the probability of this risk?

       A.   Drop the idea of trying the new approach
       B.   Identify preventive actions to reduce the risk
       C.   Identify the corrective actions to reduce the risk
       D.   Convince the project sponsor and use his coercive power to force
            the decision

31. A project manager estimated that a project would require 4375 person hours
    of effort. The project ended up using 6250 person hours of effort. The
    difference between these two figures is called a:

       A.   Variance
       B.   Control Limit
       C.   Threshold
       D.   Standard Deviation

32. Projects can deliver products that vary in quality and grade. Which of the
    following people is responsible for managing the tradeoffs involved to
    deliver the required level of quality and grade?

       A.   The customer
       B.   The project sponsor
       C.   The quality team
       D.   The project manager and the project team

33. A project manager is considering risk in a project. When does risk come
    into play in a project?

       A. During the SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
          threats) analysis.
       B. During the Identify Risks phase.
       C. As soon as the Plan Risk Management phase begins
       D. As soon as a project is conceived

34. The scope of work in a project could not be clearly defined. There was also
    a strong possibility that the scope would be altered during the course of the
    project. Which type of contract would suit this type of situation?

       A.   Fixed price with economic price adjustment contract
       B.   Fixed-price contract
       C.   Cost-reimbursable contract
       D.   Fixed price incentive contract
35. You are managing a project with a large multi-national staff. One of the
    engineers was originally tasked to deliver her part of the work on Oct 19,
    but due to the change in the critical path, her deliverable will be needed 2
    days sooner. However, as the new deadline is still 2 weeks away and she is
    ahead of schedule, you are confident that her delivery will be on time.
    During a staff meeting, you learn from her functional manager that this
    engineer celebrates a religious holiday on Oct 17. He tells you that the
    engineer is not particularly religious, however, and if pushed a bit and
    offered some incentive she may forego celebrating this holiday and come to
    work. What should you do?

       A. Check if one of her colleagues can share some of her workload this
          week
       B. Increase her project incentive if she agrees to deliver her
          presentation on 17th.
       C. Let the critical path remain the same.
       D. Ask her boss to request her to skip the holiday.

36. Jackie is the project manager of large project. During the Determine Budget
    process, she identifies that contingency reserves need to be made for
    unplanned but potentially required changes that could result from realized
    risks identified in the risk register. Which of the following is true about
    reserves?

       A. Management Reserves are not a part of project cost baseline, but
          will be included in the total budget for the project
       B. Contingency Reserves are not a part of project cost baseline, but
          will be included in the total budget for the project
       C. Both the Management Reserves and the Contingency Reserves are
          not part of project cost baseline, and they are also not included in
          the total budget for the project
       D. Both the Management Reserves and the Contingency Reserves are
          not part of project cost baseline, but they are included in the total
          budget for the project

37. The legal nature of the contractual relationship between a buyer and a seller
    requires that appropriate legal counsel be involved in the project, for
    specific activities. Which of the following phases requires legal counsel to
    be involved.

       A.   Control procurements
       B.   Plan procurement management
       C.   Conduct procurements
       D.   Each procurement management process

38. A project manager is looking at a make-or-buy analysis as part of the Plan
    Procurement Management process. What type of costs should the project
    manager consider for this analysis?

       A. Direct costs
        B. Indirect costs
        C. Out-of-pocket costs
        D. Both direct as well as indirect costs

39. Which of the following is not an input to the Conduct Procurements
    process?

        A.   Proposal evaluation techniques
        B.   Seller proposals
        C.   Source selection criteria
        D.   Procurement statement of work

40. During the execution of a project, a large number of defects were
    discovered. The project manager ensured that the issues, defect resolution
    and action item results were logged into a defects database. What would the
    defect database be considered a part of?

        A.   Expert Judgment
        B.   Deliverables
        C.   Change Requests
        D.   Organizational Process Assets

41. The WBS structure can be created in a number of forms except which of the
    following?

        A. Using work packages as the second level of decomposition, with the
           project deliverables inserted at the third level.
        B. Using major deliverables as the second level of decomposition.
        C. Using phases of the project life cycle as the second level of
           decomposition, with the product and project deliverables inserted at
           the third level.
        D. Using subcomponents which may be developed by organizations
           outside the project team, such as contracted work.

42. A project manager is currently ensuring that the stakeholders clearly
    understand the project goals, objectives, benefits and risks. This relates to
    which of the following processes?

        A.   Control Stakeholder
        B.   Identify Stakeholders
        C.   Plan Communications Management
        D.   Manage Stakeholder Engagement

43. Which of the following may not be considered an attribute of a project?

        A. Repetitive elements may be present in some project deliverables.
        B. The impact of a project usually ends when the project ends.
        C. A project can involve a single person.
       D. There is uncertainty about the product that the project creates.

44. Which of the following structures is helpful in tracking project costs and
    can be aligned with the organization's accounting system?

       A.   Project breakdown structure (PBS)
       B.   Matrix breakdown structure (MBS)
       C.   Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
       D.   Organizational breakdown structure (OBS)

45. A first-time project manager is advised by an experienced project manager
    that he needs to plan for cost of quality. The first-time project manager is
    not sure of what costs are included in the cost of quality. What would your
    advise be?

       A. Cost of quality only includes cost of nonconformance
       B. Cost of quality includes cost of conformance and cost of
          nonconformance
       C. Cost of quality only includes prevention costs and internal failure
          costs.
       D. Cost of quality only includes cost of conformance

46. Miranda is an experienced project manager. As part of the Collect
    Requirements phase, she decides to use a group creativity technique. This
    technique is expected to enhance brainstorming with a voting process, and
    can be used to rank the most useful ideas for further brainstorming or
    prioritization. Which of the following will she likely use?

       A.   Normal group technique
       B.   Minimal group technique
       C.   Unanimous group technique
       D.   Nominal group technique

47. In which of the following situations would it be better to avoid using
    Analogous Estimating?

       A.   When the project team members have the needed expertise
       B.   When an accurate estimate is required
       C.   When a low value estimate is required
       D.   When the previous activities are similar in fact and not just
            appearance

48. A group of people were discussing multiple alternatives during the Collect
    Requirements process. One of the individuals in the group made the
    decision for the group. This method of reaching a group decision would be
    termed as:

       A. One Thinking Hat
       B. Dictatorship
       C. Plurality
       D. Autonomy

49. Which of the following processes will determine the correctness of
    deliverables?

       A.   Plan Quality Assurance
       B.   Plan Quality Management
       C.   Control Quality
       D.   Perform Quality Assurance

50. All of the monitoring and control processes and many of the executing
    processes produce change requests as an output. Change requests include
    corrective action and preventive action. Which of the following are
    normally affected by corrective and preventive actions?

       A.   Defect repair
       B.   Regressive baselines
       C.   The project baselines
       D.   The performance against baselines


Answers

1. B - Accept the position, but disclose your lack of experience with this type of
   environment. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Responsibilities requires that
   project managers accept only those projects for which they have the appropriate
   qualifications and background. However, if the project stakeholders receive full
   disclosure and still give their consent, it is permissible to accept a stretch
   assignment. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
   Responsibility]
2. C - Actions such as adopting less complex processes, more testing, or choosing a
   more stable supplier would be considered as mitigation. These actions reduce the
   probability and/or impact of risks. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 345] [Project Risk
   Management]
3. B - The Close Project or Phase process establishes the procedures to investigate
   and document the reasons for actions taken if a project is terminated before
   completion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 101] [Project Integration Management]
4. A - The project manager is correct. Prevention is about keeping errors out of the
   process whereas inspection is about keeping errors out of the hands of the
   customer. This is an important that the project management team needs to be
   aware of. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 250] [Project Quality Management]
5. A - When the stakeholders list becomes unmanageable, the project stakeholders
   should be prioritized to ensure the efficient use of effort and time to manage their
   expectations. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. C - Authority is the best choice. Authority is the right to apply project resources
   and make decisions within the project. These decisions could include quality
   acceptance, selection of the method for completing an activity, and how to
   respond to project variances. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 264] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
7.    C - Prioritization matrices provide a way of ranking a set of problems and/or
      issues that are usually generated through brainstorming. The rest of the choices
      are not valid techniques for the development of a priority matrix. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 246] [Project Quality Management]
8.    A - This is known as funding limit reconciliation. It can be accomplished by
      placing imposed date constraints for work into the project schedule. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 212] [Project Cost Management]
9.    D - Focus groups bring together prequalified stakeholders and subject matter
      experts to learn about their expectations and attitudes about a proposed product,
      service or result. Typically a trained moderator is used to guide the group through
      an interactive discussion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 114] [Project Scope
      Management]
10.   B - The question is asking about the stakeholder management process from the
      executing process group. The Manage Stakeholder Engagement process executes
      the stakeholder management strategy developed during the Plan Stakeholder
      Management process. The Control Stakeholder Engagement process is all about
      making the necessary adjustments to the stakeholder management strategy.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 404] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   A - Power/Interest grids are used to group stakeholders based on their level of
      authority ("power") and their level of concern ("interest") regarding project
      outcomes. A stakeholder classified as low on the "interest" scale, and low on the
      "power" scale will be classified in the "Monitor" quadrant. This involves
      minimum effort. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 397] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
12.   B - The completion of project scope is measured against the project management
      plan whereas the completion of product scope is measured against the product
      requirements. The work of the project results in delivery of the specified product
      scope. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 106] [Project Scope Management]
13.   D - Project team members are initially responsible for resolution of their conflicts.
      If conflict escalates, the project manager should help facilitate a resolution.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource Management]
14.   C - Identify Risks is an iterative process as new risks evolve or become known in
      a project. The frequency of iteration, and who participates in each cycle, will vary
      by the situation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 321] [Project Risk Management]
15.   C - If the key stakeholders support has been lost, this could lead to a major
      disaster. Since a number of efforts by the project manager have already failed, the
      matter should immediately be escalated to the project sponsor. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 406] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   A - A compromise requires searching for options that bring some degree to
      satisfaction to all parties in order to temporarily or partially resolve the conflict.
      This would be the best way to handle the current situation as the difference of
      time zone is not under the control of anyone. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 283]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
17.   D - Acceptance is a strategy adopted because it is not possible to eliminate all
      risks from a project. This strategy indicates that the project management team has
      decided not to change the project management plan to deal with a risk. Passive
      acceptance requires no action except to document the strategy, leaving the project
      team deal with the risks as they occur. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 345] [Project
      Risk Management]
18.   D - Unit labor or material rates are usually fixed up between the buyer and seller
      in case of Time and Material contracts. Specific categories such as junior or
      senior engineers at specific hourly rates are agreed upon by both parties. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 364] [Project Procurement Management]
19.   B - This is done in the Estimate Costs process. The project manager works in
      accordance with the organization's guidelines and decides whether the estimates
      will be limited to direct project costs only or whether the estimates will also
      include indirect costs. Indirect costs are those that cannot be traced to one specific
      project, and are usually allocated equitably over multiple projects. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 202] [Project Cost Management]
20.   D - The best choice is to require all vendors to sign a non-disclosure agreement
      before sending out this additional information, then provide the additional
      information to each bidder that has signed an NDA. Project managers are required
      to act fairly and provide equal access to information to all authorized parties.
      Sending the information to only some of the bidding companies is a violation of
      the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. PMI Code of Ethics and
      Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   C - Deciding what information is relevant to an audience is an activity done in the
      Plan Communications Management process. Improper communication planning
      will lead to problems such as delay in message delivery or communication of
      sensitive information to the wrong audience. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 290]
      [Project Communications Management]
22.   B - If the bars in a resource histogram extend beyond the maximum available
      hours, it means that a resource optimization strategy needs to be applied, such as
      adding more resources or modifying the schedule. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      265] [Project Human Resource Management]
23.   C - Staff assignments are negotiated on many projects. The project manager will
      negotiate with functional managers to ensure that the project receives competent
      staff in the required time-frame. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 270] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
24.   A - The project management team is a subset of the project team and is
      responsible for the project management and leadership activities such as
      initiating, planning, executing, monitoring, controlling, and closing the various
      project phases. For smaller projects, the responsibilities can be shared by the
      entire team, or taken up solely by the project manager. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      256] [Project Human Resource Management]
25.   B - Disclose that you have just discovered an error in some of the information you
      had planned to present and only present the information that you know to be
      accurate. Project managers are obligated to provide accurate and timely project
      information at all times, as noted in the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
26.   C - The quality management plan may be formal or informal, highly detailed or
      broadly framed. The style and detail is determined by the requirements of the
      project as defined by the project management team. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      241] [Project Quality Management]
27.   B - The statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of products or
      services to be delivered by the project. For an external project, the SOW may be
      received as part of a bid document such as the request for proposal, request for
      information, request for bid or as part of a contract. It is usually not part of the
      business case. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 68] [Project Integration Management]
28.   D - The project management team determines dependencies that will require a
      lead or a lag to accurately define the logical relationship. A lead allows an
      acceleration of the successor activity. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 158] [Project
      Time Management]
29.   A - Cost and staffing levels are low at the start of the project. The rest of the
      statements are incorrect. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 40] [Project Framework]
30.   B - If the new approach is the industry best practice, it must be adopted. Further,
      forcing a decision won't help obtain the key stakeholders' support. Actions that
      reduce the probability of a risk in the future are preventive actions. The team
      needs to brainstorm and come up with effective preventive actions in this
      situation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 413] [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   A - Variance is a quantifiable deviation, departure, or divergence away from a
      known baseline of expected value. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 566] [Project
      Framework]
32.   D - The project manager and the project management team are responsible for
      managing the tradeoffs involved to deliver the required level of quality and grade.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 228] [Project Quality Management]
33.   D - Project risk exists in a project the moment the project is conceived. The risks
      are identified as part of specific processes, but the risk always exist. The Plan
      Risk Management process should begin when a project is conceived and should
      be completed early during the planning phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 314]
      [Project Risk Management]
34.   C - A cost-reimbursable contract gives the project flexibility to redirect a seller
      whenever the scope of work cannot be precisely determined at the start of the
      project and needs to be altered, or when high risks may exist in the effort.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 363] [Project Procurement Management]
35.   A - Checking to see if one of her colleagues could share some of her workload
      this week is the best choice. If another resource can assist with the completion of
      this task, the engineer may celebrate the holiday without impacting the delivery of
      her work item. PMI's Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct mandates that
      project managers not only respect the religious beliefs of others, but they must use
      their position or expertise to influence the decisions or actions of others to benefit
      at their expense. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
36.   A - Management Reserves are not a part of project cost baseline, but will be
      included in the total budget for the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 213]
      [Project Cost Management]
37.   D - Project procurement management includes processes necessary to purchase or
      acquire products or services needed from outside the project team. If the legal
      nature of a contractual relationship between a buyer and a seller requires that
      appropriate legal counsel is involved with a procurement, the assistance of the
      legal counsel will be required for every phase of the procurement management.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 355] [Project Procurement Management]
38.   D - The make-or-buy analysis needs to be as comprehensive as possible. Hence it
      should consider all possible costs - both direct and indirect costs. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 365] [Project Procurement Management]
39. A - Proposal evaluation techniques are the tools and techniques of the Conduct
    Procurement process. The rest of the choices are the valid inputs to this process.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 371] [Project Procurement Management]
40. D - Issue and defect management databases are considered part of the
    organizational process assets. They typically contains historical issue and defect
    status, control information, issue and defect resolution, and action item results.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 28] [Project Framework]
41. A - The work packages are at the last level of a WBS. The rest of the statements
    are correct regarding the structure of the WBS. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 129]
    [Project Scope Management]
42. D - This is done in the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. It involves
    ensuring that the stakeholders clearly understand the project goals, objectives,
    benefits and risks. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 406] [Project Stakeholder
    Management]
43. B - The impact of a project may far outlast the project itself. The other choices are
    valid attributes of projects. A project may involve a single person, a single
    organizational unit, or multiple organizational units. Repetitive elements may be
    present in some project deliverables, but this does not change the fundamental
    uniqueness of the project work. Additionally because of the unique nature of the
    work, there are usually uncertainties about the work involved. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
44. C - The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) provides the framework for the cost
    management plan. WBS contains control accounts that links directly to the
    performing organization's accounting system. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 199]
    [Project Cost Management]
45. B - Cost of quality (COQ) includes all costs incurred over the life of a product
    related to quality management activities and quality issues. It includes cost of
    conformance (prevention and appraisal costs) as well cost of nonconformance
    (internal and external failure costs) [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 235] [Project
    Quality Management]
46. D - Miranda likely intends to use the Nominal group technique. This enhances
    brainstorming with a voting process to rank the most useful ideas for further
    brainstorming or prioritization. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 115] [Project Scope
    Management]
47. B - Analogous estimating is generally less costly than other techniques and are
    generally less accurate. It is most reliable when previous activities are similar in
    fact, and the project team members have the needed expertise. This method
    cannot be used when an accurate estimate is required. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    169] [Project Time Management]
48. B - The method where a single individual makes the decision on behalf of a group
    is termed as Dictatorship. Other group decision making techniques are Unanimity
    (everyone agrees on a course of action), Majority (Support from more than 50%
    of the members of the group) and plurality (The largest block in a group decides
    even if a majority is not achieved). [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 115] [Project
    Scope Management]
49. C - An important goal of quality control is to determine the correctness of
    deliverables. The results of the execution of quality control processes are
    validated deliverables. These are then an input to the Validate Scope process for
    formalized acceptance. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 248] [Project Quality
    Management]
50. D - Corrective and preventive actions do not normally affect the project baselines,
    only the performance against the baselines. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 81]
    [Project Integration Management]
Exam 16 Test Questions
1. You are a certified PMP, and have been contact by PMI as part of an
   investigation they are conducting into allegations of improper conduct by
   your manager, also a PMP. A complaint has been filed stating that your
   manager has received bribes related to a large procurement contract on
   another project. PMI has asked if you would be able to provide information
   regarding this situation. What should you do?

       A. Confront your manager.
       B. Send PMI project documentation and emails related to the
          allegations to assist with their investigation.
       C. Notify the appropriate management immediately.
       D. Do nothing, citing a conflict of interest.

2. As part of the Estimate Costs process, a project manager obtained access to
   certain commercially available databases to get resource cost rate
   information. What type of input is such published commercial information
   considered as?

       A.   Enterprise environmental factor
       B.   Historical information
       C.   Organizational process asset
       D.   HR Input

3. A project needed to monitor the technical performance of the project and
   capture data related to how many errors or defects had been identified, and
   how many remained uncorrected. Which of the following techniques should
   the project use?

       A.   Scatter diagram
       B.   Flowchart
       C.   Histogram
       D.   Control chart

4. Which of the following is not an example of parametric estimating?

       A. Activity duration estimated based on the number of drawings
          multiplied by the number of labor hours per drawing.
       B. Activity duration estimated based on the number of labor hours per
          meter for cable installation.
       C. Activity duration estimated based on the square footage in
          construction.
       D. Activity duration estimated based on the actual duration of a similar,
          previous project.

5. Nancy's project has got a huge number of key positive and negative
   stakeholders. It is very important to closely manage the influential negative
   stakeholders to ensure project's success. Do the key positive stakeholders
    need to be managed as well?

       A. No; more attention needs to be given to the key negative
          stakeholders.
       B. The positive stakeholders need to be closely managed as well since
          stakeholders' needs and expectations change over time.
       C. Project stakeholders should not be classified as positive and
          negative stakeholders.
       D. Yes; positive stakeholders should be more closely managed than the
          negative stakeholders.

6. Which of the following is not an example of a work performance report?

       A.   Status report
       B.   Project charter
       C.   Project update memo
       D.   Project recommendations

7. A project charter that formally authorized a project was created. The project
   charter documented the initial requirements to satisfy stakeholders' needs
   and expectations. How often should the project charter ideally be revised?

       A.   At the beginning, middle and end of a project.
       B.   Once a month
       C.   Never
       D.   As required by the PMO.

8. Kelly, the project manager of a large project, found that she did not have
   the necessary number of resources required for some activities in the
   project. To account for the limited resources, she decided to apply the
   critical chain method. Which of the following would she use to protect the
   critical chain from slippage along the feeding chains?

       A.   Feeding buffers
       B.   Standby buffers
       C.   Overflow buffers
       D.   Dependent buffers

9. A statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of the products or
   services to be delivered by the project. It usually references all of the
   following except:

       A.   The business case
       B.   The product scope description
       C.   The strategic plan
       D.   The business need

10. Nancy's project is in execution. Nancy is currently planning to execute the
    Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. She has gathered the stakeholder
    management plan, the recent change log, and the necessary organizational
    process assets. Which of the following is a key input to this process that is
    still missing from this list?

       A.   Communications methods
       B.   Stakeholder register
       C.   Stakeholder management strategy
       D.   Communications management plan

11. A project manager needed to shorten a project schedule. He decided to
    apply crashing, a schedule compression technique. Which of the following
    activities would not be an example of crashing?

       A.   Bringing in additional resources
       B.   Reducing project scope
       C.   Paying to expedite delivery activities
       D.   Approving overtime

12. A project can be authorized by any of the following except:

       A.   The project manager
       B.   The PMO
       C.   The sponsor
       D.   The portfolio steering committee

13. A research project needed to be carried out under largely undefined,
    uncertain and rapidly changing environmental conditions. If this project is
    carried out as a multi-phase project, which of the following phase-to-phase
    relationships best suits it?

       A.   Overlapping relationship
       B.   Sequential relationship
       C.   Iterative relationship
       D.   Boxed relationship

14. A first-time project manager created a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
    where the deliverables had different levels of decomposition. What would
    your comment on this be?

       A. This is incorrect. All deliverables need to have the same level of
          decomposition.
       B. This is incorrect. Only deliverables under different branches can
          have different levels of decomposition.
       C. This is fine. Different deliverables can have different levels of
          decomposition depending on the work involved.
       D. This is fine. The focus of the WBS is not the deliverables, but the
          tasks involved.

15. Stanley's project is in execution. Stanley has a monthly stakeholder update
    meeting set up where he presents the project's progress and current issues to
    the key stakeholders. During the last stakeholder update meeting, the
    stakeholders requested Stanley to provide bi-weekly project updates instead
    of monthly updates. The communication management plan has been
    broadly framed and it doesn't restrict Stanley from doing bi-weekly updates.
    What should Stanley do?

       A. Start providing bi-weekly updates instead of monthly updates.
       B. Update the communication management plan prior to providing the
          bi-weekly updates.
       C. Disregard the stakeholders' request and continue with the monthly
          updates.
       D. Request the stakeholders to submit a change request.

16. Decision tree analysis is used to calculate the average outcome when the
    future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. What is the input and
    output in a decision node?

       A. Input: Cost of each decision Output: Probability of occurrence
       B. Input: Cost of each decision Output: Decision made
       C. Input: Scenario probability Output: Expected Monetary Value
          (EMV)
       D. Input: Cost of each decision Output: Payoff

17. Sensitivity analysis helps to determine which risks have the most potential
    impact on the project. A project manager prepared a display chart of
    sensitivity analysis for his project. The diagram contained a series of bars
    with the length of the bars corresponding to the risk impact on the project.
    The longer the bars, the greater was the risk presented. Such a diagram is
    likely to be:

       A.   An assessment diagram
       B.   A triangular distribution
       C.   A tornado diagram
       D.   A funnel distribution

18. Which of the following is neither an input nor an output of the Direct and
    Manage Project Work process?

       A.   Approved change requests
       B.   Change requests
       C.   Approved deliverables
       D.   Deliverables

19. As part of the Plan Risk Management process, a project manager is looking
    at the activity of preparing a risk management plan. Which of the following
    is true about risks?

       A. A risk may have one or more causes and, if it occurs, may have one
          or more impacts.
       B. A risk usually has a single cause and, if it occurs, may have one or
          more impacts.
       C. A risk usually has a single cause and if it occurs usually has a single
          impact.
       D. A risk usually has more than one cause, and if it occurs, may have
          one or more impacts.

20. You have just taken over a project from another project manager about 6
    months into a 12-month project. As you get to know the staff on the project,
    you become aware that 5 staff members are relatives of the previous project
    manager. What do you do?

       A. Notify your project stakeholders there is a possibility that nepotism
          was behind some of the staffing decisions made on your project.
       B. Check recruitment records of all employees
       C. Report the HR manager to PMI.
       D. Interview these 5 employees

21. A seller organization was executing work for a project under a contract.
    During the course of the project, a number of disputes arose over the scope
    and quality of work. Which of the following is the preferred method of
    resolving these claims?

       A.   Alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
       B.   Claims court
       C.   Appeals court
       D.   Negotiation

22. Which of the following is incorrect regarding a bidders conference?

       A. Questions from each seller should be handled confidentially and not
          shared with other sellers.
       B. No bidders should receive preferential treatment, even if they are
          part of the company's existing list of approved suppliers.
       C. Bidders conferences should not involve individual face-to-face
          meetings
       D. All prospective sellers should be allowed to have a common
          understanding of the procurement.

23. The Actual Cost (AC) is the total cost actually incurred and recorded in
    accomplishing work performed for an activity or work breakdown structure
    component. What is the upper limit for the AC?

       A.   50% over and above the Planned Value (PV)
       B.   The Actual Cost (AC) is limited to the Planned Value (PV).
       C.   100% over and above the Planned Value (PV)
       D.   There is no upper limit for the Actual Cost (AC).
24. You are the project manager of a project executing work under a contract
    signed with a buyer organization. Just after the project has started, you
    notice that the buyer organization had made a mistake in the financial terms
    and your organization stands to benefit considerably through this oversight.
    What should your stance be?

       A. Do not take any action since a contract is a binding and legal
          document.
       B. Discuss with your management on how you could gain a bonus due
          to the increased revenue your company stands to gain.
       C. Informally check with your counterpart in the buyer organization to
          see if they have noticed this error.
       D. Bring the error to the notice of the buyer organization and have an
          amendment made to the contract since this was in good faith.

25. You are managing a project to design microprocessor control systems. The
    design work was estimated to complete in 3.5 months, with seven
    milestones. The sixth milestone is the prototype to be handed over to
    manufacturing. All milestones before prototyping have been completed
    ahead of schedule with 6th one being delayed for 4 months as the prototype
    has been sent back several times, due to conflicts between departments.
    You are now planning to hold a meeting to review the design specifications,
    and handle conflicts between design and manufacturing. Who is at fault?

       A.   The scheduler.
       B.   The project manager.
       C.   The manufacturer.
       D.   The design engineer.

26. Why are the approved change requests input to the Direct and Manage
    Project Work process?

       A. Approved change requests may be rejected by the project team
          during the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
       B. Approved change requests are implemented by the project team
          during the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
       C. Approved change requests are sent to the Change Control Board
          during the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
       D. Approved change requests are reviewed by the project team during
          the Direct and Manage Project Work process.

27. Sheila is a project manager managing a global project. She has stakeholders
    located in various parts of the globe. Due to the nature of the project, she
    also has large volumes of information that needs to be shared with the
    recipients. What type of communication method should she prefer for this
    purpose?

       A. Pull communication
       B. Push communication
       C. Request based communication
       D. Interactive communication

28. Dan is a project manager in an organization and conducts a workshop on
    project management. Which of the following statements made by him about
    projects is incorrect?

       A. Projects exist within an organization and operate as a closed system.
       B. Project processes usually generate information that helps improve
          the management of future projects.
       C. Successful project management includes meeting sponsor, customer,
          and other stakeholder requirements.
       D. Project management is an integrative undertaking.

29. Rick, a project manager, is updating the status of his project. Based on the
    performance indices, he expects the project to finish a month earlier than
    the planned finish date. However, he expects the project to exceed the
    budgeted costs. What can you say about the schedule performance index
    (SPI) of the project?

       A.   The SPI is less than 1.0.
       B.   The SPI equals the CPI.
       C.   The SPI is greater than 1.0.
       D.   The SPI is equal to 1.0.

30. A project team is currently planning to perform the Control Stakeholder
    Engagement process to reassess the project stakeholders' current
    engagement levels and review the current stakeholder management
    strategy. Which of the following is an output of this process?

       A.   Project documents updates
       B.   Information management system
       C.   Work performance data
       D.   Approved change requests

31. Variance Analysis is an important tool used in the Control Costs Process.
    Which of the following statements regarding variances is correct?

       A. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to increase
          as more work is accomplished
       B. The percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease
          as more work is accomplished
       C. The percentage range of acceptable variances is high at the start of a
          project, tends to decrease in the middle of a project, and then tends
          to increase as the project nears completion
       D. The percentage range of acceptable variances is a constant all
          through the project

32. As part of risk planning, some responses are designed for use only if certain
    events occur. A project manager of a multi-year project decided to trigger
    one such set of responses during the Control Risks process. Which of the
    following is likely to have triggered the responses?

       A.   Late receipt of status reports
       B.   A key employee going on vacation for three days.
       C.   Errors found in a deliverable document
       D.   Missing an intermediate milestone

33. Stakeholder analysis is an important technique in the Identify Stakeholders
    process. One of the steps involved is to identify the potential impact of each
    stakeholder and classify them appropriately. Which of the following is not a
    valid model used for this purpose?

       A.   Salience model
       B.   Tolerance model
       C.   Power / interest grid
       D.   Influence / impact grid

34. A key project in an organization has been ignored due to high travel
    expenses associated with the movement of subject matter experts and other
    specialists across various project locations. Which of the following will
    permit such a project to be taken up in a cost-efficient manner?

       A.   Management sign-off
       B.   Negotiation
       C.   Virtual teams
       D.   Co-location

35. Your company took over the management of a project from another
    company that went out of business. To minimize disruptions related to the
    transition, your company hired a number of the employees from the other
    company. One of these employees has delivered a 300 page document a
    week ahead of schedule. However, while walking past his desk you notice
    he has a document opened on his computer with the logo of his former
    employer. You suspect that some of his work may have been taken from
    documentation that is the property of the other company. What do you do?

       A. Report this to your project stakeholders immediately.
       B. Determine if any materials belonging to the other company have
          been copied.
       C. The copyright material is owned by the client, for whom you are
          working so this is not a copyright issue.
       D. Do nothing. Because the company is now out of business, out no
          one now owns the copyright on that material.

36. A project manager is performing a set of processes in the Initiating Process
    Group. Which of the following is likely to be part of the Initiating Process
    Group?
       A.   Develop Project Management Plan
       B.   Define Scope
       C.   Develop Project Charter
       D.   Plan Quality Management

37. During the course of the project, the project management team developed a
    forecast for the estimate at completion (EAC) based on the project
    performance. Which of the following statements about EAC is correct?

       A. The EAC forecast based on the Bottom-up estimate to complete
          (ETC) requires a new estimate.
       B. The EAC forecast is best estimated using the estimate to complete
          (ETC) work performed considering both SPI and CPI factors.
       C. The EAC forecast is best estimated using the estimate to complete
          (ETC) work performed at the present CPI.
       D. The EAC forecast is best estimated using the estimate to complete
          (ETC) work performed at the budgeted rate.

38. A project manager is confused about the perspective of the buyer-seller
    relationship in the context of project procurement management. How would
    your clarify this?

       A. The buyer-seller relationship exists only between organizations
          external to the acquiring organization.
       B. The buyer-seller relationship exists only between organizations
          internal to the acquiring organization.
       C. The buyer-seller relationship is applicable only when a performing
          organization is involved.
       D. The buyer-seller relationship can exist at many levels on one
          project, and between organizations internal to and external to the
          acquiring organization.

39. It was found that there were a large number of hidden requirements to be
    uncovered in the Collect Requirements phase. Which of the following tools
    should a project manager use to identify them?

       A.   Participant observer
       B.   Questionnaires
       C.   Surveys
       D.   Interviewing

40. Stakeholder identification is a continuous process. Which of the following
    statements about stakeholders is incorrect?

       A. Positive stakeholders benefit from the outcome of a project
       B. A project manager needs to focus on the positive stakeholders since
          their needs are best served by the project
       C. Overlooking negative stakeholders can result in an increased
          likelihood of failure
        D. Stakeholders can have conflicting or differing objectives

41. Which of the following is not an enterprise environmental factor
    influencing the Develop Project Management Plan process?

        A.   Project management body of knowledge
        B.   Governmental or industry standards
        C.   Project Management Plan template
        D.   Project management information system

42. A project manager in a seller organization discovered that certain
    deliverables had been handed over to the buyer without undergoing proper
    testing. Recalling the deliverables will result in a cost overrun to the
    project. What should the project manager do in such a case?

        A. Recall the deliverables even though there will be a cost overrun.
        B. Terminate the project.
        C. Approach management to obtain additional funding to handle the
           potential cost overrun.
        D. Wait for the procuring organization to get back with their list of
           defects in the deliverables.

43. Matt is the project manager of a project that involves a buyer-seller
    relationship. The source selection criteria is an input to which of the
    following processes?

        A.   Control Procurements
        B.   Conduct Procurements
        C.   Close Procurements
        D.   Plan Procurement Management

44. A project manager is estimating the project duration and finds that the only
    information available to him is a previous project that was quite different
    from the current one. However, some portions of the previous project were
    similar to the current one. Which of the following tools is the project
    manager likely to use?

        A.   Analogous estimating
        B.   Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)
        C.   Three-point estimates
        D.   Parametric estimating

45. During the Conduct Procurements process, the procuring organization
    found that there were significant differences in the pricing by different
    sellers. What is the best course of action in such a scenario?

        A. Award the project to a supplier who is already on the procuring
           organization's preferred supplier list.
        B. Cancel the procurement activity.
       C. Investigate whether the project statement of work was defective or
          ambiguous.
       D. Award the project to the highest bidder.

46. A first-time project manager was of the opinion that all training activities
    need to be planned. He discussed this with an experienced project manager,
    and understood that some training was necessarily unplanned. Which of the
    following correctly lists examples of unplanned training?

       A. Training by observation, conversation, and project management
          appraisals
       B. Training by mentoring, on-the-job training, and online courses
       C. Training by conversation, coaching, and classroom training
       D. Training by mentoring, observation, and coaching

47. A project manager used a control chart to determine whether a process was
    stable or not, and to determine if its performance was predictable. He
    determined the upper and lower specification limits based on the
    contractual requirements. A set of eighteen data points were taken. Of
    these, 8 consecutive data points were above the mean. What can you say
    about such a process?

       A. A process is considered as out of control if five consecutive data
          points are above or below the mean. Hence the process is out of
          control.
       B. A process is considered as out of control if six consecutive data
          points are above or below the mean. Hence the process is within
          control.
       C. A process is considered as being within control if less than half the
          data points are above or below the mean. Hence the process is
          within control.
       D. A process is considered as out of control if seven consecutive data
          points are above or below the mean. Hence the process is out of
          control.

48. While analyzing the risks in a project, a project manager came up with a
    Risk Urgency Assessment document. In which process would this be done?

       A.   Close Risks
       B.   Control Risks
       C.   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
       D.   Plan Risk Management

49. A project manager is looking at various classification methods to share
    information among project stakeholders. Which of the following correctly
    classifies the different methods used?

       A. Pull communication - Meetings; Push communication - Newsletters;
          Interactive communication - E-learning repository
       B. Interactive communication - Meetings; Push communication - E-
          learning repository; Pull communication - Newsletters
       C. Push communication - Meetings; Pull communication - Newsletters;
          Interactive communication - E-learning repository
       D. Interactive communication - Meetings; Push communication -
          Newsletters; Pull communication - E-learning repository

50. Which of the following roles in a project is more likely to be involved in
    negotiations on procurements during the Conduct Procurements phase?

       A.   Procurement administrator
       B.   Project coordinator
       C.   Project manager
       D.   Project sponsor


Answers

1. C - Notifying the appropriate management of the PMI investigation and their
   request for your assistance is the best choice. Sharing confidential information
   with an outside party without approval from your management is a violation of
   the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Once the appropriate
   management have been notified, they will let you know the best way to proceed
   with this investigation. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2]
   [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - Such published commercial information is considered as part of enterprise
   environmental factors that influence the Estimate Costs process. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 204] [Project Cost Management]
3. C - Histograms are bar charts and are also used to show the frequency
   distributions of different variables. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project
   Quality Management]
4. D - Activity duration estimated based on the actual duration of a similar, previous
   project is an instance of Analogous estimating. The other three choices are
   examples of parametric estimating. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 170] [Project Time
   Management]
5. B - Managing both the positive and the negative stakeholders is equally
   important. Stakeholders' expectations and interests change over time. In order to
   ensure the success of the project, the positive stakeholders should be closely
   managed in order to retain their support and commitment to the project. [PMBOK
   5th edition, Page 394] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. B - The project charter is a high level document that authorizes a project. It is not
   a work performance report. The rest of the choices are valid examples of work
   performance reports. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 93] [Project Integration
   Management]
7. C - The project charter is a high level document that authorizes a project. It
   documents a broad understanding of the project and usually does not need to be
   updated during the course of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 71] [Project
   Integration Management]
8. A - In the critical chain method, additional buffers known as feeding buffers, are
      placed at each point that a chain of dependent tasks not on the critical chain feeds
      into the critical chain. These buffers protect the critical chain from slippage.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 178] [Project Time Management]
9.    A - The statement of work (SOW) usually does not reference the business case.
      The business case may contain cost sensitive information that may not be made
      available to a wider audience. Note that the business case also includes the
      business need. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 68] [Project Integration Management]
10.   D - The stakeholder register and the stakeholder management strategy are
      essential inputs to this process. However, they are already included in the
      stakeholder management plan. Communications methods are the tools and
      techniques of the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. The missing input is
      the communications management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 404] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
11.   B - Schedule compression techniques such as crashing and fast tracking shorten
      the project schedule without changing the project scope. Approving overtime,
      bringing in additional resources and paying to expedite delivery activities are
      valid examples of crashing. Reducing project scope is not a valid example of
      crashing. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181] [Project Time Management]
12.   A - Projects are authorized by someone external to the project such as a project
      sponsor, PMO or portfolio steering committee. A project manager does not
      authorize the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, 68] [Project Integration Management]
13.   C - An iterative relationship is best suited for projects to be carried out in
      uncertain conditions as may be the case in research. In this methodology, only one
      phase is carried on at any time, and the planning for the next phase is carried out
      as work progresses in the current phase. Sequential and overlapping relationships
      are not suitable for these types of projects. Boxed relationship is not a valid
      choice. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 45] [Project Framework]
14.   C - This is fine. All deliverables need not have the same level of decomposition.
      This will depend on the work involved in coming up with the deliverable.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 131] [Project Scope Management]
15.   A - The key stakeholders' concerns and requests can never be disregarded. Since
      the communication management plan is flexible and it doesn't restrict Stanley
      from doing bi-weekly updates, Stanley must immediately accept the key
      stakeholders' request. Since this is not impacting the communication management
      plan, there is no need to go through the formal change control. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 407] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   B - Decision tree analysis is used to calculate the average outcome when the
      future includes scenarios that may or may not happen. In a decision node, the
      input is the cost of each decision while the output is a decision made. [PMBOK
      5th edition, Page 339] [Project Risk Management]
17.   C - The chart is likely to be a tornado diagram. Tornado diagrams are very useful
      for comparing relative importance and impact of variables that have a high degree
      of uncertainty to those that are more stable. The charts are positioned vertically,
      with the bars running out horizontally. The longer bars are at the top of chart, and
      the shorter bars are the bottom. This appears like the shape of a tornado, and
      hence the name. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 338] [Project Risk Management]
18.   C - Approved deliverables are neither an input nor an output of the Direct and
      Manage Project Work process. Approved or accepted deliverables are outputs of
      the Validate Scope process and are the inputs of the Close Project or Phase
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 79] [Project Integration Management]
19.   A - A project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has an effect
      on the objectives of the project. A risk may have one or many causes and, if it
      occurs, may have one or more impacts. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 310] [Project
      Risk Management]
20.   A - Notify your project stakeholders of the situation. Once they are aware of the
      circumstances, a plan of action can be developed. It is possible the stakeholders
      may already be aware of the situation and had actually approved the hiring of
      these resources. Thus it is important to involve your stakeholders to resolve this
      issue. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
21.   D - When a buyer and seller enter into a dispute over the execution of work under
      the terms of a contract, negotiation is the preferred method of resolution of all
      claims and disputes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 384] [Project Procurement
      Management]
22.   A - A key objective of a bidders conference is to ensure that all bidders have the
      same level of understanding of the procurements. Hence, in order to be
      completely fair, buyers must ensure that all sellers hear every question from any
      individual prospective seller and every answer from the buyer. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 375] [Project Procurement Management]
23.   D - There is no limit to the Actual Cost (AC). Whatever is spent to achieve the
      Earned Value (EV) is measured as the Actual Cost. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      218] [Project Cost Management]
24.   D - The correct thing to do would be to bring this to the notice of the buyer
      organization and have an amendment to the contract made. [PMI code of ethics
      and professional conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
25.   B - The project manager is at fault for failing to effectively mediate and resolve
      conflict and control the project schedule. The project manager is ultimately
      responsible for the project, and as per the PMI Code of Ethics must take
      ownership and be accountable for his or her errors and omissions during all
      project phases. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
26.   B - Approved change requests are implemented by the project team during the
      Direct and Manage Project Work process. The rest of the choices are incorrect
      statements regarding the Direct and Manage Project Work process. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 82] [Project Integration Management]
27.   A - Pull communication is suited for this purpose. It is used for very large
      volumes of information, or for very large audiences and requires the recipients to
      access communication content at their own discretion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      295] [Project Communications Management]
28.   A - Projects exist within an organization and cannot operate as a closed system.
      They require input data from the organization and beyond, and deliver capabilities
      back to the organization. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 48] [Project Framework]
29.   C - A project that is ahead of schedule will have a SPI value greater than 1.0 since
      it indicates that more work was completed than was planned. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 219] [Project Cost Management]
30.   A - The information management system is a tool and technique of the Control
      Stakeholder Engagement process; while the work performance data is the input of
      this process. Change requests are produced during this process but these are not
      approved during this process. The correct answer is project documents update
      which is the output of this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 410] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
31.   B - Variances assess the magnitude of variation to the original cost baseline. The
      percentage range of acceptable variances will tend to decrease as more work is
      accomplished and the project nears completion. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 222]
      [Project Cost Management]
32.   D - Responses designed for use only if certain events occur are known as
      contingent response strategies. These responses are triggered by events such as
      missing intermediate milestones. The other events listed may not warrant
      triggering of contingency responses. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 346] [Project
      Risk Management]
33.   B - Tolerance model is not a valid classification model. The other three models
      are valid approaches and classify stakeholders based on power / interest, influence
      / impact or power / urgency and legitimacy as in the case of salience model.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 396] [Project Stakeholder Management]
34.   C - Virtual teams overcome the hurdle of high travel expenses by forming teams
      of people based in different geographical areas. It might appear that management
      sign-off or co-location may also permit the project to take off. However, they will
      not be as cost-efficient as virtual teams. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 271] [Project
      Human Resource Management]
35.   B - Determine if any materials belonging to the other company have been copied.
      The fact that the other company has gone out of business does not necessarily
      mean that the other company no longer owns intellectual property. Once you
      know if materials from the other company have been used, you can develop a plan
      to move forward. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
36.   C - The Initiating Process Group consists of those processes performed to define a
      new project or phase. The Develop Project Charter process is part of this group
      and it creates the project charter that formally authorizes a project or a phase. The
      other choices listed are part of the Planning Process Group. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 61] [Project Integration Management]
37.   A - The EAC forecast based on the Bottom-up estimate to complete (ETC)
      requires a new estimate. There is no best method for EAC calculation as it varies
      from situation to situation. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost
      Management]
38.   D - Project procurement management is usually looked at within the perspective
      of buyer-seller relationships. The buyer-seller relationship can exist at many
      levels on one project, and between organizations internal to and external to the
      acquiring organization. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 357] [Project Procurement
      Management]
39.   A - A hidden requirement is the one that the user or the customer fails to
      communicate or take for granted. Hidden requirements can be identified by a
      "participant observer" who actually performs a process or procedure to experience
      how it is done. Interviewing, questionnaires and surveys are requirements
      collection techniques but they won't help in identifying hidden requirements.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 116] [Project Scope Management]
40.   B - A project manager needs to take into consideration all types of stakeholders -
      positive and negative. Focusing only on positive stakeholders will increase the
      probability of failure of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 32] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
41.   C - The project management plan template is an organizational process asset. The
      rest of the choices are valid enterprise environmental factors that influence the
      Develop Project Management Plan process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 74]
      [Project Integration Management]
42.   A - It is the project manager's primary responsibility to ensure that deliverables
      are tested and have gone through the process outlined in the project management
      plan. Hence the project manager should recall the deliverables, even it involves a
      cost overrun. Approaching management may be the next step. Terminating the
      project is not called for, and it will be unethical to wait for the procuring
      organization to do their testing and find out the defects in deliverables. [PMI
      Code of Ethics & Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
43.   B - The source selection criteria is an input of the Conduct Procurements process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 371] [Project Procurement Management]
44.   A - Analogous duration estimating is used when there is limited available
      information about a project. This is especially true in the early phases of a project.
      In such instances, a previous similar project is used as a basis for estimating.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 169] [Project Time Management]
45.   C - If there are significant differences in pricing by sellers, it usually indicates that
      the procurement statement of work was defective or ambiguous, or that the sellers
      misunderstood or failed to respond completely to the procurement statement of
      work. In such instances, an investigation needs to be launched to understand the
      reasons for the differences. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 376] [Project Procurement
      Management]
46.   A - Unplanned training takes place in a number of ways that include observation,
      conversation, and project management appraisals conducted during the
      controlling process of managing the project's team. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      275] [Project Human Resource Management]
47.   D - A process is considered as out of control if a data point exceeds a control limit
      or if seven consecutive data points are above or below the mean. Hence the
      process is out of control. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality
      Management]
48.   C - The Risk Urgency Assessment is a tool used in the Perform Qualitative Risk
      Analysis process. It identifies risks requiring near-term responses that may be
      considered urgent to address. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 333] [Project Risk
      Management]
49.   D - Examples of Interactive communication are meetings, phone calls, video
      conferences. Examples of Push communication are newsletters, memos, emails,
      faxes. Examples of pull communication are intranet sites, e-learning and
      knowledge repositories. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 295] [Project
      Communications Management]
50.   A - The project manager, a team member or the project sponsor do not typically
      perform the role of lead negotiator on procurements. Due to the legal nature of the
      contractual relationship involved, a legal representative or a procurement
      administrator are involved. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 380] [Project Procurement
      Management]
Procurement Test Questions
1. Which of these is not an input to the Control Procurements process?

       A.   Agreements
       B.   Change requests
       C.   Work performance data
       D.   Work performance reports

2. Which of the following is not a tool or technique of the Control
   Procurements process?

       A.   Payment system
       B.   Configuration management system
       C.   Contract change control system
       D.   Records management system

3. You have received a proposal against a RFP that was sent to vendors. One
   of the vendors has indicated that they can do the project for $12,500. The
   cost for the project is $10,000 and their profit will be $2,500. Which type of
   the contracts is most suitable to be used in this situation?

       A.   Cost Plus Fixed Fee
       B.   Cost Plus Percentage of Cost
       C.   Fixed price
       D.   Cost Plus Incentive Fee

4. Your company requires that before you purchase any routers or switches for
   the data center you are building, you need to solicit quotes from three
   separate suppliers prior to submitting the purchase request to the finance
   department. This policy belongs to?

       A.   Organizational Process Assets
       B.   Enterprise Environmental Factors
       C.   Procurement Management Knowledge Area
       D.   Make-or-Buy Decision

5. Which process involves verification and acceptance of all project
   deliverables, and hence supports the Close Project or Phase process?

       A.   Perform Integrated Change Control
       B.   Validate Scope
       C.   Estimate Activity Durations
       D.   Control Costs

6. Which of the following is accurate regarding agreements in the Project
   Procurement Management?

       A. Agreements can never be terminated.
        B. Terms and conditions never include the seller's proposal
        C. Agreements are informal documents.
        D. Agreements are legal documents between a buyer and a seller.

7. What is the purpose of a bidder conference?

        A.   Awarding a contract to the most suitable vendor
        B.   Pre-qualifying the potential sellers
        C.   Ensuring all vendors have a clear understanding of the procurement
        D.   Developing a comprehensive sellers list

8. The types of contracts that can be used in a project are documented in the:

        A.   Request for Proposal (RFP)
        B.   Procurement management plan
        C.   Procurement statement of work
        D.   Work breakdown structure (WBS)

9. Different types of contracts are appropriate for different types of purchases.
   Which of these is not one of the three broad categories of contracts?

        A.   Cost-reimbursable
        B.   Time and Material
        C.   Fixed-price or lump-sum
        D.   Fixed-assessment

10. You are building a mansion that will have copper roofs. The duration of the
    project will be approximately three years, so you have built into the
    contract that as the price of copper increases the contract allows for price
    increases as a percentage of the cost copper. However, all other costs are
    fixed. This is an example of what type of contract?

        A.   Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment
        B.   Fixed Price Incentive Fee
        C.   Unit Price
        D.   Time and Materials


Answers

1. B - Change requests are not the inputs of the Control Procurement process. The
   rest of the choices are valid inputs of this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
   379] [Project Procurement Management]
2. B - The configuration management system is not a tool and technique of the
   Control Procurements process. The rest of the choices are valid tools and
   techniques of this process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 379] [Project Procurement
   Management]
3. C - Apparently it looks like the vendor is asking for a cost plus fixed fee contract.
   However, the vendor is actually looking for a fixed price contract when they
      asked for a fixed $12,500. The cost and fee are just the components the vendor
      has estimated to come up with a final price. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 362, 363]
      [Project Procurement Management]
4.    A - Any type of corporate policy or formal procurement procedure is an
      organizational process asset. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 27] [Project Procurement
      Management]
5.    B - The Validate Scope process formalizes the acceptance of the completed
      project deliverables and hence supports the Close Project or Phase process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 133] [Project Scope Management]
6.    D - Agreements are legal and formal documents between buyers and sellers.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 357] [Project Procurement Management]
7.    C - Bidder conferences are also called contractor conferences or vendor
      conferences. Their purpose is provide all vendors with an understanding of the
      project requirements and give all vendors equal time to get their questions
      answered. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 375] [Project Procurement Management]
8.    B - The types of contracts that can be used in a project are documented in the
      Procurement Management Plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 366] [Project
      Procurement Management]
9.    D - Fixed-assessment is not a category of contracts. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      362] [Project Procurement Management]
10.   A - Since the price increases are tied only to the rising costs of the copper, this is
      a Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment (FP-EPA) contract. This is
      common with multiple year contracts. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 363] [Project
      Procurement Management]
Exam 17 Test Questions
1. Your are working for a large project organization, with several project
   managers, working on 15 projects. All project managers submit their status
   reports at month end. One of your colleague project manager has reported
   an error in last 2 months. Discussing the issue with one of her project's team
   members, who is also working on one of your projects, you realize that she
   is deliberately misreporting the project's status, to pump-up her
   performance as the annual performance appraisal is due next month. The
   month-end review meeting will be held in 2 days time as you are preparing
   your presentation for the same. What should you say about her status
   report?

       A. Report the incorrect status to the appropriate management.
       B. Since there is no direct relationship between your project and hers,
          there is no need to intervene in this issue.
       C. Prepare a brief of what you have discussed with her team member
          and report the inconsistency in the meeting.
       D. Send an email to her boss asking to check the contents of her report.

2. You have presented a unique and verifiable product to your customers for
   their approval. Approval of this product may allow you to move on to your
   next phase. This unique and verifiable product is also known as:

       A.   A plan
       B.   A project
       C.   A portfolio
       D.   A deliverable

3. Experienced project managers always tell that accuracy and precision are
   not the same. Precise measurements may not be accurate and accurate
   measurements may not be precise. Which of the following statements about
   the precision and accuracy are CORRECT?

       A. Accuracy means the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics
          fulfill requirements and Precision means a category assigned to
          products or services having the same functional use but different
          technical characteristics
       B. Accuracy means the values of repeated measurements are clustered
          and Precision means the measured value is close to the actual value
       C. Precision means the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics
          fulfill requirements and Accuracy means a category assigned to
          products or services having the same functional use but different
          technical characteristics
       D. Precision means the values of repeated measurements are clustered
          and Accuracy means the measured value is close to the actual value

4. You are in the middle of a risk assessment meeting with key stakeholders,
   customers and project team leaders. While identifying and assessing risks,
    you have realized that two key stakeholders are overemphasizing the impact
    of a risk. What is the BEST step you must take to avoid unfairness or bias
    when assessing risks?

       A. Implement assumptions analysis to explore the validity of
          assumptions
       B. Develop a risk response strategy to eliminate threats
       C. Perform qualitative risk analysis to identify risk attitudes
       D. Perform sensitivity analysis to establish which risks have the most
          impact on the project

5. Which of the following is the best strategy for managing project
   stakeholders who have high interests in the project but do not have
   significant powers?

       A.   Keep them satisfied
       B.   Manage them closely
       C.   Continuously monitor them
       D.   Keep them informed

6. There is a heavy demand for new houses in your city's expensive
   neighborhood. RECON, a construction company employed you as a project
   manager to assess the benefit of building new energy efficient houses in
   that neighborhood although it takes more expensive technology to build
   such houses. You have started gathering data to perform the detail payback
   analysis to submit a report to the management. Since the full financial
   impact of energy efficient house building is difficult to estimate, you would
   like to prepare a rough cost-benefit analysis and include it with the report.
   Which of the following describes the effort you are undertaking in this
   scenario?

       A. You are developing a business case to provide as an input to the
          develop project charter process
       B. You are developing a cost management plan to provide as an input
          to the estimate costs process
       C. You are developing a risk management plan to provide as an input
          to the perform quantitative risk analysis process
       D. You are developing a cost-benefit analysis to provide as an input to
          the plan risk management process

7. Jared is in the execution phase of a residential housing construction project.
   He has been informed of major scope changes from stakeholders in the
   middle of the project. These changes involve regulatory requirements from
   local authorities that may impact not only the scope but also the cost and
   duration of the project. What should be the FIRST approach from Jared in
   considering these changes?

       A. Meet with the change control board to solicit some ideas on the new
          project plan
       B. Create a report detailing the impact of scope changes on project
           parameters such as cost, quality and schedule
        C. Add new tasks to the project plan and assign resources to account
           for regulatory changes
        D. Escalate the scope changes to the sponsor and steering committee
           for their decision

8. You are working in an Information Technology project as a project
   manager to develop a shopping website for your customers. Some key
   stakeholders in the project suggested scope changes to improve the look
   and feel of the website. Your team has analyzed the impact of these changes
   and presented to the change control board for approval. What should be
   your next step if the change control board accepts all proposed changes?

        A. Implement the change request and update stakeholders
        B. Review change control board decisions and inform stakeholders for
           their input
        C. Conduct a team status meeting to update the progress on change
           requests
        D. Revise cost estimates, schedule dates, resource requirements and
           planning documents

9. Jane is worried about her project because many of her tasks are slowly
   moving and two critical tasks may have the chance of slippage. She
   conducts a thorough resource analysis and finds out that there are five
   resources who will be free next week. She would like to use this as an
   opportunity to assign those resources to finish her tasks early and prevent
   the project completion date from slipping. This is an example of?

        A.   Management reserves
        B.   Resource leveling
        C.   Crashing
        D.   Fast tracking

10. Andrew is managing a construction project. He is using his communication,
    interpersonal and management skills to keep the key project stakeholders
    engaged with the project. Which of the following activities is not related to
    the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process?

        A.   Addressing and resolving issues
        B.   Adjusting the stakeholder management strategy
        C.   Confirming the stakeholders' continued commitment
        D.   Negotiating and communicating with the stakeholders

11. You are working on a waste management project that, upon competition,
    will be handed over to the local municipality for steady state operation.
    Parking of the trucks and other vehicles has become a major problem
    because no parking area has been allotted to you on the main dumping site.
    As a result, your trucks are being parked on nearby roadsides. One of the
    fleet supervisor tells you that there is a large tract of land very close to the
    main site, that is owned by a local charity. Many locals park their cars on
    this tract of land. What should you do?

       A. Since the piece of land is already being used as parking, you can
          park your trucks over there.
       B. Don't park the trucks on that piece of land as it will be violation of
          other's property rights.
       C. Check the local parking laws.
       D. Ask the supervisor to get contact information of the local charity.

12. In a textile manufacturing project, a team divided the whole project work
    into 35 work packages and assigned a few work packages to the design
    department for review. After the review, the manager of the design
    department requested the team to further divide the work packages into
    more manageable work components for estimating and scheduling the
    resources. In this scenario, which of the following techniques should the
    team use to complete the manager's request?

       A.   Decomposition
       B.   The parametric estimating
       C.   The precedence diagramming method
       D.   The bottom-up estimating

13. You are working as a project manager for MALTEX, an IT organization
    having a projectized organization structure. You have recently started
    managing a project that involves stakeholders from within and outside your
    organization. The stakeholders external to your organization are very
    critical as their interests are negatively affected by the project. You are
    making serious efforts to gather their expectations and influence levels
    early in the project to make sure that their voice is heard and proper
    communication needs can be planned in the future phases of the project.
    The outcome of your effort can be documented in:

       A.   The stakeholder management plan
       B.   The project scope document
       C.   The risk register
       D.   The stakeholder communication plan

14. You have been managing a Federal highway construction project which is
    intended to improve the transportation between north and south regions of a
    country. Being in the execution phase, the change control board has
    approved many change requests generated from stakeholders including the
    highway transportation agency. At least half of those requests were made to
    bring the quality of the micro texture of the road aligned with the quality
    levels incorporated in the project management plan. What is the next course
    of action for you going forward?

       A. Initiate a defect repair to repair the road or completely pave a new
          road
       B. Initiate a preventive action to reduce the probability of negative
          consequences associated with the poor quality of the road
       C. Initiate a change request to bring the road quality in line with the
          project management plan
       D. Initiate a corrective action to bring the future quality of the road in
          line with the project management plan

15. During a key stakeholders update meeting, George's project was
    challenged. The project is currently in the executing phase. One of the key
    stakeholders challenged that the project no longer makes any business sense
    to her. What must George do next?

       A. Update the issue log and request the stakeholder to provide more
          details.
       B. Request the project sponsor to intervene.
       C. Prematurely terminate the project.
       D. Redo the business case for the project.

16. To communicate with stakeholders on the resolved issues and the issues
    that are hard to resolve, you use an issue log in your project. Since you
    assign an owner for every issue and resolve it by proactively working on it,
    your stakeholders actively support all your efforts in managing the project.
    This method of actively resolving issues and reducing risks to the project is
    known as:

       A.   Quality management
       B.   Scope Management
       C.   Communications management
       D.   Stakeholder management

17. You have been assigned as the project manager for a software development
    project. You are currently communicating with stakeholders and addressing
    their issues and expectations. Which of the following documents help
    carrying out this effort?

       A. The Issue log, Project charter, and Configuration management
          system
       B. The stakeholder management plan, communications management
          plan, and the change log
       C. The Project risk register, Work performance information, and
          Accepted deliverables
       D. Business case, change requests, and control charts

18. Changes in the projects are inevitable. So, project managers must develop
    or use a system to manage and control changes. There are four types of
    changes that need to be controlled in a project. Project changes, deliverable
    changes, process changes, and baseline changes. The impact of each of
    these changes must be evaluated and approved or rejected changes must be
    communicated to all stakeholders as and when required. Which of the
    following helps controlling the above mentioned changes?

       A.   Configuration control and Control chart
       B.   Configuration control and Change control
       C.   Control chart and Cost control
       D.   Change control and Control chart

19. Two of your expert team members have been in a heated argument over the
    use of a new software product for your research project. Recently you
    noticed that the argument instead of increasing creativity, is causing
    conflict between the team members. To prevent the conflict from
    escalating, you want to resolve it by evaluating alternatives and open
    dialogue. All of the following statements about a conflict are false
    EXCEPT:

       A.   Scarce resource cannot be a source of a conflict.
       B.   Conflict is inevitable in a project environment.
       C.   Personal work style cannot be a source of a conflict
       D.   Reducing the amount of conflict is not desirable.

20. While going through a list of candidates to be hired for your project, you
    find that your cousin is one the 3 short listed candidates. You know that she
    was desperately looking for job. After reviewing these resumes, you'll be
    sending them to the electronics engineer for a technical interview. Having a
    first look at the 3 short listed resumes, you realize that they have similar
    qualifications and experiences. What should you do?

       A. To avoid conflict of interest, ignore your cousin's resume but
          forward the other two resumes.
       B. Forward all three resumes.
       C. Call your cousin and conduct an informal interview yourself before
          forwarding the resumes.
       D. Consult your boss before forwarding the resumes for interview.

21. Which of the following is neither an input to nor an output of the Close
    Procurements process?

       A.   Closed procurements
       B.   Procurement documents
       C.   Procurement audits
       D.   Project management plan

22. Some tools or techniques can be used across different project processes to
    plan, execute or control the characteristics of project elements. Which of
    the following is used as a tool in both Control Quality and Plan Quality
    Management processes?

       A. Benchmarking
       B. Statistical sampling
       C. Cost of quality
       D. Design of experiments

23. In an underground highway construction project, the project stakeholders
    have suggested many changes to the project scope. As you have already
    defined the cost baseline in your project, you would like to revisit the
    baseline to see how these changes impact the overall cost of the project. So,
    you have started an impact analysis to determine the impact, and inform the
    concerned stakeholders of all approved changes and the corresponding
    costs. You must use the following to carry out such process:

       A.   Control Scope
       B.   Control Risks
       C.   Control Costs
       D.   Control Communications

24. Which of the following documents the formal or informal assessments of
    the project team's effectiveness?

       A.   Team Performance Assessments
       B.   Project Performance Appraisals
       C.   Observations
       D.   Conversations

25. You have recently joined the a new company as a project manager. While
    reviewing the procurement plans for a project you will be taking over, you
    see that the company is considering using one of the most expensive
    manufacturers to provide certain equipment required for the project. While
    working with your previous employer, you used a different supplier for the
    same equipment, and paid significantly less for the equipment. Without
    telling your boss, you call the supplier you worked with previously for a
    quote. Have you violated the rule of keeping the proprietary information
    confidential?

       A. Maybe. You need to talk to your boss first.
       B. No. There is no harm in sharing the information with your current
          employer, because you are no longer working for your old
          employer.
       C. Yes. The supply source is proprietary information and you should
          not contact the supplier.
       D. You have not violated any rule.

26. Which of the following statements are NOT true considering the planned
    value, the earned value, the schedule variance and the cost variance of a
    project?

       A. The cost variance is the difference between the earned value and the
          actual cost
       B. The schedule variance is the difference between the earned value
           and the planned value
        C. The earned value is the value of work to be completed in terms of
           the approved budget
        D. The planned value is the budget authorized to the work to be
           performed

27. You are working as a project manager for a wind-powered vehicle
    manufacturing project, which is in its planning phase. You carefully
    gathered all your requirements from your key stakeholders and prepared a
    system requirements specification and project requirements specification
    documents. While presenting your documents to the project team, a project
    team member who is very enthusiastic about the project started talking
    about the duration estimates for each activity. Which of the following
    statements indicate your response to your team member?

        A. WBS creation and Schedule development must be done after
           estimating durations
        B. Schedule development and Costs estimation must be done before
           estimating durations
        C. Scope definition, WBS creation, Quality planning, and
           Communication planning must be done before estimating durations
        D. Scope definition, WBS creation, Activity definition, and Activity
           sequencing must be done before estimating durations

28. Rosanne is an experienced project manager working on a pharmaceutical
    project. This project involves two big vendors to supply chemical products
    with specific composition for preparing drugs. While reviewing documents
    to see how the seller is performing, she noticed that some of the contractual
    terms were not met by the sellers. Since it is first time violation, she would
    like to initiate a corrective action to bring the performance of the seller
    consistent with the statement of work. Which of the following are NOT
    outputs of Rosanne's effort?

        A.   Work performance data and approved change requests
        B.   Work performance information and change requests
        C.   Change requests and Organizational process assets update
        D.   Change requests and Project management plan updates

29. The project charter defines the overall scope and objectives of a project.
    Considering different inputs to the project charter, which of the following is
    NOT a correct statement?

        A. Government or industry standards cannot be used as an input to
           develop a project charter
        B. The project's business case is an input to the Develop Project
           Charter process
        C. Organizational process assets are input to the Develop Project
           Charter process
        D. When projects are executed for external customers, a contract or an
             agreement is used as an input to the charter

30. Nancy's project is 80% complete. Which of the following is least likely to
    be updated to the organizational process assets during the Control
    Stakeholder Engagement process performed at this stage?

        A.   Project selection criteria
        B.   Project reports
        C.   Feedback from the stakeholders
        D.   Stakeholder notifications

31. Close Project or Phase is the process of completing and concluding all
    activities across all process groups to officially close the project. Which of
    the following activities are NOT performed during this process?

        A.   Actions required to transfer completed products to operations
        B.   Actions required to archive project information
        C.   Actions required to audit project success or failure
        D.   Actions required to accept the deliverables

32. Which of the following activities fall under the planning process group but
    not under the project time management?

        A. Estimating the type of materials and equipment needed to perform
           project activities
        B. Developing the Schedule Management Plan
        C. Identification of various activities to produce the project
           deliverables
        D. Developing a detailed description of the project and product being
           developed

33. James has been managing a hotel construction project in a busy street. He is
    in the process of estimating activity durations for building walls and
    calculates the most likely estimate as 15 days. If pre-fabricated material is
    used, it would take no more than 12 days to finish the work. However, the
    work may be delayed and could take up to 18 days if less experienced
    construction workers are used to build the walls. But, the engineer in-
    charge of the work estimates the duration as 8 days when pre-fabricated
    material is used. What is the expected duration of building walls using the
    three-point (PERT) estimate, if the engineer's estimation is assumed
    correct?

        A.   12 days
        B.   11 days
        C.   16 days
        D.   14 days

34. Rodney is in the process of preparing the project performance report for the
    team meeting. He is expecting many questions from his stakeholders on the
    budget and schedule. He calculates the following values; Budget at
    Completion (BAC) = $22,000, Earned Value (EV) = $13,000, Planned
    Value (PV) = $ 14,000, Actual cost (AC) = $15,000. What is the Estimate
    at Completion (EAC) for the project if the work is performed at the
    budgeted rate?

       A.   $24,000
       B.   $36,000
       C.   $22,500
       D.   $37,000

35. You are reviewing the responses to an RFP issued by your company and
    realize that a major requirement was not included in the RFP that was
    released. By chance, however, one of the bidders included that requirement
    in their response. What is the best course of action?

       A.   Award the contract to that bidder.
       B.   Revise and reissue the RFP.
       C.   Select the bid that included the requirement.
       D.   Cancel the RFP.

36. Many organizations favor fixed-price contracts because the performance of
    the project is the responsibility of the seller. Which of the following very
    important for a firm fixed price contract?

       A. The buyer must precisely specify the number of resources to be used
          for procurement
       B. The buyer must precisely specify the service or product to be
          procured
       C. The buyer must precisely specify the time for completing the
          contract
       D. The buyer must precisely specify the price of the contract

37. Decision making is an important skill a project manager must possess to
    manage and lead the team. Which of the following is NOT a part of the six-
    phase decision-making model?

       A.   Solution evaluation planning
       B.   Solution action planning
       C.   Problem solution generation
       D.   Problem solution escalation

38. You applied for a project coordinator position in your organization. You
    have recently met with your director to learn more about the job functions
    of that position. Your director indicates that it is the functional managers
    who control the resources and not you in your new position. Which of the
    following represents the organization structure that you will be working in
    if you are chosen as a project coordinator?
       A.   Projectized
       B.   Weak matrix
       C.   Balanced matrix
       D.   Strong matrix

39. Control charts are used to determine the stability of any process. Which of
    the following best describes the range of the control limits applied on a
    control chart?

       A.   3 sigma
       B.   6 sigma
       C.   Specification limit / 3
       D.   Specification limit x 3

40. Chris works as a project manager for UNISTEEL, a steel melting shop. He
    was assigned by his Executive Project Manager to study and prepare a
    report on the defects that eroded the blast furnace lining which has caused a
    drastic decline in production. Since this report will be used by the
    management to control the process and material quality, Chris performed a
    careful study and identified two major factors out of many factors related to
    refractories that caused majority of the lining problems. Which of the
    following statements BEST illustrate the technique Chris must have used in
    this scenario?

       A. A Pareto chart indicates that the vital few sources of the problem.
       B. A cause and effect diagram indicates how various causes show the
          history and variation of defects
       C. A Pareto chart identifies the possible relationship between changes
          observed in two independent variables
       D. A cause and effect diagram indicates how various factors or causes
          can be linked to potential problems

41. Cindy has been working in a manufacturing project as a project manager.
    This project is designed to produce high quality semiconductors to use in
    computers. Since semiconductors are produced from silicon wafers, she
    contracted a company to provide silicon wafers to the project on an ongoing
    basis. Due to unknown reasons from the contractor, low quality wafers have
    been transferred to the project compromising the electrical performance of
    semiconductors. Overwhelmed by the complaints from the computer
    division, Cindy is obligated to correct the manufacturing defects to avoid
    future liabilities. In this scenario, the costs incurred by Cindy is known as:

       A.   External failure costs or Cost of nonconformance
       B.   Appraisal costs or Cost of nonconformance
       C.   Prevention costs or Cost of conformance
       D.   Internal failure costs or Cost of conformance

42. You, as an independent consultant, are working with a project manager of a
    spacecraft parts manufacturing project to make sure that the team comply
    with organizational quality policies and procedures. Since parts made in
    this project must adhere to high precision and accuracy, you are
    documenting the gaps within the processes and procedures to improve the
    quality for customer acceptance. Which of the following best represents the
    project management activity you are doing?

        A.   Statistical sampling
        B.   Quality audits
        C.   Quality control
        D.   Inspection

43. You have been managing a research project that is intended to create
    Genetically Modified fruits using Genetic Engineering techniques. Since
    many legal issues are involved in this process, you created contingency
    allowances by using different quantitative analysis methods to account for
    cost uncertainty. You have just wrapped-up a brainstorming session with
    your team in the execution phase to monitor new risks evolved in the
    project over past few weeks and to establish new risk response plans. What
    should you do if you want to allocate more contingency reserves to account
    for new risks?

        A. Perform the reserve analysis to compare the amount of contingency
           reserves remaining to the amount of risk remaining
        B. Perform Monte Carlo analysis to compare the amount of
           contingency reserves remaining to the amount of risk remaining
        C. Perform the variance and trend analysis to compare planned results
           to the actual results
        D. Perform the quantitative risk analysis to determine the outstanding
           risks

44. In a small office construction project, the following activities are scheduled
    in sequence. i) Digging and pouring footings - 5 days ii) Working on the
    slab and pouring - 3 days iii) Framing the floor - 5 days iv) Wall framing -
    4 days v) Roof framing - 6 days vi) Insulation and drywall - 7 days vii)
    Interior doors and trim - 3 days viii) Hardware and fixtures - 2 days. What
    is the minimum time to complete the project if all activities are on a critical
    path except number viii, and activity iii is delayed by 1 day?

        A.   32 days
        B.   33 days
        C.   34 days
        D.   35 days

45. Analyzing the situation, differentiating between wants and needs, and
    focusing on interests and issues rather than on positions are critical
    elements in:

        A. Project Charter
        B. Estimating
        C. Variance analysis
        D. Negotiating

46. In a ship design project, a project manager is in the process of negotiating
    with a consulting company to ensure that project receives certified and
    specialized consultants for creating the hull design. The project manager
    wants to make certain that the consultants will be able to work until their
    assignments are completed. He is using all his negotiation skills and
    interpersonal skills to get competent staff on time. Based on the scenario
    described above, the project manager is engaged in:

        A.   Acquire Project Team process
        B.   Resource leveling process
        C.   Plan Human Resource Management process
        D.   Manage Project Team process

47. You have recently acquired a project to develop Organic products for a
    retail store. You are making informal conversations and luncheon meetings
    with all your senior functional managers to understand various factors that
    impact the allocation of resources to the project. Which of the following
    BEST describes the activity you are undertaking?

        A. You are using organizational process assets to manage your project
           team
        B. You are using the observation and conversation to manage your
           project team
        C. You are using the networking technique to develop the human
           resource plan
        D. You are making use of your interpersonal skills to develop your
           project team

48. The organization's safety and health policy, ethics policy, project policy,
    and quality policy can be used in a project to influence it's success. All
    these policies are a part of:

        A.   Organizational process assets
        B.   The project management plan
        C.   Enterprise environmental factors
        D.   Historical databases

49. Velvet is working for a chemical industry and her management proposed
    two different projects to manufacture Benzene for commercial use. After
    doing financial analysis, the financial advisor provided her the following
    statistics about the projects. Project-1-60% probability of success with a
    profit of $500,000 and 20% probability of failure with a loss of $200,000;
    Project-2-30% probability of success with a profit of $300,000 and 30%
    probability of failure with a loss of $400,000; Based on the information
    above, Velvet must choose:

        A. Either project-1 or project-2
        B. Neither project-1 nor project-2
        C. Project-2
        D. Project-1

50. You are managing a highly complex drug manufacturing project and your
    sponsor is highly motivated and influential. You are optimistic about the
    outcome of the project, however, you are not sure about the project
    approval requirements that measure the success of the project. So, you
    would like to document the name of the person who signs off on the
    project, and the criteria that constitutes the success of the project. Which of
    the following documents should you use first to incorporate project
    approval requirements?

        A.   The scope document
        B.   The project charter
        C.   The approval requirement plan
        D.   The project management plan


Answers

1. A - Report the incorrect status to the appropriate management. Project managers
   are required by PMI's Code of Ethics to provide truthful and accurate information,
   and to report the errors and omissions of others to the appropriate management.
   [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. D - A unique and verifiable product produced in each phase or end of the project
   is known as a deliverable. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 537] [Project Integration
   Management]
3. D - Accuracy and Precision are not the same. Precision means the values of
   repeated measurements are clustered and Accuracy means the measured value is
   close to the actual value. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 228] [Project Quality
   Management]
4. C - After identifying risks, the project manager must prioritize risks for further
   analysis by assessing and analyzing the impact of each risk. It is often possible
   that during the risk assessment, risk attitudes may introduce bias into the
   assessment of identified risks. So project managers must identify and manage risk
   attitudes during the qualitative risk analysis. So, you must perform the qualitative
   risk analysis to avoid bias during assessment. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 329]
   [Project Risk Management]
5. D - The best strategy for managing project stakeholders who have high interests
   in the project but do not have significant powers is to keep them informed.
   [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 397] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. A - An organization's business need may arise due to advances in the technology,
   a demand from the market or a legal requirement. The business need along with
   the cost-benefit analysis are documented in a business case. A business case
   determines whether the project worth the investment. Payback analysis is also
   part of a business case. The business case and other documents are used as an
   input to the develop project charter process. Hence, you are making efforts to
   build a business case to provide as an input to the develop project charter process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 69] [Project Integration Management]
7.    B - Any scope changes in a project must go through the integrated change control
      process to determine the impact on project parameters such as cost, quality and
      schedule. After finding the impact, the changes should be presented to the change
      control board for their review. Then, all approved changes must be planned and
      resources must be allocated. Therefore, the first step for Jared is to create a report
      detailing the impact of scope changes on project parameters such as cost, quality
      and schedule. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96] [Project Integration Management]
8.    D - Approved change requests require changes to cost estimates, resource
      requirements, schedule dates and activity sequences. You should incorporate
      these revisions first before asking your team to implement the changes.
      Stakeholders can be updated after carrying out the changes. So, the first step you
      should do is to revise the estimates and baselines. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 82]
      [Project Integration Management]
9.    C - Adding more resources to scheduled tasks in order to compress the task
      durations is called crashing. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181] [Project Time
      Management]
10.   B - Adjusting the stakeholder management strategy is an activity related to the
      Control Stakeholder Management process. The rest of the choices are the
      activities carried out during the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 405, 409] [Project Stakeholder Management]
11.   D - You must not use someone's property without permission, even if others are
      doing the same thing. The best option is to call the charity and ask for their
      permission. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
12.   A - The manager requested to divide the work packages into more manageable
      components for estimating the resources. The define activities process is used to
      divide the work packages into more manageable activities for estimating,
      scheduling, and executing the project work. Decomposition is the technique used
      during this process to divide the work packages into activities. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 151] [Project Time Management]
13.   A - The stakeholder management plan is a component of the project management
      plan and identifies the management strategies required to effectively engage
      stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 403] [Project Stakeholder Management]
14.   B - Change requests are initiated and submitted to the change management board.
      Once change requests are approved, the project manager must give a documented
      direction to prevent, correct or repair based on the approved changes. In this
      scenario, the project performance seems to be deviated from the project
      management plan. So, you must initiate a preventive action to assure future
      performance aligns with the project management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      81] [Project Integration Management]
15.   A - If a key stakeholder has some reservations, these need to be addressed.
      George must first understand these concerns and determine the root cause before
      taking any action. He must request the objecting stakeholder to provide further
      details so that he can analyze the situation. Taking an immediate action without
      understanding the problem and determining the root cause is poor project
      management. Further this issue must be recorded in the issue log. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 408] [Project Stakeholder Management]
16.   D - Proactively working with project stakeholders and resolving their issues relate
      to project stakeholder management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 391] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
17.   B - Communicating with stakeholders to address their issues is done during
      Manage Stakeholder Engagement process. The documents used as an input to this
      process are the stakeholder management plan, communications management plan,
      change log and organizational process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 404]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
18.   B - Configuration control is focused on the specification of both the processes and
      deliverables where as change control is focused on project changes and the
      product baselines. So, a configuration control with a change control system must
      be implemented to handle all those changes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 96]
      [Project Integration Management]
19.   B - Conflict is inevitable in a project environment. The rest of the statements are
      incorrect. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 282] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
20.   B - Send all three candidate's resumes Since all the candidates have similar
      profiles, all three deserve a full chance of evaluation. Because you have neither
      short listed the resumes nor will you be the interviewer or make the final decision,
      there is no question of discrimination, impartiality or conflict of interest. [PMI
      Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
21.   C - Procurement audits are the tools and techniques of the Close Procurement
      process. The rest of the choices are either the inputs or the outputs of the process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 386] [Project Procurement Management]
22.   B - Statistical sampling is a tool and technique common to both the Plan Quality
      Management and Control Quality processes. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 230]
      [Project Quality Management]
23.   C - The Control Costs process involves many activities such as influencing the
      factors that change the cost baseline, managing the actual changes, and informing
      stakeholders of approved changes and corresponding costs. Since you are in the
      process of managing the cost changes and informing them to the stakeholders,
      you are in the Control Costs process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 215] [Project
      Cost Management]
24.   A - Team Performance Assessments documents the formal or informal
      assessments of the project team's effectiveness. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 278]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
25.   D - No rule has been violated, as you have not disclosed any proprietary or
      confidential information. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
26.   C - Earned value is the value of the work already completed. This value is often
      expressed in terms of the approved budget assigned to the work completed. The
      earned value is measured against the performance measurement baseline.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 218] [Project Cost Management]
27.   D - Estimating activity durations is done during planning phase of a project. Since
      project manager has just developed requirements, the scope must be defined and
      the WBS must be created immediately. Based on the WBS, activities must be
      defined and sequenced. After sequencing, resources and duration for each activity
      must be estimated. So, the team member must know that many activities need to
      be done before estimating durations. Therefore, 'Scope definition, WBS creation,
      Activity definition, and Activity sequencing must be done before estimating
      durations' is the correct response from you in this situation. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 105, 141] [Project Time Management]
28.   A - Evaluating the performance of the seller is done during the Control
      Procurements process. If the contractual terms are not met by the seller, a
      corrective action can be initiated. If there are severe violations, contract can be
      terminated based on the language used in the contract. Work performance
      information, change requests, project management plan updates, project document
      updates and organizational process updates are the outputs of this process. Work
      performance data and approved change requests are inputs to this process.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 379] [Project Procurement Management]
29.   A - Government or industry standards are part of enterprise environmental factors
      and are used as inputs to the Develop Project Charter process. [PMBOK 5th
      Edition, Page 70] [Project Integration Management]
30.   A - All of the choices are the organizational process assets that might get updated
      during the Control Stakeholder Engagement process. However, since the project
      is in execution, the project selection criteria are least likely to be updated at this
      stage. The rest of the choices are more likely to be updated during the Control
      Stakeholder Engagement process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 415] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
31.   D - Actions required to transfer completed products to operations, actions
      required to archive project information, and actions required to audit project
      success or failure are carried out in the Close Project or Phase process. But,
      actions required to accept the completed deliverables are executed in the Validate
      Scope process. The completed deliverable are then transferred to the Close
      Project or Phase process. Therefore, actions required to accept the deliverables are
      not done in the Close Project or Phase process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 101]
      [Project Integration Management]
32.   D - Identification of various activities to produce the project deliverables is done
      in Define Activities process of the project time management. Estimating type of
      materials and equipment needed to perform activities is done during Estimate
      Activity Resources process. This is also a part of the project time management.
      Developing the schedule management plan is done during the Plan Schedule
      Management process, which is also a time management process. Developing a
      detailed description of the project and product being developed is done during the
      Define Scope process. This is also a planning activity, however, it falls under
      project scope management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 105, 141] [Project Scope
      Management]
33.   D - If the engineer is correct, the optimistic estimate can be taken as 8 days. The
      pessimistic estimate is still 18 days and the most likely estimate is 15 days. Using
      the PERT or the three-point technique, the expected activity duration is calculated
      using the formula Te = (To + 4Tm + Tp)/6, where Te is the estimated duration,
      To is optimistic duration, Tm is the most likely duration and Tp is the pessimistic
      duration. Hence, Te = (8 +60 +18)/6 = 14 days (approximately.) Therefore, 14
      days is the correct answer. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 170, 171] [Project Time
      Management]
34.   A - If the project work is performed at the budgeted rate, the Estimation at
      Completion can be determined using the formula (EAC) = AC + (BAC - EV);
      Substituting all these values in the equation EAC = $ 15,000 + ($22,000 -
      $13,000) = $24,000. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 220] [Project Cost Management]
35. B - Revise and reissue the RFP. Not only is in the best interest of both the bidders
    and the project to use an accurate requirements list to develop procurement plans,
    PMI's Code of Ethics prohibits project managers from intentionally providing
    incorrect information. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 4]
    [Prof. Responsibility]
36. B - In a firm fixed price contract, the buyer must precisely specify the product or
    service to be procured. Any changes in the contract require additional cost to the
    buyer. So, buyers must be careful while preparing the statement of work.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 363] [Project Procurement Management]
37. D - In a six-phase decision making model, the project manager must define the
    problem first. After defining, he/she must generate problem solution, generate
    ideas to action, plan solution action and plan solution evaluation. Once the
    solution is implemented, he must evaluate the outcome and process. Therefore,
    except problem solution escalation all other phases are part of this model.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 516] [Project Human Resource Management]
38. B - In a weak matrix organization structure, project manager works more like a
    coordinator to organize different activities and do not have direct control over the
    resources. Project team members report to functional managers and their progress
    is measured by the functional managers. Therefore, weak matrix is the correct
    answer. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 23] [Project Framework]
39. B - The control limits of a control chart are set at plus/minus 3 sigma. Hence the
    range is 6 sigma. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 238] [Project Quality Management]
40. A - In this scenario, Chris is using a quality control technique to carry out his
    study. A Pareto chart identifies the vital few sources that are responsible for
    causing most of a problem's effects. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 237] [Project
    Quality Management]
41. A - In this scenario, Cindy is performing warranty work to correct manufacturing
    defects. These defects are identified by external customers and the costs are
    known as external failure costs. These costs are also known as costs of
    nonconformance because the product did not meet the quality requirements. The
    cost of nonconformance is a part of the cost of quality. Therefore, Cindy is
    incurring external failure costs or cost of nonconformance. [PMBOK 5th edition,
    Page 235] [Project Quality Management]
42. B - Making sure that the project team comply with organizational quality policies
    and procedures is done in the Perform Quality Assurance process. Quality audits
    are one of such techniques in which a structured review is performed by
    independent consultants or contractors to identify all shortcomings in carrying out
    quality policies and procedures. These efforts should be used later to improve the
    product quality and reduce the cost of quality. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 247]
    [Project Quality Management]
43. A - Many risks evolve over the course of any project. Project managers must
    monitor and control those risks and plan risk responses. The reserve analysis is
    used as a tool in the Control Risks process. This technique is used to compare the
    amount of contingency reserves remaining to the amount of risk remaining
    throughout the execution of the project. Hence, you must perform the reserve
    analysis first to decide on the contingency allowances. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
    352] [Project Risk Management]
44. C - A critical path has a zero total float. That means, any delay in the critical path
    activity delays the project finish date. In other words, critical path gives the
      minimum time required to complete a project. So, adding the duration for all
      critical path activities give the minimum time required as 33 days. If activity iii is
      delayed by one day, the total duration or the minimum time required to complete
      the project will also be delayed by one day, thus making it 34 days. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 176] [Project Time Management]
45.   D - Negotiation is a strategy used to bring compromise between two parties with
      opposing interests. Analyzing the situation, differentiating between wants and
      needs, focusing on interests and issues rather than on positions, asking high and
      offering low, and listening are very important skills in negotiation. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 517] [Project Human Resource Management]
46.   A - Negotiation skills are used by project managers throughout the project. In this
      scenario, the project manager is negotiating with vendors to get talented
      consultants in sufficient number within the scheduled time. This process ensures
      the availability of scarce resources during critical phases of the project. This effort
      is done during the Acquire Project Team process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 267]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
47.   C - Networking is a technique used to develop the project human resource plan.
      This technique is used by many project managers to understand the factors that
      impact the allocation of resources. Luncheon meetings, conferences and events
      are various forms of networking. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 263] [Project Human
      Resource Management]
48.   A - Organizational process assets can be used to influence project's success.
      Organizational standards and policies such as safety and health policy, ethics
      policy, quality policy, and project management policy are a part of the
      organizational process assets. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 27] [Project
      Framework]
49.   D - Profit or loss from a project = (Expected profit * probability of profit) -
      (Expected loss * probability of loss). So, for project-1, the profit or loss =
      (500000 *0.6 - 200000 *0.2) = 300000 - 40000 = $ 260,000 profit. For project-2,
      the profit or loss = (300000 *0.3 - 400000 *0.3) = 90000-120000 = $ - 30,000 =
      $30,000 loss. Hence, Velvet must select project-1 which can yield profit.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 339] [Project Risk Management]
50.   B - Project approval requirements must be documented early in the project during
      the initiation phase. These requirements show the requisites for project success,
      the names of persons signing off the project and deliverable requirements. Since
      the project charter is created in the initiation phase of the project, the project
      manager must include these requirements in the charter. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 72] [Project Integration Management]
Exam 18 Test Questions
1. To assist with the selection of a supplier for a large procurement on your
   project, you've hired a consultant. The consultant has prepared an
   independent estimate to be used as a benchmark while reviewing bids on
   the RFP. The independent estimate is confidential and is not shared with
   any bidders. When the sealed bids are opened, you discover that only 1
   supplier, has submitted a quote lower than the independent estimate. All
   other quotes are 45% to 70% higher than the benchmark. While discussing
   this development with members of the project team, you learn that the
   company with the lowest bids is owned by a distant relative of the
   consultant you hired to create the benchmark. What is the best course of
   action?

       A. Confirm that the lowest bidder has understood the requirements and
          award them the contract'.
       B. Since one of the supplier knows more than others, you must disclose
          the independent estimate to all others to be fair.
       C. Disqualify the lowest bidder.
       D. Review the RFP specifications and requirements.

2. A project to construct a high-rise building is progressing very well.
   Stakeholders are proactive in identifying issues related to the quality of the
   structure, walls and floors. As a project manager, you are conducting
   meetings to clarify or resolve their issues. Although, you are committed to
   manage stakeholders concerns, you learned that some critical issues need to
   be deferred to the next phase of the project for resolution. What should you
   do in this situation?

       A. You must not defer any stakeholder issues but look for alternate
          methods
       B. You must escalate these issues to the sponsor for his advice
       C. You must work with stakeholders to defer those issues
       D. You must request the stakeholders to retract their issues

3. Marvin has been working for a retail company as a project manager. With
   his positive thinking and good managerial skills he turned many potentially
   disastrous projects into successes. Because of his expertise, the company
   high level executives offered him a group project manager position for a
   newly started environmental project. However, Marvin learned that in his
   newly assigned project he may have to offer bribes to get the Government
   licenses. What should Marvin do in such a situation?

       A. Reject the offer because project managers should not engage in an
          unethical conduct
       B. Accept the offer because project managers must obey their higher-
          ups
       C. Accept the position and offer bribes because project managers must
          complete projects on time and within budget
       D. Investigate to find out if it is customary to offer bribes in that part of
          the country

4. Which of the following is not an example of soft skills?

       A.   Emotional intelligence
       B.   Intelligence quotient
       C.   Group facilitation
       D.   Negotiation

5. Julia is managing a complex industrial process reengineering project. She
   has identified all of her key project stakeholders and has conducted
   individual interviews with them to identify other project stakeholders as
   well. However, Julia is still not comfortable with her project's stakeholders
   list as she believes there would be more key external stakeholders still
   missing from the list. What can help Julia in this situation?

       A. Use stakeholder register templates from the organizational process
          assets.
       B. Conduct more meetings with the key stakeholders.
       C. Julia needs to get over her fear and finalize the project stakeholder
          register.
       D. Seek expert judgment from subject matter experts.

6. You are in the final phase of a low cost car manufacturing project. This
   project, as designed, has delivered a low cost car that runs on the battery.
   However, to close this project, many administrative standards are required
   to be followed in order to avoid auditing from Government authorities.
   Since your organization possesses experts who have tremendous knowledge
   in closing procedures and standards, you would like to use them to close
   this project. This effort is an instance of:

       A.   Using enterprise environmental factors in closing the project
       B.   Using expert judgment in closing the project
       C.   Using organizational process assets in closing the project
       D.   Poor project management practice

7. Nancy is engaged in the construction of three unique office buildings.
   Although construction sites are located in various places, she has been
   managing each team very efficiently to complete the work on time and
   within the budget. Which of the following statements describe the effort
   that Nancy is doing?

       A. Construction of each building is an operational work because it is
          repetitive in nature
       B. The building construction is considered neither as a project nor as
          an operational work
       C. Construction of all three buildings is considered as one project
       D. Construction of each building is a project because each building is
            unique in nature

8. There are several communication methods used to share and distribute
   information to stakeholders, team members and management. Which of the
   following communication methods are used during execution phase to
   notify the public about environmental changes your project is going to
   cause after implementation?

       A.   Pull communication
       B.   Interactive communication
       C.   Informal communication
       D.   Push communication

9. Lesley is managing a software development project for the World Climate
   Control Organization. Since her team members are dispersed across the
   globe, she would like to set up online conferences in next two months to let
   everyone in her project know what is going on and what their role is within
   the project. She wants to use these conferences as team development
   activities to learn and exchange information in the project. To schedule
   such activities, which of the following should she use to know the
   availability of team members?

       A.   Project charter
       B.   Resource calendars
       C.   Responsibility assignment matrix
       D.   Project staff assignments

10. Bill is managing a healthcare software development project using state-of-
    the-art technology. Stakeholder management is very crucial for the success
    of this project. The stakeholder involvement and influence is significant on
    this project. During which of following project stages, stakeholder
    management will be the most challenging task for Bill?

       A.   Early during the project execution
       B.   Towards the end of the project execution
       C.   Towards the closure of the project
       D.   Halfway through the project execution

11. Which of the following statements is NOT true considering the
    management of risks in a project?

       A. The affect of various risks on project scope, cost and quality is
          numerically analyzed in the perform quantitative risk analysis
          process
       B. Positive risks are mitigated during the plan risk responses process.
       C. Analytical techniques are used during the plan risk management
          process
       D. The risk register is updated in all risk management processes except
             in plan risk management

12. You have been chosen by a program management office (PMO) to write a
    purchase order for your expertise in business writing. You have learned that
    the PMO has already selected a seller for a software product and would like
    to award the procurement contract to the selected seller as a purchase order
    which you must prepare. In this scenario, the PMO is administering:

        A.   The close procurements process
        B.   The control procurements process
        C.   The plan procurement management process
        D.   The conduct procurements process

13. Randy, a senior project manager, is using a lessons learned knowledge
    management system to document the findings in a precision instrument
    manufacturing project. He is using the information from his team which has
    identified causes of product quality variance using a control chart and the
    details regarding corrective actions chosen to reduce the variance and
    improve the product quality. Which of the following should Randy use to
    add this information to the lessons learned?

        A.   Organizational process assets in the quality control process
        B.   The process improvement plan in the plan quality process
        C.   Organizational process assets in the quality assurance process
        D.   The process improvement plan in the quality control process

14. Shawn is in the execution phase of his project. He is getting unexpected
    requests from his stakeholders about the project progress. All of the
    following can be used by Shawn to respond to their requests EXCEPT:

        A.   Communications management plan
        B.   The stakeholder register
        C.   Organizational process assets
        D.   Work performance reports

15. Tom is managing a software development project. The buyer of the product
    is an external entity. During the execution of the project, Tom finds out that
    a new operations manager has been hired in the customer organization. The
    new manager is now a key stakeholder of the project. Which of the
    following documents is least likely to get updated as a result of the addition
    of this new stakeholder?

        A.   Stakeholder register
        B.   Risk register
        C.   Stakeholder management plan
        D.   Issue log

16. A drug manufacturing project requires many pharmaceutical chemicals for
    synthesizing to produce an active ingredient or a drug. You are managing a
    contractor to supply all these chemicals in your drug manufacturing project.
    Recent quality testing of the drugs raised concerns over the quality of the
    materials supplied by the contractor. Which of the following must be done
    to make sure that all contractual obligations are followed by the contractor?

       A.   Escalate this issue to the sponsor and submit all drug testing reports
       B.   Reject all poor quality drugs and penalize the contractor
       C.   Convene a meeting with stakeholders and communicate the findings
       D.   Carryout audits and inspections to verify compliance in the seller's
            deliverables

17. A project manager is spending majority of the project funding in the current
    phase of the project. Not only she is spending her money but also managing
    various resources in the project. What is the stakeholder influence on the
    project now compared to earlier phases?

       A.   Cannot be determined
       B.   More
       C.   Less
       D.   Same

18. You are working for FALCON highway construction agency as a project
    cost estimator. The agency started a highway construction project which is
    in it's planning phase. The rough order of magnitude (ROM) cost estimate
    for the project is expected to be between 3 and 5 million dollars in the
    planning phase with a ROM of -25% to +25%. What will be the ROM
    estimate in the execution phase if it changes to -10% to +10%?

       A.   Between 3.1 and 4.1 million dollars
       B.   Between 3.6 and 4.4 million dollars
       C.   Between 3.9 and 4.1 million dollars
       D.   Between 3.4 and 4.4 million dollars

19. Organizations evaluate the need of buying products versus making the
    items themselves. Which of the following is not a factor that influences the
    make-or-buy decisions:

       A.   Core capabilities of the organization
       B.   Value delivered by vendors meeting the need
       C.   Total duration of the project
       D.   Risk associated with meeting the need in a cost-effective manner

20. You are in the 10th month of a year long project and about to deliver the
    major product of your project. You have already received 75% of the total
    payment from the client. Your client is a non-governmental organization
    (NGO). You have just received a fax from the client saying that they are
    wrapping-up their operations from the region because of a change in the
    government. The new government has decided to close down this NGO
    because of fraud allegations. You are shocked to receive this news and call
    your boss to get a confirmation from him. He has also received the same
    news from other sources and asks you to terminate the project and release
    the team. What must you do?

       A. Update lessons learned, release payments of your suppliers, pay all
          the employees and relieve them from their duties.
       B. Release payments of your suppliers, pay all the employees and
          relieve them from their duties.
       C. Close all project documents, release payments of your suppliers, pay
          all the employees and relieve them from their duties.
       D. Release payments, check the termination clause in contract, and
          relieve employees from their duties.

21. Nancy can bid on two projects. 'Project A' has a 50% return on investment,
    while the 'Project B' has 20% return on investment. The Project A's scope
    of work is complex and Nancy's organizations doesn't have the necessary
    skills and experience to perform this project. However, Project B's scope of
    work falls within the strengths of Nancy's organizations. Which project
    must Nancy bid on?

       A.   None as this is a conflict of interest situation
       B.   Both since the overall profit will be higher
       C.   Project A since the return on investment is the highest
       D.   Project B since the organization has the required skills

22. Debbie, an IT project manager, is in the planning phase of a shopping
    website development project. A junior project manager, who has been
    working under her authority, started developing procedures to indicate how
    the integrity of cost and schedule performance baselines should be
    maintained in the project. Where should the junior project manager store
    these procedures?

       A.   In the project human resource plan
       B.   In the project scope statement
       C.   In the project management plan
       D.   In the project communication plan

23. Your organization has recognized a need to replace the legacy
    manufacturing system with a modern software application to reduce
    delivery delays and process downtime. Your IT director anticipates a
    project to fulfill this business need, however, he warns that the new
    project's budget cannot exceed $75,000 due to shortages in the department
    budget. He also indicates that no additional staff will be allocated to this
    project other than the existing IT staff. If you are assigned as a project
    manager to this project, you would document these initial project conditions
    as:

       A. Project assumptions in the project charter
       B. Project restrictions in the project management plan
       C. Project constraints in the project charter
       D. Project conditions in the project cost management plan and human
          resource management plan

24. Which of the following is an output of the Create WBS process?

       A.   Scope baseline
       B.   Project scope statement
       C.   Decomposition
       D.   Requirements documentation

25. You have just received notice that the organization you've been working for
    as a project manager has gone bankrupt. All employees have been given 72
    hours notice of termination. What is the best course of action for the two
    projects you are managing?

       A.   Follow company directives.
       B.   Conduct a project closeout meeting.
       C.   Leave the office today.
       D.   Raise a claim for and on behalf of all the employees and contractors
            who were participating in the project

26. Jen works as a project manager for the National weather agency. She has
    been managing a project which was designed to find the impact of climate
    changes on Northern mountains. The initial study established two months
    delay for the testing equipment to reach mountains due to road construction.
    However, a recent assessment has shown a significant drop in the delay
    time because of rapid progress in construction. Which of the following
    steps should Jen take next to account for the change in the delay time?

       A.   Distribute the information
       B.   Conduct a stakeholder meeting
       C.   Create a new project plan
       D.   Update the risk register

27. The method used in the plan quality management process to identify the
    factors that may influence specific variables of a product under
    development is known as:

       A.   The forecasting technique
       B.   The control chart
       C.   The statistical sampling
       D.   The design of experiments

28. A team member in your project is constantly providing incomplete
    deliverables and not performing well. What should you do first?

       A. Discuss the issue with the team member in private
       B. Discuss the issue with the team member in presence of the project
          sponsor
       C. Discuss the issue with the team member in the presence of other
          team members
       D. Discuss the issue with the team member in presence of the
          company's HR manager

29. Dana works for a Federal agency that manages mission critical projects. As
    a project manager, she is responsible for all communication needs in her
    data center project, which has started recently. This project involves many
    stakeholders, customers, external vendors and team members. Since
    conflicts are inevitable in such a huge project, she has decided to provide
    her project team the details of the issue escalation process including the
    names of the chain of command to escalate the issues that cannot be
    resolved at a lower level. Dana must use the following document to store
    this information:

       A.   The project charter
       B.   The communication management plan
       C.   The issue log
       D.   The project scope document

30. Bill is managing a website development project. He has recently received a
    feedback from one of the key project stakeholders. The feedback is overall
    positive but it contains some recommendations. After analyzing the
    recommendations, Bill accepts them, gets them approved and incorporates
    them into the project management plan. What needs to be done with this
    feedback now?

       A.   Discard it as it is no longer required
       B.   Publish it on the corporate intranet
       C.   Add it to the organizational process assets
       D.   Send it back to the stakeholder

31. The project you are working on has received an invoice from a vendor for
    USD $17,500. However, your team believes the correct total due is
    $15,300. When you notify the vendor of this, the vendor still insists on US$
    17,500. What is the best course of action now?

       A.   Pay $15,300.
       B.   Negotiate with the vendor.
       C.   File a lawsuit.
       D.   Pay $17,500

32. Project costs are estimated for all project activities and aggregated to
    establish a cost baseline. Which of the following statements about the cost
    baseline is NOT true?

       A. The project cost performance is measured against the cost baseline
       B. The cost baseline is an output of the determine budget process
       C. The cost baseline includes all authorized budgets including
          management reserves
       D. The cost baseline is in the form of an 'S' curve

33. The RACI chart is an example for a responsibility assignment matrix
    (RAM). The letters R and C in RACI chart stand for

       A.   Responsible and consult
       B.   Resource and consultant
       C.   Responsible and categorize
       D.   Resource and consult

34. The number of communication channels depends on the number of team
    members in any project. If five team members are released from a team of
    25, how many communication channels remain in the project?

       A.   300
       B.   625
       C.   190
       D.   400

35. You are managing a project for a customer that has just gone bankrupt and
    is subject to liquidation proceedings. There are several outstanding invoices
    that this customer has not paid to your company. What should you do now?

       A. Go into alternate dispute resolution
       B. Do nothing.
       C. Contact the appropriate management at your company for advice
          how to proceed.
       D. Send the invoices to the bankruptcy attorneys.

36. You are in a meeting with your senior manager who has been helping you
    to organize and manage a team of IT people with numerous backgrounds.
    While you are discussing the creativity and breakthrough performance your
    team is demonstrating now, your senior manager indicates that your team
    has moved from the storming to the performing stage. Which of the
    following explains the characteristic of the performing stage?

       A. In the performing stage, the team completes the work and disbands
          as a project team
       B. In the performing stage, the team function as a well organized unit
          and resolve issues effectively
       C. In the performing stage, the team members are not collaborative
       D. In the performing stage, the team starts to work together and adjust
          their behaviors

37. No matter how good you are in communicating, information distribution to
    stakeholders as planned is a challenging task. Many tools and techniques
    are used during the Manage Communications process EXCEPT:
        A.   Performance reporting
        B.   Work performance reports
        C.   Communication technologies
        D.   Communication models

38. Mary is a project manager for an infrastructure upgrade project in a
    Government agency. She has recently realized that a critical scheduled task
    exceeded the deadline and the stakeholders are on top it. The resource
    manager has permitted to use three more resources to work and complete
    the delayed task. Although, the attempt from the resource manager helps
    her, Mary is concerned about the task because:

        A. Allocating more resources may result in rework
        B. Allocating more resources may shorten the duration but results in
           increased risk or cost
        C. Resources may need training to complete the task
        D. Allocating more resources need stakeholders approval

39. All of the following are tools of the Control Schedule process EXCEPT:

        A.   Parametric estimating
        B.   Modeling techniques
        C.   Schedule compression
        D.   Leads and lags

40. You are working with your customers on completed deliverables in your
    electronic parts manufacturing project. Since these parts are exported to
    other countries, they need more testing before your customers accept them.
    In this scenario, which of the following statements about the completed
    deliverables is CORRECT?

        A. Completed deliverables not accepted by customers must be
           forwarded to the close project or phase process
        B. Deliverables formally accepted by customers must be moved to
           organizational process assets
        C. Deliverables formally accepted by customers are forwarded to the
           validate scope process
        D. Completed deliverables not accepted by customers must require a
           change request for defect repair

41. You are managing a heavy equipment manufacturing project that involves
    many mechanical, electrical as well as IT staff. Your team prepared a
    schedule network diagram using duration estimates with dependencies and
    constraints. Your team also calculated the critical path for the project using
    late and early values. Today, your project office has indicated about the
    non-availability of some of the resources you planned for the project. Now,
    you explore the possibility of modifying the schedule to account for limited
    resources. What is your best possible step in such a situation?
       A.   Recalculate critical path using the critical chain method
       B.   Perform resource leveling to account for limited resources
       C.   Use crashing or fast tracking to level resources across the project
       D.   Apply leads and lags to develop a viable schedule

42. You are working as a project manager for a high yield crop development
    project. Data from the weather agency shows an unfavorable weather
    pattern for next few months. As a senior project manager, you want to
    assess the feasibility of the schedule under adverse conditions and provide
    some insights to your team. This way, your team can prepare some reserves
    and plan risk responses if unfavorable conditions exist during execution.
    Which of the following techniques should you use to assess the feasibility
    of the schedule?

       A.   Pareto charts
       B.   Variance analysis
       C.   Crashing
       D.   Monte Carlo analysis

43. All of the following activities areperformed in the Close Project or Phase
    process EXCEPT

       A. Activities that fulfill the exit criteria of the project
       B. Sending the deliverables to the customer for acceptance
       C. Activities which are needed to transfer the completed products to
          operations
       D. Documenting the reasons for projects terminated early

44. Your project team has recentlyidentified a risk in the software development
    project and decided not to change the project management plan to deal with
    the risk. The risk response strategy your team used in this scenario is an
    example of:

       A.   Mitigate
       B.   Transfer
       C.   Avoid
       D.   Acceptance

45. Which of the following is neither an input to nor an output of the Develop
    Project Charter process?

       A.   A project charter
       B.   Professional and technical associations
       C.   A business case
       D.   A project statement of work

46. Which of the following does notmotivate an individual?

       A. Achievement and growth
       B. Job satisfaction
       C. Micro-management
       D. Challenging work

47. You have just completed the first phase of a multi-phase project. You have
    performed the earned value measurements and found out that the current
    CPI is 0.79, the current SPI is 0.98. Your next phase plan should focus first
    on which element of the project?

       A.   Quality
       B.   Resources
       C.   Schedule
       D.   Cost

48. A project manager has just startedplanning his project. If he has very
    limited information about the project, he must use the following technique
    to estimate the duration for each activity:

       A.   Four-point estimating
       B.   Three-point estimating
       C.   Analogous estimating
       D.   Parametric estimating

49. You are in the Validate Scope process of your electronic goods
    manufacturing project. While reviewing some products, you have noticed
    that the tolerance for one product is 0.01% less than what was listed in the
    requirements documentation. This deviation may not be a problem for the
    customers and it may not negatively impact the operations. What is your
    best immediate action in such a situation?

       A.   Notify the customers about thedeviation
       B.   Change the project management plan to allow for small deviation
       C.   Reject all products and restart the project
       D.   Discuss with your team about the quality testing

50. You have recently taken over atroubled automobile project which has gone
    out of control. The project team missed many deadlines and stakeholders
    were not happy with the project progress. As an experienced project
    manager, your first priority is to bring the schedule into alignment with the
    project plan. You would like to use what-if scenario analysis to see how
    various factors affected the project schedule so that you can develop a plan
    to reduce the impact of adverse conditions on the project schedule in future.
    What would be your next course of action once you determine the factors
    that created schedule overrun?

       A.   Prepare a resource breakdownstructure to identify resources used
       B.   Update activity lists to incorporate new activities into the schedule
       C.   Generate change requests for a corrective action
       D.   Develop project schedule network diagrams to determine the total
           slack


Answers

1. D - Review the RFP requirements and specifications. Such a wide range of quotes
   indicates that there may be elements that are not stated clearly or correctly.
   Because there is no evidence of collusion between the consultant and the lowest
   bidder, the RFP review is the best choice. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
   Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
2. C - Project managers must actively communicate and work with stakeholders to
   meet their needs and address their issues as they occur. However, there might be
   occasions when some issues need to be resolved outside the project and some
   need to be deferred to the next phases of the project. In such cases, project
   manager must work with stakeholders to defer those issues. He must not escalate
   these issues to the sponsor without talking to the sponsors first. Asking the
   stakeholders to withdraw their issues is not recommended. [PMBOK 5th edition,
   Page 405, 406] [Project Stakeholder Management]
3. A - Project managers must adhere to code of ethics and professional conduct.
   They must maintain fairness and honesty. Since the new job requires some illegal
   and unethical activities, Marvin must reject the offer. [PMI code of Ethics and
   Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
4. B - Intelligence quotient (IQ) is anassessment of an individual's intelligence. This
   is not a soft skill. Soft skills are an individual's interpersonal skills and they
   include emotional intelligence, negotiation and group facilitation etc. [PMBOK
   5th edition, Page 275] [Project Human Resource Management]
5. D - The stakeholder register template do not contain stakeholders information, it
   only helps the project manager produce his/her project's stakeholder register. If
   Julia is not comfortable with the list, she needs to identify more stakeholders until
   she is satisfied. Interviewing the identified key stakeholders again might not
   resolve the issue. The best option is to seek an expert's opinion. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 397] [Project Stakeholder Management]
6. B - Projects are closed during the Close Project or Phase process. One of the tools
   which can be used in this process is the expert judgment. Expert judgment can be
   obtained from consultants or industry experts. These experts make sure that all
   project standards are followed when they are closed. In this scenario, you want to
   use experts from your own organization in closing the project. [PMBOK 5th
   edition, Page 102] [Project Integration Management]
7. D - Projects are temporary and unique in nature where as operational work is
   repetitive in nature. Since Nancy is working to construct three unique buildings
   and each has a definitive beginning and a definitive end, each effort is considered
   as a project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 3] [Project Framework]
8. A - Push communication is used to send information to specific recipients who
   need to know. Push communication is done using letters, faxes and memos etc..
   Pull communication is used for large volume of information. The methods for this
   kind of communication include internet sites and blogs etc. Since you want to
   notify public about the environmental changes, you must use pull communication
   methods. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 295] [Project Communications
   Management]
9. B - Resource calendars are used to know the availability of team members for
    team development activities. The responsibility assignment matrix gives the
    responsibilities assigned to various team members. Project staff assignments give
    details of individual assignments and project organization charts display team
    members and their reporting relationships. The project charter does not give any
    of that information. Hence, Lesley must use resource calendars to know that
    information. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 265] [Project Human Resource
    Management]
10. A - Stakeholders' influence is highest during the early stages of the project and
    lowest towards the end of the project. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 406] [Project
    Stakeholder Management]
11. B - Risk mitigation is a negative risk response strategy; it is not applicable to
    positive risks. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 345] [Project Risk Management]
12. D - Sellers are selected and procurement contracts are awarded to selected sellers
    in the conduct procurements process. Contracts can be awarded in the form of a
    purchase order. Since PMO selected you to write the purchase order, it is in the
    process of conducting procurements. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 371] [Project
    Procurement Management]
13. A - Since Randy is using product quality variance information and corresponding
    corrective action information, he and his team are in the process of quality
    control. In quality control, all quality activities and their results are recorded to
    assess the quality performance. Corrective actions are taken to bring the quality
    on track. Lessons learned databases are part of organizational process assets and
    these assets are updated in the quality control process. Hence, Randy must update
    organizational process assets during the quality control process. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 254] [Project Quality Management]
14. B - Since Shawn is in the execution phase and stakeholders are requesting project
    information, he must be in the Manage Communications process. The
    communications management plan, organizational process assets and work
    performance reports are inputs to this process. So, Shawn must use any of these
    documents to respond to their requests. The stakeholder register is an output of
    identify stakeholders process and it does not give any information about the
    project progress. Hence, 'The stakeholder register' is the correct answer. [PMBOK
    5th edition, Page 297] [Project Communications Management]
15. D - The stakeholder register must be updated as now there is a new project
    stakeholder on the project. Changes to the stakeholder management plan might
    also be required to ensure that the new key stakeholder is properly engaged with
    the project. Addition of a new key stakeholder brings some degree of uncertainty
    to the project; this should also be recorded in the risk register. The issue log is
    least likely to be updated in this case. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 408, 409]
    [Project Stakeholder Management]
16. D - Since the drug testing raised doubts over the chemicals supplied by the
    contractor, you must ensure that contractor is following the quality requirements
    by inspecting and auditing sellers deliverables. You can also include seller's
    personnel during auditing. All other actions including meeting with the sponsor
    and stakeholders can be performed later, if the seller is not following the
    contractual requirements. Therefore, 'Carryout audits and inspections to verify
    compliance in the seller's deliverables' is the first action required from you.
    [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 383] [Project Procurement Management]
17. C - Since the project manager isspending the money and managing resources, she
    is currently in the execution phase of the project. Spending levels are maximum in
    the execution phase. Stakeholder influences on the project decrease over the life
    of the project. Hence, stakeholder influence is less now compared to previous
    phases. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 39, 40] [Project Framework]
18. B - Since the Rough Order ofMagnitude (ROM) in the planning phase is -25% to
    +25%, the estimated mean value is 4 million dollars. If the estimates narrows
    down to -10% to +10% it becomes 3.6 to 4.4 million dollars. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 201] [Project Cost Management]
19. C - The total duration of the project doesn't influence the organization's make-or-
    buy decisions. The rest of the choices are valid. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 374]
    [Project Procurement Management]
20. D - Release payments, check the termination clause in the contract, and relieve
    employees from their duties. PMI requires project managers to follow all
    processes and policies, including contracts. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
    Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
21. D - Nancy must not bid for the 'project A' since her organization lacks the
    required skills and experience. This leave her with only 'project B' to bid on.
    Project managers are mandated by the PMI's code of ethics and professional
    conduct to accept only those assignments that are consistent with their
    background, experience, skills and qualifications. [PMI Code of Ethics &
    Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
22. C - The baselines change only when a change request is generated. A project
    management plan documents the instructions to handle changes to performance
    baselines. These baselines include scope, cost and schedule baselines. Therefore,
    the junior project manager must store these procedures in the project management
    plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 77] [Project Integration Management]
23. C - The budget restrictions and staffing restrictions must be known early in the
    project. These restrictions are also known as constraints which form the boundary
    of the project. Constraints must be documented as early in the project as possible.
    Since Project charter is the first document prepared in the project, all constraints
    must be recorded in the project charter to get an agreement from stakeholders.
    Hence, you must document these conditions as project constraints in the project
    charter. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 72, 124] [Project Integration Management]
24. A - The scope baseline is an output of the Create WBS process. The rest of the
    choices are either inputs or tools and techniques of the process. [PMBOK 5th
    edition, Page 125] [Project Scope Management]
25. A - Follow all company directives. The organization management is responsible
    for developing these directives, which may include specific instructions on
    closing out work in progress. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct,
    Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
26. D - The delays are considered as risks to the project. In this scenario, the
    reassessment indicated a drop in the risk (delay time) compared to the initial risk
    identification. The risk reassessment is done in the control risks process and the
    outcome of the risk reassessments updates the risk register. Therefore, Jen must
    take steps to update the risk register. Other steps can be taken after updating the
    risk register. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 351] [Project Risk Management]
27. D - The design of experiments is a quality planning tool to identify the factors that
    may influence specific variables of a product under development. This tool is
      used to determine the number of quality tests in a project. [PMBOK 5th edition,
      Page 239] [Project Quality Management]
28.   A - Discuss the issue with the team member in private. Conflicts should be first
      addressed in private, using a direct and collaborative approach. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 283] [Project Human Resource Management]
29.   B - The issue escalation process must be documented during the planning phase
      of a project. The issues that cannot be resolved at a lower level can be escalated
      using a chain of command within a stipulated time frame. This information is part
      of the communication management plan. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 296] [Project
      Communications Management]
30.   C - The feedback must not be discarded. It needs to be stored in the organizational
      process assets library. Sending it back to the stakeholder does not make any sense.
      There is no restriction in publishing it, but updating the organizational process
      assets should be the project manager's priority. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 415]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
31.   B - Negotiate with the vendor. Making a unilateral decision is counter to the PMI
      Code of Ethics, requiring good faith negotiations. Failing to negotiate will not be
      in the best interest of either the project or the vendor. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      384; PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 3] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
32.   C - The project cost baseline includes all authorized budgets excluding
      management reserves. Management reserves are not included to measure the cost
      performance of a project. Therefore, 'The cost baseline includes all authorized
      budgets including management reserves' is not a true statement. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 212, 213] [Project Cost Management]
33.   A - The responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) is used to show the relationship
      between resources and work packages. A RACI chart is an example for RAM and
      the letters in RACI chart stands for responsible, accountable, consult, and inform.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 262] [Project Human Resource Management]
34.   C - The total number of communication channels in a project can be determined
      using a formula n(n-1)/2 where n represents the number of team members. In this
      scenario, since 20 team members exist after relieving 5, total number of
      communication channels left = 20(19)/2 = 190. Hence 190 is the correct answer.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 292] [Project Communications Management]
35.   C - You are responsible for finding the right way of handling this situation. You
      must contact your management for advice how to proceed. Your company may
      already have plans in place for this scenario, and if not, they will develop a path
      forward. [PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Page 2] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
36.   B - There are five stages of team development: Forming, Storming, Norming,
      Performing and Adjourning. In the Forming stage, the team works independently;
      In the Storming stage, the team begins to understand the project work; In the
      Norming stage, the team begins to learn one another; In the performing stage,
      they work as a well organized unit and show the maximum performance; In the
      Adjourning stage, the team completes the work. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 276]
      [Project Human Resource Management]
37.   B - The work performance reports are inputs to the Manage Communications
      process. The rest of the choices are the valid tools and techniques of the Manage
      Communications process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 297] [Project
      Communications Management]
38.   B - To meet schedule constraints, schedule compression techniques are used to
      reduce the schedule duration. The crashing and fast tracking are two such
      techniques. Crashing involves allocation of more resources to reduce the duration.
      Crashing always does not produce a desirable result and may result in increased
      risk. Providing training is not a problem from project manager's point of view.
      Stakeholder's approval is not required when resources are not allocated. So,
      Mary's concern is only about increased risk or cost due to allocation of more
      resources to the task. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 181] [Project Time
      Management]
39.   A - Leads and lags, Schedulecompression and Modeling techniques are used as
      tools to the Control Schedule process. Parametric estimating is not a tool of this
      process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 185] [Project Time Management]
40.   D - Validate scope is the process of formalizing the acceptance of finished
      deliverables. In this process, stakeholders or customers give formal acceptance to
      the completed deliverables and deliverables not accepted by them must initiate a
      change request for defect repair. The accepted deliverables must be forward to the
      close project or phase process. Therefore, 'Completed deliverables not accepted
      by customers must require a change request for defect repair' is the correct
      answer. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 136] [Project Scope Management]
41.   A - A critical chain method is used to prepare a schedule network diagram with
      limited resources. A network diagram is prepared initially and the critical path is
      then calculated. Availability of resources is entered and resource-limited schedule
      is prepared. Duration buffers are used in critical chain method. Hence,
      recalculating the critical path using the critical chain method is the next best step.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 178] [Project Time Management]
42.   D - Modeling techniques are used to prepare a schedule under different scenarios.
      The outcome of these techniques assess the feasibility of the project schedule if
      adverse conditions exist. Monte Carlo is one of such techniques that involves
      simulation by calculating multiple project duration with different set of activity
      assumptions using probability distribution. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 180]
      [Project Time Management]
43.   B - Sending the deliverables to the customer for acceptance is an activity of
      Validate Scope process. The rest of the choices are activities related to the Close
      Project or Phase process. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 101] [Project Integration
      Management]
44.   D - When risks cannot be handled or managed in a project, it is advisable to
      accept them. In this scenario, your team is unable to identify suitable response
      strategy. Hence, risk acceptance is the correct strategy to plan for. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 345] [Project Risk Management]
45.   B - A project statement of work and a business case are inputs to the Develop
      Project Charter process. A project charter is an output of the Develop Project
      Charter process. Professional and technical associations are used as tools to gather
      expert opinions while developing a charter. Hence, 'Professional and technical
      associations' is the correct answer. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 66] [Project
      Integration Management]
46.   C - Micro-management does not motivate an individual. The motivation factors
      include: job satisfaction, challenging work, sense of accomplishment,
      achievement and growth, financial compensation, and other rewards and
      recognitions. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 514] [Project Human Resource
      Management]
47.   D - A Schedule Performance Index (SPI) of less than one indicates that less work
      has completed than planned and a Cost Performance Index (CPI) of less than one
      indicates a cost overrun for the work completed. In this scenario, cost overrun is
      more compared to the schedule delay. Therefore, you must focus on the cost of
      the project to reduce it for next phase. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 219] [Project
      Cost Management]
48.   C - When there is a limited amount of information available about a project,
      analogous estimating is used to estimate the activity durations. This estimating
      technique uses parameters such as budget, complexity and size from previous
      projects to estimate the duration. Since the project manager has just started
      planning and he has very limited information, he must use analogous estimating.
      [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 169] [Project Time Management]
49.   A - When you find a defective product, you must notify customers immediately
      even if the deviation may not affect customers. As a project manager, you must
      maintain honesty and should not hide facts. After notifying customers, the project
      manager must discuss with the team and change project management plan based
      on the customer's input. Hence, the first step you must take in this process is to
      notify the customers about the deviation. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional
      Conduct, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
50.   C - You are in the process of determining the status of the project schedule and
      influencing the factors that caused schedule changes. Based on the scenario, you
      are currently in the Control Schedule process. What-if analysis is used in Control
      Schedule process to see how various factors influence the schedule. One output of
      this process is to generate change requests to correct the schedule. Hence you
      should generate a change request for the required corrective action. [PMBOK 5th
      edition, Page 81, 191] [Project Time Management]
Stakeholder Test Questions
1. Anthony is currently managing a bridge construction project. The project is
   in the execution phase. During the planning phase of the project, Anthony
   developed a comprehensive stakeholder management plan for the project.
   However, the frequency of the plan review has not been defined. How often
   should the stakeholder management plan be reviewed by Anthony?

       A. On a monthly basis.
       B. The stakeholder management plan cannot be reviewed during the
          execution of the project.
       C. On a weekly basis.
       D. On a regular basis; frequency needs to be decided by Anthony.

2. Jim is managing a road network design project for a government agency.
   He is currently carrying out the Plan Stakeholder Management process for
   the project. Which of the following documents will provide the list of
   project stakeholders to Jim for this process?

       A.   Organizational process assets
       B.   Enterprise environmental factors
       C.   Stakeholder register
       D.   Project management plan

3. Gordon is currently developing his project's stakeholder management
   strategy. All enterprise environmental factors should be considered during
   this process. Which of the following enterprise environmental factors
   should be paid special attention during this process?

       A.   Project templates
       B.   Lessons learned from past similar projects
       C.   Commercial databases
       D.   The organization's culture and structure

4. Daniel is the project manager for a factory construction project. Daniel has
   recently joined this organization and is not fully aware of the organization's
   culture and structure. In order to manage his project stakeholders, Daniel
   has to understand his project stakeholders better. Which of the following
   can provide Daniel some historical information regarding stakeholder
   management on previous projects?

       A.   Project management plan
       B.   Enterprise environmental factors
       C.   Organizational process assets
       D.   Project charter

5. The Project Stakeholder Management knowledge area is focused on
   engaging project stakeholders with the project. What is the objective of
    effectively keeping the project stakeholders engaged with the project?

        A. To manage their expectations so that the project objectives are
           achieved.
        B. Using consistent project management methodology across
           organizational projects.
        C. To motivate the project team members.
        D. To demotivate the negative stakeholders.

6. Christine is managing a healthcare software development project. At a PMI
   conference, she met George who is the project manager at a competitor
   organization. George is a PMP and has successfully delivered many
   successful healthcare related software development projects. If George
   shares his stakeholder management experience with Christine, will that be
   considered Expert Judgment?

        A.   No! George is a project manager at a competitor organization.
        B.   Yes! All participants at a PMI conference are experts.
        C.   Yes! George is an expert in managing such projects.
        D.   No! This would be an example of expert opinion and not expert
             judgment.

7. Sandra is managing a new supersonic aircraft design project. This is a huge
   project and the success of this project is very critical for her organization.
   For such mission-critical projects, which of the following is the most
   desirable engagement level for all major project stakeholders?

        A.   Resistant stakeholders
        B.   Leading stakeholders
        C.   Neutral stakeholders
        D.   Supportive stakeholders

8. Jennifer has recently been asked to manage an office refurbishment project.
   She finds out that the chief financial officer of the company is resisting the
   project. The chief financial officer is a key project stakeholder. What must
   Jennifer do first?

        A.   Seek expert judgment from the project initiator.
        B.   Seek support from the project sponsor to force project decisions.
        C.   Conduct a team meeting to discuss this issue.
        D.   Analyze options that might change or influence the chief financial
             officer's perception.

9. Greg's project is in the initiating stage. The sponsor of the project has asked
   Greg to present a list of the identified project stakeholders in the next
   project update meeting. He has also asked Greg to present the project
   stakeholders current and desired engagement levels so that they can
   brainstorm on the stakeholder management strategy. Which of the
   following is a presentation tool that can help Greg summarize all of this
    information in a tabular format?

       A.   Communications management plan
       B.   Stakeholder register
       C.   Stakeholders engagement assessment matrix
       D.   Stakeholder management plan

10. Diana is managing the development of a mobile phone application. Half of
    the project work has been completed. Diana is currently reviewing her
    stakeholder management plan. She finds out that some of the resisting
    stakeholders have now become supportive. How should Diana update her
    stakeholder management plan?

       A. Do not update the stakeholder management plan at this stage as
          things are getting better.
       B. Transfer these stakeholders to the project supporters group, and for
          these stakeholders, adopt the stakeholder management strategy
          defined for the project supporters.
       C. For these stakeholders, continue with the defined resisting
          stakeholder management strategy as this strategy has produced
          positive results so far.
       D. Transfer these stakeholders to the project supporters group but
          continue with the defined resisting stakeholder management strategy
          with these stakeholders.


Answers

1. D - As projects progress, projectstakeholders, their interests, needs, expectations
   and engagement levels may change. The stakeholder management plan should be
   regularly reviewed by the project manager. The frequency of the review should be
   decided by the project manager if that has not been imposed by the top
   management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 400] [Project Stakeholder Management]
2. C - The stakeholder register, an output of the Identify Stakeholders process,
   documents all of the identified project stakeholders and related information. The
   stakeholder register (an input to the Plan Stakeholder Management process) will
   provide the necessary information to Jim. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 400]
   [Project Stakeholder Management]
3. D - The lessons learned and the project templates are not enterprise environmental
   factors, these are organizational process assets. The commercial databases can
   provide very limited information to develop the stakeholder management plan.
   During the Plan Stakeholder Management process, the organization's culture and
   structure are of particular importance. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 401] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
4. C - The project charter and the project management plan do not document lessons
   learned from previous similar projects. Lessons learned are stored in the
   organization's process assets library. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 401] [Project
   Stakeholder Management]
5. A - The core objective for stakeholder engagement management is to ensure that
      the project stakeholders are kept satisfied and their expectations are being met
      throughout the course of the project. Keeping the project team members
      motivated and using a consistent project management methodology are generic
      objectives of project management. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 400] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
6.    C - George is giving an expert opinion; this is analogous to expert judgment. A
      PMP certified project manager from a competitor would not normally give false
      information. This can be considered an expert judgment since George has
      successfully delivered many similar projects. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 401]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
7.    D - It would be an ideal situation for any project if all of the major stakeholders
      are supportive of the project. This will ensure smooth project progress and timely
      resolution of issues. In the real world this might not be achievable; nevertheless, it
      is the most desirable state for all major stakeholders. On the other hand, if all
      major stakeholders assume a leading role, this will lead to major and serious
      conflicts. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 402] [Project Stakeholder Management]
8.    D - In this scenario, the chief financial officer is a resistant key stakeholder. The
      chief financial officer must be turned into a project supporter in order to ensure
      success. Any of the given choices can be the solution to this problem. However,
      Jennifer should first identify all the available options and analyze them before
      selecting the best option. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 402] [Project Stakeholder
      Management]
9.    C - Both the communications and stakeholder management plans are detailed
      textual documents. They are not presentation tools. On the other hand, both the
      stakeholder register and the stakeholders engagement assessment matrix contain
      the required information. However, the stakeholders engagement assessment is
      the best tool to be selected in this situation as it only presents the information
      required by the project sponsor in a tabular format. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page
      402] [Project Stakeholder Management]
10.   B - The stakeholder management plan should be reviewed regularly. Since some
      of the resistant project stakeholders have now become project supporters, this
      implies that the current stakeholder classification in the stakeholder management
      plan is no longer accurate. These stakeholders should now be transferred to the
      project supporters group, and going forward the stakeholder management strategy
      defined for the project supporters should be adopted for these stakeholders.
      Although the stakeholder management strategy for the resisting stakeholders has
      delivered great results, it should only be applied to the current project resistant
      stakeholders. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 400] [Project Stakeholder Management]
professional and Social Responsibility Practice
Questions
1. You have just initiated a project to establish windmills in a developing
   country. To celebrate the initiation of the project, the customers arranged a
   party in which a key customer offered valuables to all of your project team
   members including yourself with a request to complete the project sooner
   than the actual finish date. What should you do?

       A. Accept the offer and agree to finish the project early
       B. Reject the offer because it violates the code of ethics and
          professional conduct
       C. Accept the offer but refuse to complete the project early
       D. Reject the offer and do not communicate with that customer

2. You overlooked a high-level risk in an insurance project and failed to
   document it in the project charter. If the risk shows up during the planning
   phase, what should be your response as a project manager?

       A.   Take the responsibility and evaluate the impact
       B.   Call a customer meeting to inform them that risk has occurred
       C.   Escalate to the sponsor for advice
       D.   Develop the risk response plan and communicate to the team

3. You have recently started working as a project manager for a public school
   construction project. Your analysis shows that the cost estimate for the
   project seems to be unreasonable and it could take at least 25% more to
   complete the project. What should you do if your sponsor wants to carryout
   the project with another project manager in case you refuse to accept it?

       A. Conduct a customer focus meeting to explain the facts
       B. Resign from the project and let the sponsor assign new project
          manager
       C. Submit detailed facts to the supervisor supporting your argument
       D. Continue with the project and document the limited budget as a
          constraint

4. You have recently started working as a project manager for a health
   insurance portal development project. The project sponsor tells you that due
   to the critical nature of the project the work must start immediately and
   complete in two weeks. Based on the instructions, you have started
   documenting major constraints and assumptions to perform the project
   feasibility study. What should you do if you are able to prepare only the
   high-level feasibility study in the given time frame?

       A. Conduct the stakeholder meeting to evaluate other options
       B. Escalate this issue to the sponsor and explain the need for more
          detailed study
       C. Submit the high level study and start making plans to prepare the
          charter
       D. Submit the high level study and schedule a detailed study in the
          planning phase

5. Danny has been working as a project manager for a company which
   provides outsourcing services to banks. Recently, he has sent a proposal to
   a local bank in response to a bid for a data warehouse project in which his
   company lacks expertise. Although his company lacks expertise, it has good
   working relationship with the bank in all other projects. Which of the
   following statements is correct considering the proposal that Danny
   submitted?

       A. Danny has not violated the PMI code of ethics and professional
          conduct
       B. Danny has violated the company policy but not the PMI code
       C. Danny has violated the procurement code but not the PMI code
       D. Danny has violated the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct

6. In a software development project, Debby, the project manager completed
   developing a charter and identification of stakeholders. Since multiple
   contracts are involved in the project, Debby has collected proprietary
   information from vendors during the planning process to decide on the
   contract. What should Debby do when a functional manager from the same
   organization wants to see this information?

       A.   Deny the request as the manager is not part of the project
       B.   Accept the request as the manager belongs to the same organization
       C.   Deny the request to protect the confidentiality of the information
       D.   Accept the request but caution the manager to maintain
            confidentiality

7. You are responsible for developing high-level risks, assumptions, and
   constraints for your project. You meet with experts in your organization and
   understand various risks in the project. However, you notice a significant
   risk to the project based on the historical data from a previous project about
   which nobody is aware of. What should you do to continue the project?

       A.   Do not document the risk as it is based on past data
       B.   Document but make it a low-level risk
       C.   Document and make it a high-level risk
       D.   Do not document the risk since nobody knows about it

8. You are using the one-on-one interview technique to gather high-level
   risks, assumptions, and constraints in an infrastructure development project
   to set up a bank. During the interview process a key stakeholder tells you
   that the project might end up in failure due to lack of support from the local
   people. What should you do in this situation?
       A.   Escalate stakeholder's comments to the sponsor for his advice
       B.   Investigate the reasons behind stakeholder's comments
       C.   Document stakeholder's comments and continue with the project
       D.   Ignore stakeholder's comments and continue with the project

9. You have started a project to establish a railroad between two neighboring
   cities. The state agency that sponsors this project is very much committed
   to complete this project on time and within budget. To support the agency's
   intention, you have completed the charter and started identifying
   stakeholders who would support the project. You would like to gather as
   many stakeholders as possible to successfully complete this project and
   move on to the planning phase. What should a project manager do while
   identifying stakeholders in a project?

       A. Notify the negative stakeholders to talk to the sponsor
       B. Identify positive stakeholders and eliminate negative stakeholders to
          gather maximum support for the project
       C. Identify positive stakeholders and request negative stakeholders to
          be out of the project
       D. Identify both the positive and negative stakeholders and address
          their concerns

10. Due to shortage of resources, a project manager has made a decision in a 3-
    year construction project to develop a partial work break down structure
    (WBS) in the beginning of the planning phase. The WBS will be expanded
    as more information is known in the near term. What should the project
    manager do if a key resource criticizes her decision to develop the partial
    WBS?

       A.   Ignore the resource's comments
       B.   Remove the resource from the project
       C.   Re-develop the complete work breakdown structure for all 3 years
       D.   Explain to the resource about the Rolling wave planning

11. You are using parametric estimating techniques to estimate costs for each
    activity and the total budget in your project. However, a project manager
    who is a colleague of you tells you to bump up each estimate by 20% to
    account for any unknown risks and submit that as a total budget for the
    customers. What should you do?

       A.   Do not inflate the estimate
       B.   Inform the customer and then inflate the estimate
       C.   Inflate the estimate first and inform the customer
       D.   Inflate the estimate but do not inform the customer

12. Two of your team members are in constant argument with each other on
    work assignments. Due to their attitude, the project is getting delayed and
    pressure is building on other team members. What should you do?
        A.   Issue a memo
        B.   Meet with them to understand their concerns
        C.   Inform the concerned functional manager
        D.   Replace the team members

13. After several brainstorming sessions with customers, Kurt established
    various project deliverables in an IT project. Two weeks later, While
    reviewing the plan, Kurt identifies two similar deliverables and determines
    to merge both of them into a single deliverable. What should Kurt do next?

        A.   Merge the deliverables and inform the customer
        B.   Submit the need to merge to the customer
        C.   Merge the deliverables but do not inform the customer
        D.   Merge the deliverables but do not update the project management
             plan

14. The management of a retail business unit has just assigned Mario to
    compare multiple projects and select a best project that will produce most
    value for the unit. Although Mario has been working as a project manager
    for a long time, he has a very limited knowledge and understanding on the
    project selection methods. What should be the first course of action from
    Mario in this scenario?

        A.   Select the best project with whatever knowledge he possess
        B.   Refuse to take the assignment
        C.   Obtain expert's judgment to help select the project
        D.   Inform the management about lack of knowledge on project
             selection methods

15. You are hired by a company to work as a project manager in a foreign
    country. You discover that you must pay kickbacks to the officials to get
    licenses in your project. What should you do?

        A.   Offer kickbacks but inform your management
        B.   Resign from the project
        C.   Offer kickbacks but document in the project cost management plan
        D.   Refuse to pay kickbacks

16. Jack is currently identifying stakeholders in his automobile project. While
    talking to his senior manager, Jack learns that one of the key stakeholders,
    who he identified in his project, is so influential that he was able to dismiss
    an IT project before moving into the planning phase. What should Jack do
    with such influential stakeholders?

        A. Get an approval from sponsor to eliminate them from the project
        B. Involve them from the beginning of the project and manage them
           closely
        C. Provide limited access to project information compared to other
           stakeholders
       D. Provide more access to project information compared to other
          stakeholders

17. While conducting interviews for a project manager position you happen to
    see your classmate in the list of prospective candidates. What would you do
    immediately?

       A.   Encourage your classmate by offering some tips
       B.   Resign from the interview panel
       C.   Remove your classmate from the list
       D.   Inform the interview panel of the relationship

18. While talking to your one of your team leaders you discover that he was in
    constant criticism from a team member about the allocation of tasks. The
    team leader also indicates that the specific team member also delays many
    tasks causing delays in the project schedule. What action should you take as
    a project manager?

       A. Conduct a meeting with the sponsor, team leader, and the team
          member
       B. Approach the team member and understand his point of view
       C. Replace the team member
       D. Direct your team leader to issue a memo

19. What should you do as a senior project manager if the PMP certification
    claimed by a recently recruited project manager does not appear in the PMI
    website?

       A.   Advise your new recruit to complete his certification
       B.   Report to the PMI
       C.   Report to the sponsor
       D.   Request more information from the new recruit

20. You have recently acquired a project from a PMP certified project manager,
    who has been removed from the project due to incompetency and lack of
    skills. When you happen to meet him outside your building, he started
    rebuking you for taking his project. He even goes so far as to suggest that
    your religion plays a part in your selection by the management. What
    should you do FIRST?

       A.   Report to the customer
       B.   Do nothing
       C.   Report to the Police
       D.   Report to Project Management Institute (PMI)

21. In a manufacturing project, you have requested bids to procure stainless
    steel products. But, your sponsor insists you to conduct bidder conferences
    before selecting sellers. What mandatory standard in PMI code of ethics
    and professional conduct would be satisfied by conducting bidder
    conferences?

       A.   Honesty
       B.   Respect
       C.   Responsibility
       D.   Fairness

22. You are using joint application development (JAD) sessions in a software
    development project to collect product requirements from stakeholders.
    Which of the following mandatory standard in the PMI code of ethics and
    professional conduct is fulfilled with JAD sessions while gathering
    requirements?

       A.   Honesty
       B.   Fairness
       C.   Responsibility
       D.   Respect

23. A functional manager in your organization has recently filed a complaint
    against a junior project manager regarding his project management
    certification. The functional manager claims that the PMP certification
    claimed by the junior project manager is false and needs to be verified.
    What should be your response as a senior project manager?

       A. Report to PMI
       B. Suspend the junior project manager
       C. Ask your project manager to provide evidence for his/her PMP
          certification
       D. Ask your functional manager to provide evidence for his argument

24. While conducting a brainstorming session to identify stakeholders, a
    process manager disagrees with you on a decision you have made regarding
    the influence and impact of each stakeholder on the project. He even makes
    some comments against you in front of other stakeholders. As a senior
    project manager what should be your immediate response?

       A. Do nothing in the meeting but later escalate this issue to the sponsor
       B. Take the help of other stakeholders and present your argument
       C. Propose an immediate meeting between the two of you to resolve
          the differences
       D. Remove the process manager from the project

25. Which of the following has been identified as one of the single biggest
    reasons for project success or failure?

       A. Communication
       B. Scope
       C. Costs
       D. Schedule

26. You have given a chemical manufacturing project that could potentially
    contaminate the ground water in the neighboring residential community.
    After detailed analysis, you learn that the impact could be severe over long
    run. If the sponsor of the project wants to complete this project PMP Focus
    Area Test: Professional and So as soon as possible, being a senior project
    management practitioner you must:

       A.   Undertake the project but not inform the residents
       B.   Refuse to take up the project
       C.   Support the sponsor
       D.   Undertake the project but inform the residents

27. You are working in a software development project in which specialized
    resources are required to perform some tasks. You estimate that these
    resources will be required during the executing phase of the project.
    However, your estimation fails to account for the fact that these resources
    will be available for only limited hours in the executing phase. What should
    you do to make schedule changes based on the limited availability?

       A.   Communicate to customers and update the baseline
       B.   Update the project schedule
       C.   Update the schedule baseline
       D.   Perform an impact analysis

28. A project manager has completed identification of stakeholders and started
    planning for a flow instruments installation project in a hospital. While
    developing the project management plan, a team member indicates that a
    stakeholder in the X-Ray department is missing from the stakeholder's list.
    Which of the following statements indicate the BEST response from the
    project manager?

       A. Authenticate the information from the team member
       B. Include and involve the stakeholder immediately
       C. It is too late to involve a stakeholder in the planning, so ignore the
          stakeholder
       D. Wait until the execution phase to involve the new stakeholder

29. While gathering high-level business requirements for a software
    development project using facilitated sessions, one of your customers
    proposes a requirement which may not be possible due to technological
    limitations. If the customer insists on the requirement what should you do?

       A.   You should not document the requirement
       B.   You should document the requirement and include it as a risk
       C.   You should listen to the customer and understand his view point
       D.   You should document the requirement to meet customer
           expectations

30. You have just started leading a World bank health care development project
    in an developing country in which it is customary to offer lunch when a
    project is initiated. Although, your team members are willing to accept the
    offer, you decide to refuse the offer since you are well-aware that the PMI's
    code of ethics and professional conduct does not allow to take gifts. Which
    of the following statements are TRUE considering your decision?

        A. Your decision is wrong because you should obey the norms and
           customs of others as long as you do not favor them
        B. Your decision is correct because you are engaging yourself in
           unethical behavior by accepting the lunch
        C. Your decision is correct because you are following the PMI's code
           of ethics and professional conduct
        D. Your decision is wrong because conduct rules only apply to local
           projects not international projects


Answers

1. B - Since the stakeholder made a request by offering gifts, you should refuse the
   offer. The PMI's code of ethics and professional conduct indicates that a project
   manager should never engage in unfairness. Favoring one or more customers by
   taking gifts is not allowed. Thus, you should reject the offer because it violates
   the code of ethics and professional conduct. Not communicating with one
   customer could deteriorate the relationships with other customers as well. If it is
   customary in that country to offer gifts, you might take it without agreeing to
   customer's request. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 3]
   [Prof. Responsibility]
2. A - According to the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct, project
   managers must take the ownership of the decisions they make or fail to make.
   Thus, you should take the responsibility and evaluate the impact first. A risk
   response plan should be developed only after evaluating the impact. Calling a
   customer meeting cannot get rid of the risk. You should escalate to the sponsor
   only if the risk is beyond your control. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional
   responsibility, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
3. C - Project managers have responsibility to present truthful and accurate
   information regarding costs, schedules, and resources. So, you must submit the
   facts that substantiate your argument. If your argument is correct, then the
   sponsor might agree with you. Talking to customers is not appropriate.
   Continuing the project will make the project fail. It is inappropriate to resign from
   the project without presenting the facts. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional
   responsibility, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
4. B - Developing a detailed feasibility study is essential to initiate a project. If
   efforts are not made initially to justify whether or not the project is worth the
   required investment, it could result in project failure. It is also the responsibility
   of the project manager to provide accurate and complete information in regard to
   the feasibility of any project. Thus, you must escalate the issue to the sponsor and
      explain the need for more detailed study. Since the project initiation depends on
      the feasibility of the project, the report cannot be prepared in the project planning
      phase. Conducting stakeholder meeting is an invalid choice because the
      stakeholders are not selected yet to conduct a meeting. [PMI code of Ethics and
      Professional responsibility, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
5.    D - One of the mandatory standards for a project manager is to maintain
      responsibility and bid only such projects where his/her company has expertise and
      skills. Since Danny bid for a project in which his company lacks experience, he
      violated the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct. There is no
      procurement code in project management. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional
      responsibility, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
6.    C - It is the responsibility of the project manager to maintain the confidentiality of
      the protected or proprietary information in a project. A project manager should
      provide the confidential information only to the vendor evaluation committee or
      whoever is involved in the evaluation process and also to the sponsor. He/she
      must not provide this information to any other employees within the organization
      or within the project. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 2]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
7.    C - As a project manager you have a responsibility to disclose accurate
      information to all project stakeholders honestly. Project managers must not
      engage in documenting false information or misleading information. Thus, you
      must document it as a high-level risk. Even though the risk is based on past data,
      it must be documented because the risks could also be identified from the past
      data. Documenting as a low-level risk is a misleading act and a project manager
      must not do that. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 3]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
8.    B - You must document the comments from the stakeholder in this case.
      However, you should not continue the project unless you know the reasons behind
      his comments. The sponsor might ask you to investigate the reasons, so escalating
      stakeholder's comments to the sponsor may not yield anything. Ignoring
      stakeholder's comments is not advisable. Thus, 'Investigate the reasons behind the
      stakeholder's comments' is the CORRECT step. [PMI code of Ethics and
      Professional responsibility, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
9.    D - Project stakeholders are people, organizations, or groups whose interests are
      positively or negatively impacted by the project. A project manager must identify
      both the positive and negative stakeholders for successful completion of the
      project. Eliminating the negative stakeholders or keeping them away from the
      project will jeopardize the objectives of the project and cause the project to fail.
      One of the mandatory standards for a project manager is to show fairness and
      disclose potential conflict of interest situation to stakeholders. He must escalate
      issues to the sponsor only when he fails in influencing negative stakeholders.
      Thus, 'Identify both the positive and negative stakeholders and address their
      concerns' is the correct answer. [Reference - PMBOK 5th Edition, pages 393, 394
      & PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 4] [Project
      Stakeholder Management]
10.   D - One of the mandatory standards for a project manager is to maintain respect
      by showing high regard to others. A project manager must respect other's
      viewpoint. A project manager need not develop a complete WBS during the initial
      stages of planning. In long projects, WBS can be developed partially and can be
      extended as more details are known later, which is also known as the rolling wave
      planning. Thus, the project manager must explain to the resource about the rolling
      wave planning. Ignoring the comments or removing the resource is not
      appropriate responses from the project manager. [Reference - PMBOK 5th
      Edition, page 131 & PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 3]
      [Project Scope Management]
11.   A - Honesty is a mandatory standard for project managers. Project managers are
      required to provide accurate information to customers regarding budget,
      resources, and risks. Unknown risks can be accounted using reserves in a project.
      But, inflating budget or schedule values or making misleading or false estimation
      is against the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct. Hence, 'Do not inflate
      the estimate' is the BEST answer in this scenario. [PMI code of Ethics and
      Professional responsibility, Pages 4, 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
12.   B - One of the mandatory standards in the PMI code of ethics and professional
      conduct is Respect. A project manager must listen to other's point of view and
      understand it. Hence, you must meet with the team members first to understand
      their concerns. If the problem continues, you must issue a memo or replace the
      team members in an extreme situation. Talking to the functional manager may not
      resolve the problem as they are controlled by you in your project. [Reference -
      PMBOK 5th Edition, Page 283 & PMI code of Ethics and Professional
      responsibility, Page 4, 5] [Project Human Resource Management]
13.   B - Any corrections made to the deliverables must be informed to the customer
      because acceptance of deliverables is the key for a successful project. It is the
      responsibility of the project manager to communicate to the appropriate body
      before making changes. Thus, Kurt must submit the need to merge to the
      customer. Once customers accept the change, the deliverables should be merged
      and customers should be informed. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional
      responsibility, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
14.   D - The management has just assigned Mario to select the best project. One of the
      mandatory standards for practitioners of project management is Honesty. So, in
      this scenario, Mario should honestly tell the management about his lack of
      knowledge on project selection methods. Attempting to select the project without
      expert knowledge could create problems later. Refusing the assignment is not an
      appropriate action. Management may suggest taking expert's help for selecting the
      project, but informing the management is the first step to take and it is up to the
      management to decide. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page
      4] [Prof. Responsibility]
15.   D - Offering kickbacks is against the PMI code of ethics and professional
      conduct. Resigning from the project is not an appropriate action. Thus, you must
      refuse to pay kickbacks. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility,
      Page 5] [Prof. Responsibility]
16.   B - All stakeholders must be identified as early as possible in the project. The
      stakeholders can be positive or negative. They must be classified based on their
      influence, interest, expectations, and importance. A project manager must not
      engage in hiding information. He must provide equal access to all stakeholders
      who are authorized to have that information. Thus, Jack must involve them from
      the beginning of the project and manage them closely. [Reference - PMBOK 5th
      Edition, page 397 & PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 4]
      [Project Stakeholder Management]
17. D - As a project manager you have a responsibility to disclose to your interview
    panel about the conflict of interest situation that could arise by interviewing your
    classmate. It is up to the panel to decide the best course of action including your
    resignation. So, 'Inform the interview panel of the relationship' is the immediate
    step. Offering tips to your classmate would violate the fairness standard in PMI
    code. Removing your classmate is not appropriate. [PMI code of Ethics and
    Professional responsibility, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
18. B - A project manager should manage a conflict by directly approaching the team
    member, who caused the conflict. According to PMI code of ethics and
    professional conduct, a project manager must be responsible and show respect.
    He/she must listen to other's viewpoint, seeking to understand them before
    making a decision. Replacing the team member or issuing a memo are not
    appropriate actions. Involving the sponsor in team issues is not an appropriate
    action unless the issues are beyond control. [Reference - PMBOK 5th Edition,
    pages 282, 283 & PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 3]
    [Project Human Resource Management]
19. D - A project manager must bring violations of the code of conduct or unethical
    activities to PMI's attention. False certification claims must be reported to PMI. In
    this case, it is not yet confirmed that the new recruit has made false claim unless
    you request more information from him. Once you confirm that he has made false
    claim, you can report to both the PMI and Sponsor. Thus, Request more
    information is the best answer in this situation. [PMI code of Ethics and
    Professional responsibility, Page 2] [Prof. Responsibility]
20. D - All project managers who are PMP certified, must obey the PMI code of
    ethics and professional conduct. They must behave well in their profession. All
    violations should be brought to the PMI's notice. PMI takes disciplinary actions
    against individuals who knowingly make false allegations against other project
    managers. Thus, you must report to PMI first. If your life is threatened, then you
    must report to the police and the management. [PMI code of Ethics and
    Professional responsibility, Pages 2, 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
21. D - Bidder conferences or vendor conferences are used to provide clear
    understanding on the procurement process for all prospective sellers. This process
    ensures that the mandatory standard of Fairness is followed in the bidding
    process. Fairness in this case means making opportunities equally available to
    qualified candidates. [Reference - PMBOK 5th Edition, page 375 & PMI code of
    Ethics and Professional responsibility, Pages 3, 4] [Project Procurement
    Management]
22. B - Fairness is one of the mandatory standards in the PMI code of ethics and
    professional conduct. Fairness means not showing favoritism or prejudice. The
    JAD sessions build trust between the customers and reconcile stakeholder
    differences since they gives equal opportunity to all stakeholders. [Reference -
    PMBOK 5th Edition, page 114 & PMI code of Ethics and Professional
    responsibility, Page 5] [Project Scope Management]
23. D - One of the mandatory standards in the PMI code of ethics and professional
    conduct is Respect. A project manager must listen to other's point of view and
    understand it. But, before asking the junior project manager for evidence, you
    must ask your functional manager to provide evidence to support his allegations.
    You can suspend the project manager or report to PMI if he/she is found guilty.
    [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 3] [Prof.
      Responsibility]
24.   C - The PMI code of ethics and professional conduct requires you to conduct in a
      professional manner, even when it is not reciprocated. So, you must not engage in
      the argument. Removing the process manager will only worsen the situation. You
      must approach directly those persons with whom you have a conflict or
      disagreement. Thus, you must propose an immediate meeting between the two of
      you to resolve the differences. Escalating this issue will not resolve the
      differences. [Reference - PMBOK 5th Edition, page 283 & PMI code of Ethics
      and Professional responsibility, Page 3] [Project Human Resource Management]
25.   A - Communication has been identified as one of the single biggest reasons for
      project success or failure. Effective communication within the project team and
      stakeholders is essential. [PMBOK 5th edition, Page 515] [Project
      Communications Management]
26.   B - All project management practitioners must follow the code of ethics and
      professional conduct. One of the aspirational standards that a project manager
      must follow is the responsibility. Project managers must make decisions based on
      the best interests of society, public safety, and environment. Projects that work
      against the interests of the public must not be undertaken. So, of all the given
      options, Refuse to take up the project is the BEST option. Since you already
      completed the detailed study, taking up the project is not advisable. [PMI code of
      Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 4] [Prof. Responsibility]
27.   D - A project manager must be responsible and communicate truthful information
      to the customers. However, a project manager must perform an impact analysis
      before getting the approval from the customer and making changes. Thus,
      'perform an impact analysis' is the correct answer. The schedule and schedule
      baseline are updated after analyzing the impact. [Reference - PMBOK 5th Edition,
      pages 94, 96 & PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 2]
      [Project Time Management]
28.   A - One aspect of responsibility for a project manager is to take ownership of
      decisions made. A project manager must identify all stakeholders as early as
      possible in the project and it is his responsibility. A missing stakeholder could
      jeopardize the objectives of the project. So, the project manager must involve the
      newly identified stakeholder as soon as possible. However, the project manager
      must authenticate the information from the team member first before involving
      the stakeholder. Thus, 'Authenticate the information from the team member' is the
      best answer. [Reference - PMBOK 5th Edition, pages 393, 394 & PMI code of
      Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 2] [Project Stakeholder Management]
29.   C - A project manager must communicate honestly and openly with the customer.
      When customer insists on specific requirements, a project manager should listen
      to him and understand his point of view. Then, he must gather facts and present to
      the customer explaining why he is right or wrong. Without factual information
      project managers should not deny or accept critical requests from the customer.
      Thus, 'You should listen to the customer and understand his viewpoint' is the
      correct answer. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional responsibility, Page 3]
      [Prof. Responsibility]
30.   A - Although the PMI code of ethics and professional conduct does not allow gift
      taking, project managers should obey the norms and customs of others as long as
      they do not show favoritism based on the norms. Therefore, 'Your decision is
      wrong because you should obey the norms and customs of others as long as you
do not favor them' is the correct answer. The PMI code of conduct applies to both
the local and international projects. [PMI code of Ethics and Professional
responsibility, Page 3] [Prof. Responsibility]
PMP Formulas
Keywords                           Formulas



                                   A) SPI = EV/PV
                                      EV = Earned Value
                                      PV = Planned Value
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 183]
Schedule Performance Index (SPI)   B) < 1      Project is behind
                                   schedule
                                      = 1      Project is on schedule
                                      > 1      Project is ahead of
                                   schedule
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 183]




                                   A) CPI = EV/AC
                                      EV = Earned Value
                                      AC = Actual Cost
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 183]
Cost Performance Index (CPI)
                                   B) < 1      Over budget
                                      = 1      On budget
                                      > 1      Under budget
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 183]




                                   A) SV = EV - PV
                                      EV = Earned Value
                                      PV = Planned Value
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 182]
Schedule Variance (SV)
                                   B) Negative       Behind schedule
                                      Zero           On schedule
                                      Positive       Ahead of schedule
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide   - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 182]




Cost Variance (CV)                 A) CV = EV - AC
                                   EV = Earned Value
                                   AC = Actual Cost
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
Keywords                           Formulas
                                   Page 182]

                                   B) Negative      Over budget
                                   Zero          On budget
                                   Positive      Under budget
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 182]



Estimate at Completion (EAC)

                                   EAC = (BAC/CPI)
                                   BAC = Budget at completion
                                   CPI = Cost performance index
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 184]




                                   ETC = (EAC - AC)
Estimate to Complete (ETC) when    EAC = Estimate at completion
original estimates are flawed      AC = Actual cost
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 184, 185]




                                   ETC = (BAC - EV)/CPI
                                   BAC = Budget at completion
Estimate to Complete (ETC) when    EV = Earned value
variances are typical              CPI = Cost performance index
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 184, 185]



Estimate to Complete (ETC) when
variances are atypical
                                   ETC = BAC - EV
                                   BAC = Budget at completion
                                   EV = Earned value
                                   [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                   Page 184, 185]



Number of Communication Channels

                                   N(N-1)/2
                                   Where N = Number of project team
                                   members
Keywords                        Formulas


Expected Value (EV) or PERT
Estimation
                                (O+4M+P)/6
                                O= Optimistic estimate
                                M= Most Likely estimate
                                P= Pessimistic estimate
                                [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                Page 253]



To-Complete Performance Index
(TCPI) based on the BAC
                                TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)
                                BAC = Budget at completion
                                AC = Actual cost
                                EV = Earned value
                                [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                Page 185]



To-Complete Performance Index
(TCPI) based on the EAC
                                TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC)
                                BAC = Budget at completion
                                AC = Actual cost
                                EV = Earned value
                                EAC = Estimate at completion
                                [PMBOK(R) Guide - Fourth Edition -
                                Page 185]



Total Float (or) Total Slack

                                LS-ES (or) LF-EF
                                LS = Late start
                                ES = Early start
                                LF = Late finish
                                EF = Early finish



Standard Deviation of a Task

                                (P-O)/6
                                P = Pessimistic estimate
                                O = Optimistic estimate



Present Value (PV)
Keywords                          Formulas
                                  PV = FV/(1 + r/100)n
                                  N = Number of years
                                  r = Discount rate



Net Present Value (NPV)           The higher the better
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)     The higher the better
The Payback Period                The lower the better
The Life Cycle Cost               The lower the better
The Benefit to Cost Ratio (BCR)   The higher the better
Critical Path                     Path with longest duration
Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM)    Estimated value + or - 50% [PMBOK(R)
Estimate                          Guide -Fourth Edition - Page 168]
Variance                          (Standard Deviation) * (Standard
                                  Deviation)
Exam Taking Tips

PMP Exam Facts

       There are 200 total multiple choice questions which make up the PMP exam
       25 randomly placed "pretest questions" are included, and do not count towards
       the pass/fail determination
       Students have 4 hours to complete the exam
       Students must score 61% or higher to pass the exam (106 of 175 questions)
       Students may bring blank "scratch" paper with which to draft responses, such
       as for formula-based exam questions.

Before the Exam

       Visit the exam location before your exam date so that you are familiar with the
       address and commute time, especially if you are a nervous test taker.
       Be prepared to fully utilize your blank "scratch" paper in the exam. This
       means that you have committed important formulas, concepts, and key facts to
       memory; and you are able to apply them to a blank sheet of paper in less than
       five minutes.
       Alleviate exam stress and anxiety by taking practice exams that attune you to
       the pace, subject matter, and difficulty of the real exam.
       On the night before the exam, reduce your study time to one hour or less and
       get extra sleep. The reduced study time and extra rest will allow your brain to
       better process the information it has absorbed during earlier, more intense,
       study sessions.

Taking the Exam

       IMPORTANT: Bring your PMI authorization letter, as well as two forms of
       ID, to the exam center.
       At the beginning of the PMP exam, use your scratch paper to "download" all
       of the formulas, concepts, and key facts you have committed to memory. To
       save time, perform this activity immediately after the initial computer tutorial
       which allots 15 minutes.
       Approach each question from PMI's perspective, not your own experience,
       even if the most correct response seems contrary to your "on-the-job"
       knowledge.
       Plan your breaks during the exam. A recommended break pattern during the
       PMP exam is to stand up and stretch after every 50 questions.
       Smile as you take the exam. It has been proven that smiling alleviates stress
       and boosts confidence during exceptionally difficult tasks. Use deep breathing
       techniques to further relax.
       If you have exam time remaining, review the questions you "marked for
       review". Use all the exam time you have until each question has been
       reviewed twice.

The PMP exam is a multiple choice test that asks one to recognize correct answers
among a set of four options. The extra options that are not the correct answer are
called the "distracters" and their purpose, unsurprisingly, is to distract the test taker
from the actual correct answer among the bunch.

Students usually consider multiple choice exams as much easier than other types of
exams; this is not necessarily true with the PMP exam. Among these reasons are:

        Most multiple choice exams ask for simple, factual information; unlike the
        PMP exam which often requires the student to apply knowledge and make a
        best judgment.
        The majority of multiple choice exams involve a large quantity of different
        questions - so even if you get a few incorrect, it's still okay. The PMP exam
        covers a broad set of material, often times in greater depth than other
        certification exams.

Regardless of whether or not multiple choice testing is more forgiving; in reality, one
must study immensely because of the sheer volume of information that is covered.

Although four hours may seem like more than enough time for a multiple choice
exam, when faced with 200 questions, time management is one of the most crucial
factors in succeeding and doing well. You should always try and answer all of the
questions you are confident about first, and then go back about to those items you are
not sure about afterwards. Always read carefully through the entire test as well, and
do your best to not leave any question blank upon submission- even if you do not
readily know the answer.

Many people do very well with reading through each question and not looking at the
options before trying to answer. This way, they can steer clear (usually) of being
fooled by one of the "distracter" options or get into a tug-of-war between two choices
that both have a good chance of being the actual answer.

Never assume that "all of the above" or "none of the above" answers are the actual
choice. Many times they are, but in recent years they have been used much more
frequently as distracter options on standardized tests. Typically this is done in an
effort to get people to stop believing the myth that they are always the correct answer.

You should be careful of negative answers as well. These answers contain words such
as "none", "not", "neither", and the like. Despite often times being very confusing, if
you read these types of questions and answers carefully, then you should be able to
piece together which is the correct answer. Just take your time!

Never try to overanalyze a question, or try and think about how the test givers are
trying to lead astray potential test takers. Keep it simple and stay with what you know.

If you ever narrow down a question to two possible answers, then try and slow down
your thinking and think about how the two different options/answers differ. Look at
the question again and try to apply how this difference between the two potential
answers relates to the question. If you are convinced there is literally no difference
between the two potential answers (you'll more than likely be wrong in assuming
this), then take another look at the answers that you've already eliminated. Perhaps
one of them is actually the correct one and you'd made a previously unforeseen
mistake.

On occasion, over-generalizations are used within response options to mislead test
takers. To help guard against this, always be wary of responses/answers that use
absolute words like "always", or "never". These are less likely to actually be the
answer than phrases like "probably" or "usually" are. Funny or witty responses are
also, most of the time, incorrect - so steer clear of those as much as possible.

Although you should always take each question individually, "none of the above"
answers are usually less likely to be the correct selection than "all of the above" is.
Keep this in mind with the understanding that it is not an absolute rule, and should be
analyzed on a case-by-case (or "question-by-question") basis.

Looking for grammatical errors can also be a huge clue. If the stem ends with an
indefinite article such as "an" then you'll probably do well to look for an answer that
begins with a vowel instead of a consonant. Also, the longest response is also
oftentimes the correct one, since whoever wrote the question item may have tended to
load the answer with qualifying adjectives or phrases in an effort to make it correct.
Again though, always deal with these on a question-by-question basis, because you
could very easily be getting a question where this does not apply.

Verbal associations are oftentimes critical because a response may repeat a key word
that was in the question. Always be on the alert for this. Playing the old Sesame Street
game "Which of these things is not like the other" is also a very solid strategy, if a bit
preschool. Sometimes many of a question's distracters will be very similar to try to
trick you into thinking that one choice is related to the other. The answer very well
could be completely unrelated however, so stay alert.

Just because you have finished a practice test, be aware that you are not done
working. After you have graded your test with all of the necessary corrections, review
it and try to recognize what happened in the answers that you got wrong. Did you
simply not know the qualifying correct information? Perhaps you were led astray by a
solid distracter answer? Going back through your corrected test will give you a leg up
on your next one by revealing your tendencies as to what you may be vulnerable with,
in terms of multiple choice tests.

It may be a lot of extra work, but in the long run, going through your corrected
multiple choice tests will work wonders for you in preparation for the real exam. See
if you perhaps misread the question or even missed it because you were unprepared.
Think of it like instant replays in professional sports. You are going back and looking
at what you did on the big stage in the past so you can help fix and remedy any errors
that could pose problems for you on the real exam.
