PMP(R) Certification All-in-One For Dummies(R), 2nd Edition
Published by: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030-5774, www.wiley.com
Copyright (c) 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Media and software compilation copyright (c) 2013 by John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. All rights reserved.
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under
Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the
prior written permission of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax
(201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, Dummies.com,
Making Everything Easier, and related trade dress are trademarks or
registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the
United States and other countries, and may not be used without written
permission. PMI, PMP, and PMBOK Guide are registered trademarks of
Project Management Institute, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of
their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the
author make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically
disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of
fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is
sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If
professional assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or
the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be
aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the
U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002. For technical support, please
visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley publishes in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand.
Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be
included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such
as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may
download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more
information about Wiley products, visit us at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013944334
ISBN 978-1-11854012-1 (pbk); ISBN 978-1-118-53973-6 (ebk); ISBN 978-
1-118-61253-8 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-61244-6 (ebk)
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PMP(R) Certification All-in-One For
Dummies(R)
  To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book, go to
  www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/pmpcertificationaio.

Table of Contents

Introduction
   About This Book

   Foolish Assumptions

   How This Book Is Organized

       Book I: PMP Foundation

       Book II: Starting Off Right

       Book III: Planning Integration, Scope, and Schedule

       Book IV: Planning Cost, Quality, Human Resources, and Communication

       Book V: Planning for Risks, Procurement, and Stakeholder Management

       Book VI: Managing Your Project

       Book VII: Controlling Scope and Schedule

       Book VIII: Controlling Cost, Quality, and More

       Book IX: Closing Your Project and the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct

       Appendixes

   Icons Used in This Book

   Beyond the Book

   Where to Go from Here
Book I: PMP Foundation

Book I: Chapter 1: The PMP Exam
   The PMP Exam Blueprint

       Knowledge and skills

       Cross-cutting skills

       Code of ethics and professional conduct

       Exam scoring

   The Exam Domains

       Initiating the project

       Planning the project

       Executing the project

       Monitoring and controlling the project

       Closing the project

   Applying for the Exam

       The application process

       Scheduling your exam

   Taking the Exam

       Exam day

       Types of questions

       Exam-taking tips

       Getting your results

   Preparing for the Exam


Book I: Chapter 2: Foundations of Project Management
   Grasping the Terminology

       Definition of a project
       Projects, programs, and portfolios

       Project management

       Projects and organizational strategy

   The Project Management Office

   Understanding Environmental Constraints

       Enterprise environmental factors

       Project governance

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book I: Chapter 3: Project Life Cycles, Organizational Structures,
 and Organizational Process Assets
   The Project Life Cycle

       Project phases

       Predictive life cycles

       Iterative and incremental life cycles

       Adaptive life cycles

       Phase reviews

       Product versus project life cycle

   Organization Structures

       Functional organization

       Matrix organization

       Projectized organization

       Comparing organization types

   Leveraging Your Organization's Assets

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary
Book I: Chapter 4: It's All about the Process
   Managing Your Project Is a Process

   Understanding Project Management Process Groups

   Before the Project Begins

       Initiating processes

       Planning processes

       Executing processes

       Monitoring and Controlling processes

       Closing processes

   The Ten Knowledge Areas

       Project Integration Management

       Project Scope Management

       Project Time Management

       Project Cost Management

       Project Quality Management

       Project Human Resource Management

       Project Communications Management

       Project Risk Management

       Project Procurement Management

       Project Stakeholder Management

   Mapping the 47 Processes

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book II: Starting Off Right

Book II: Chapter 1: OMG! It's a Project!
   Knowledge and Skills for the Initiating Processes

   Internal Needs or External Influences

        Organizational need

        Market demand

        Customer request

        Technological advance

        Legal requirement

        Ecological impacts

        Social need

   Selecting the Right Projects

        Project portfolio committee

        Project Management Office (PMO)

        Criteria for project selection

   Alphabet Soup: ROI, NPV, FV and Other Project-Selection Metrics

        Financial metrics

        Financial terms

        Nonfinancial metrics

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book II: Chapter 2: Chartering Your Project
   What a Project Charter Is and Why You Need One

   Develop Project Charter: Inputs

        Project statement of work

        Business case

        Agreements

        Enterprise environmental factors

        Organizational process assets
   Develop Project Charter: Tools and Techniques

   Develop Project Charter: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book II: Chapter 3: Identifying Project Stakeholders
   Who Cares about Your Project?

   Identify Stakeholders: Inputs

        Project charter

        Procurement documents

        Enterprise environmental factors

        Organizational process assets

        Common stakeholders

   Identify Stakeholders: Tools and Techniques

        Stakeholder analysis

        Expert judgment

        Meetings

   Identify Stakeholders: Outputs

        Stakeholder register

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book III: Planning Integration, Scope, and Schedule

Book III: Chapter 1: Constructing the Project Management Plan
   Knowledge and Skills for the Planning Processes

   The Project Management Plan
   Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs

       Planning for change

       Introduction to configuration management

   Develop Project Management Plan: Tools and Techniques

       Expert judgment

       Facilitation techniques

   Develop Project Management Plan: Outputs

   The Project Management Plan and the Executing, Controlling, and Closing Processes

       Project documents

       Project management plan approval

       The project kick-off meeting

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book III: Chapter 2: Defining Project Scope
   Project and Product Scope

   Plan Scope Management

       Plan Scope Management: Inputs

       Plan Scope Management: Tools and Techniques

       Plan Scope Management: Outputs

   Collect Requirements

       Collect Requirements: Inputs

       Collect Requirements: Tools and Techniques

       Collect Requirements: Outputs

   Define Scope

       Define Scope: Inputs

       Define Scope: Tools and Techniques

       Define Scope: Outputs
   Create WBS

       Create WBS: Inputs

       Create WBS: Tools and Techniques

       Create WBS: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book III: Chapter 3: Creating Your Schedule
   Planning Schedule Management

       Plan Schedule Management: Inputs

       Plan Schedule Management: Tools and Techniques

       Plan Schedule Management: Outputs

       Define Activities

       Define Activities: Inputs

       Define Activities: Tools and Techniques

       Define Activities: Outputs

   Sequence Activities: Inputs

       Sequence Activities: Tools and Techniques

       Sequence Activities: Outputs

   Estimate Activity Resources: Inputs

       Estimate Activity Resources: Inputs

   Estimate Activity Resources: Tools and Techniques

       Estimate Activity Resources: Outputs

   Estimating Activity Durations

       Estimate Activity Durations: Inputs

       Estimate Activity Durations: Tools and Techniques

       Estimate Activity Durations: Outputs
   Developing the Schedule

       Develop Schedule: Inputs

       Develop Schedule: Tools and Techniques

       Develop Schedule: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Planning Cost, Quality, Human Resources, and
 Communication

Book IV: Chapter 1: Estimating the Price Tag
   Plan Cost Management

       Plan Cost Management: Inputs

       Plan Cost Management: Tools and Techniques

       Plan Cost Management: Outputs

   Estimate Costs

       Estimate Costs: Inputs

       Estimate Costs: Tools and Techniques

   Estimate Costs: Outputs

   Determine Budget

       Determine Budget: Inputs

       Determine Budget: Tools and Techniques

       Determine Budget: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Chapter 2: Planning for Quality
   Basic Quality Concepts
   Basic Statistics

   Plan Quality Management

        Plan Quality Management: Inputs

        Plan Quality: Tools and Techniques

        Plan Quality Management: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Chapter 3: Identifying Your Team Members
   Plan Human Resource Management

        Plan Human Resource Management: Inputs

        Plan Human Resource Management: Tools and Techniques

        Plan Human Resource Management: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Chapter 4: 90 Percent of Your Job Is Communication
   Communication Building Blocks

        Formal and informal, written and verbal

        Words, tone, and body language

        Communication skills

   Plan Communications Management

        Plan Communications Management: Inputs

        Plan Communications Management: Tools and Techniques

        Plan Communications Management: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary
Book V: Planning for Risks, Procurement, and
 Stakeholder Management
Book V: Chapter 1: Identifying What Could Go Wrong
  Projects Breed Uncertainty

  Plan Risk Management

      Plan Risk Management: Inputs

      Plan Risk Management: Tools and Techniques

      Plan Risk Management: Outputs

  Identify Risks

      Identify Risks: Inputs

      Identify Risks: Tools and Techniques

      Identify Risks: Outputs

  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

      Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Inputs

      Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Tools and Techniques

      Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Outputs

  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

      Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Inputs

      Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Tools and Techniques

      Scenarios, modeling, and simulations

      Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Outputs

  Plan Risk Responses

      Plan Risk Responses: Tools and Techniques

      Plan Risk Responses: Outputs

  Key Terms

  Chapter Summary
Book V: Chapter 2: Getting Help -- Procuring Project Scope
   Procurement Basics

   Plan Procurement Management

   Plan Procurement Management: Inputs

       Picking the right contract type

       Plan Procurements: Tools and Techniques

   Plan Procurements: Outputs

       The procurement management plan

       Source selection criteria

       Procurement statement of work

       Procurement documents

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book V: Chapter 3: Who Are All These People? Planning
 Stakeholder Management
   Plan Stakeholder Management

       Plan Stakeholder Management: Inputs

       Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques

       Plan Stakeholder Management: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VI: Managing Your Project
Book VI: Chapter 1: Managing the Work and Assuring Quality
   Knowledge and Skills for the Executing Processes
   Direct and Manage Project Work

       Direct and Manage Project Work: Inputs

       Direct and Manage Project Work: Tools and Techniques

       Direct and Manage Project Work: Outputs

   Perform Quality Assurance

       Perform Quality Assurance: Inputs

       Perform Quality Assurance: Tools and Techniques

       Perform Quality Assurance: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VI: Chapter 2: Managing the People Side of Your Project
   Acquire Project Team

       Acquire Project Team: Inputs

       Acquire Project Team: Tools, Techniques, and Outputs

   Develop Project Team

       Develop Project Team: Inputs, Tools, and Techniques

       Develop Project Team: Outputs

   Manage Project Team

       Manage Project Team: Inputs

       Manage Project Team: Tools and Techniques

       Manage Project Team: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VI: Chapter 3: Getting the Word Out to Stakeholders and
 Contractors
   Manage Communications
       Manage Communications: Tools and Techniques

       Manage Communications: Outputs

   Manage Stakeholder Engagement

       Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Inputs

       Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Tools and Techniques

       Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Outputs

   Conduct Procurements

       Conduct Procurements: Inputs

       Conduct Procurements: Tools and Techniques

       Conduct Procurements: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VII: Controlling Scope and Schedule

Book VII: Chapter 1: Monitoring, Controlling, and Managing
 Change
   Knowledge and Skills for the Monitoring and Controlling Processes

   Monitor and Control Project Work

       Monitoring versus controlling

       Monitor and Control Project Work: Inputs

       Monitor and Control Project Work: Tools and Techniques

       Monitor and Control Project Work: Outputs

       Taking responsibility for project performance

   Perform Integrated Change Control

       A Change Control process

       Configuration management

   Comparing Control Processes
   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VII: Chapter 2: Controlling Project Scope
   Validate Scope

       The flow of deliverables

       Validate Scope: Inputs

       Validate Scope: Tools, Techniques, and Outputs

   Control Scope

       Creep versus change

       Control Scope: Inputs

       Control Scope: Tools and Techniques

       Control Scope: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VII: Chapter 3: Controlling Your Schedule
   Control Schedule

   Control Schedule: Inputs

   Control Schedule: Tools and Techniques

       Performance reviews

       Resource optimization

       Modeling techniques

       Leads and lags

       Schedule compression

       Project management software and scheduling tool

   Control Schedule: Outputs

   Key Terms
   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Controlling Cost, Quality, and More

Book VIII: Chapter 1: Controlling Cost and Using Earned Value
   Control Costs

   Control Costs: Inputs

   Control Costs: Tools and Techniques

       Earned value management

       Planning with EVM

       Monitoring with EVM

       More cost control techniques

   Control Cost: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Chapter 2: Controlling Quality
   Quality Control Basics

   Control Quality: Inputs

       Validating change requests

       Example of validating change requests

   Control Quality: Tools and Techniques

       Flow charts

       Cause-and-effect diagrams

       Checksheets

       Histograms and Pareto charts

       Run charts and control charts

       Scatter diagrams
   Control Quality: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Chapter 3: Controlling Communications and Stakeholders
   Control Communications

       Control Communications: Inputs

       Control Communications: Tools and Techniques

       Control Communications: Outputs

   Control Stakeholder Engagement

       Control Stakeholder Engagement: Inputs

       Control Stakeholder Engagement: Tools and Techniques

       Control Stakeholder Engagement: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Chapter 4: Managing Your Risks and Procurements
   Control Risks: Inputs

   Control Risks: Tools and Techniques

       Risk reassessment

       Analysis

       Risk audit

   Control Risks: Outputs

   Control Procurements

       Control Procurements: Inputs

       Control Procurements: Tools and Techniques

       Control Procurements: Outputs

   Key Terms
   Chapter Summary


Book IX: Closing Your Project and the Code of Ethics
 and Professional Conduct

Book IX: Chapter 1: Closing Your Contracts and Your Project
   Knowledge and Skills for the Closing Processes

   Closing Your Procurements

       Terminating a contract

       Close Procurements: Tools and Techniques

       Close Procurements: Outputs

   Close Project or Phase

       Close Project or Phase: Inputs

       Close Project or Phase: Tools and Techniques

       Close Project or Phase: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IX: Chapter 2: The PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
 Conduct
   About the Code

   Responsibility

       Responsibility aspirational standards

       Responsibility mandatory standards

   Respect

       Respect aspirational standards

       Respect mandatory standards

   Fairness
       Fairness aspirational standards

       Fairness mandatory standards

   Honesty

       Honesty aspirational standards

       Honesty mandatory standards

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IX: Appendix A: What's on the Website
       Customer Care


Book IX: Appendix B: Practice Test

Book IX: Sample Test Answers

Book IX: Appendix C: Lab Work

Book IX: Appendix D: Exam Objective Cross Walk
       Initiating Knowledge and Skills

       Planning Knowledge and Skills

       Executing Knowledge and Skills

       Monitor and Control Knowledge and Skills

       Closing Knowledge and Skills


Book IX: Appendix E: Glossary

About the Authors

Cheat Sheet

Connect with Dummies
Introduction
 The PMP is the preeminent certification in project management. Getting your
 PMP certification will enhance your career opportunities in your current or
 future positions. In addition, studying for the exam really helps you
 understand project management principles. I know that I became a better
 project manager after months of studying this material!

About This Book
 PMP Certification All-in-One For Dummies, 2nd Edition is designed to be a
 hands-on, practical guide to help you pass the PMP exam on your first try.
 This book is written in a way that will take the information in the standard for
 project management, the PMBOK Guide, Fifth Edition, and help make it
 easily understandable so you can pass the exam.
 This book provides all the information you will need to pass the exam (you
 just have to apply the time and effort) and practical information to help you in
 the real world. Except for the first chapter in Book I (which covers the nuts
 and bolts of taking the exam), each chapter covers various elements to help
 you pass your PMP exam:
     As an exam prep guide, you will find all the information you need to pass
    the exam. And it's presented in an easy-to-understand way in terms of
    inputs, tools, techniques, and outputs. This is how it's presented in the
    PMBOK Guide as well as on the PMP exam. Pay particular attention to the
    For the Exam icons, which point out specific information you should keep
    in mind for the exam.
    As a reference to help you on your job, you can rely on my years of
    experience as an active project manager, a professional trainer, and an
    author to help you see how you can apply this information on a daily
    basis.
     Quick Assessment: Chapters start with a pretest to help you quickly
    identify what you already know or need to study in the chapter. These are
    simple fill-in-the-blank or true/false questions.
     Icons: Icons draw your attention to information that will help you on the
    exam or in the real world. For more information on the icons, check out
    the later section, Icons Used in This Book.
     Key terms: So much of the PMP exam depends on your understanding
    the terms in the PMBOK Guide and the specific definitions associated
    with them. Throughout the book, I use definitions straight from the
    PMBOK Guide Glossary, and each chapter lists all these terms at the end
    of the chapter. You should quiz yourself and make sure you understand
    every term listed in the "Key Terms" section.
    Chapter summary: At the end of chapters, I summarize the key points
    discussed. If you're unclear about something after reading these
    summaries, go back through the chapter for review.
    Prep Test: Each chapter concludes with practice questions. These are
    presented as multiple-choice questions, just like the PMP exam. And, yes,
    I give you the answers there to explain the correct answer and tell you
    where to find that information.
     The Online Prep Exam: The companion website contains a practice
    exam designed to mimic the real exam. This computerized test version
    will tell you how many you got right and how many you got wrong.
     Web addresses appear in monofont. If you're reading a digital version of
    this book on a device connected to the Internet, note that you can click the
    web address to visit that website, like this: www.dummies.com.


Foolish Assumptions
 I make a few assumptions about you as a reader and have written this book
 with these assumptions in mind:
    You're interested in attaining your PMP Certification. After all, the
    focus of this book is to help you do just that!
    You have a copy of the PMBOK Guide in its fifth edition, as of this
    writing. Much of the information on the PMP exam is based on the fifth
    edition of the PMBOK Guide. Although this book will help you
    understand and apply that information, you really should buy that book
    and study it!
     You will put the time in to pass the exam. This is not an easy exam. If
    your plan is to cram for two weeks and then sit for the exam, you will
    likely be disappointed in the result. Many people take classes, use books
    like this one, and study for four to six months prior to sitting for the exam.
    You should probably go over the PMBOK Guide at least once, read
    through this book two or more times, do the labs, use the practice
    questions, and find other ways to prepare (flash cards, study groups, online
    communities, and so on).


How This Book Is Organized
 Like all All-in-One For Dummies books, chapters are organized into
 minibooks. The chapters in each minibook are related by a specific theme or
 topic. For example, Book VI presents all the processes in the Executing
 Process Group.
 This section tells you what you can find in each minibook.
Book I: PMP Foundation
 In Chapter 1 of this first minibook, I discuss how the PMP exam is developed
 and scored as well as the application process and some test-taking tips. The
 next three chapters cover fundamental concepts you will need to master to do
 well on the exam.
Book II: Starting Off Right
 Book II covers how projects are selected and processes you need to initiate a
 project. I talk about the chartering process and identifying project
 stakeholders.

 Book III: Planning Integration, Scope, and Schedule
 The first chapter in Book III discusses the elements in a project management
 plan. In the second chapter, I discuss the importance of planning the project
 scope by collecting requirements, defining the scope, and decomposing scope
 by using a work breakdown structure. The next chapter goes through the six
 processes necessary to develop a viable project schedule.

 Book IV: Planning Cost, Quality, Human Resources,
 and Communication
 Book IV covers four important aspects of planning your project. For cost, I
 look at developing estimates and establishing the project budget. For quality,
 I discuss some basic statistics and how to establish the quality requirements
 and standards for the project. A discussion of human resources develops a
 human resource management plan with a responsibility assignment matrix
 and a staffing management plan. The communications management plan
 rounds out this minibook.

 Book V: Planning for Risks, Procurement, and
 Stakeholder Management
 I cover five risk assessment processes in the first chapter in Book V. In the
 next chapter, I discuss the various types of contracts you can use,
 procurement documents, and a procurement management plan. The last
 chapter describes how to develop a plan that will optimize stakeholder
 engagement.
Book VI: Managing Your Project
 Book VI covers what you do when you're managing the project. A lot of the
 information focuses on the interpersonal skills you apply when managing and
 developing your team and when you're managing stakeholder expectations. I
 also discuss distributing project information and conducting project
 procurements.
Book VII: Controlling Scope and Schedule
 Book VII discusses how you monitor the progress of your project and control
 change. You will also see information on how to validate and control scope.
 The minibook wraps up by discussing how to control the schedule.

 Book VIII: Controlling Cost, Quality, and More
 This minibook starts out by discussing how to control cost, including a
 special section that discusses earned value management. Controlling quality
 applies many technical techniques, which I explain and illustrate with
 examples that demonstrate the concepts. I spend some time discussing the
 similarities and differences in controlling communications and controlling
 stakeholder engagement in Chapter 3. Monitoring and controlling risks
 entails risk reassessment and looking at project and product risk. The section
 on contracts discusses how to monitor contractor performance and manage
 the claims, payments, and disputes aspects of contracting.

 Book IX: Closing Your Project and the Code of Ethics
 and Professional Conduct
 Book IX covers the two closing processes: Close Project or Phase and
 Closing Procurements. It also covers the information in the PMI Code of
 Ethics and Professional Conduct. The Code of Ethics and Professional
 Conduct is not tested per se, but the standards in the Code are integrated into
 the test questions.

 Appendixes
 The appendixes provide useful quizzes and tools to help you study for the
 exam.
 Appendix A. Turn to this appendix for more on how to access and take the
 online Prep Exam that accompanies this book.
 Appendix B. Find 100 test questions, topically weighted by subject area
 percentage just like the actual PMP exam. Take this practice test after you've
 been through the material in this book at least once. You should be able to get
 at least 70 of the 100 questions right on this mini-test before you sit for the
 exam.
 Appendix C. This appendix contains labs, where you find exercises for
 matching definitions with terms, conduct calculations, and answer fill-in-the-
 blank questions to ingrain the key information into your brain.
 Appendix D. This appendix has a matrix that maps which chapters in this
 book cover the exam objectives.
 Appendix E. The glossary lists all of the PMBOK Guide definitions you'll
 need to know for the exam.


Icons Used in This Book
 I use a number of icons in this book to draw your attention to pieces of useful
 information.


         This icon gives you a heads-up on information you should absolutely
      know for the PMP exam.


        This icon presents meanings of terms as they are defined in the
      PMBOK Guide Glossary.


          This icon gives you information on how to apply information in real
      life, or how to make your job easier.


         This icon points out something you should avoid or not do at all.


         This icon flags information that I already presented, or helps you
      remember things that will help you on your job.


Beyond the Book
I have written some extra content that you won't find in this book. Go online
to find the following:
   The Cheat Sheet for this book is at
       www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/pmpcertificationaio

   Here, you'll find handy collections of info you'll need to master, from
   scheduling relationships and estimating techniques to strategies for
   conflict resolution and quality control tools.
   Online articles covering additional topics can be found at
       www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio

   You'll find links to the articles on the parts pages at the beginning of each
   minibook, and, if relevant, at helpful points in the chapters, too. You'll
   find articles on
    * Initiating knowledge and skills
    * The role of the project management plan
    * Planning knowledge and skills
    * The importance of project stakeholder management
    * Quick tips for working with your team
    * Executing knowledge and skills
    * Monitoring and controlling knowledge and skills
    * Earned value basics: It's not about the numbers
    * Closing knowledge and skills
   Updates to this book, if any, are at
       www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio

   Updates will be posted to the Downloads tab on the book's product page.
   You'll find the online prep exam on the Downloads tab at
       www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio

   The exam has more than 200 questions that will prepare you for taking the
   official exam. With each question, you find out whether you answered the
   question correctly by clicking the Explanation button. If you answered
   incorrectly, you are told the correct answer with a brief explanation of why
   it's correct. Read Appendix A for more on how to access the exam on the
    Downloads tab.


Where to Go from Here
 You can start reading this book at any chapter you like. If I mention
 something that appeared earlier in the text, I will put a reference to point you
 to the book and chapter where you can find the information. If you want to
 focus on a specific process group, you can start at the appropriate minibook.
 For example, Initiating processes start in Book II, Planning processes in Book
 III, Executing processes in Book VI, Monitoring and Controlling processes in
 Book VII, and Closing in Book IX. If you're familiar with the PMP Exam,
 you can skip Book I, Chapter 1.
 There are a lot of websites and blogs that have practice test questions,
 discussion groups, and tips for passing the exam. There are also a number of
 apps you can get download onto your smartphone that offer a tip of the day or
 a bank of questions you can work through any time you have a few minutes.
 Try entering PMP Exam Questions or PMP Prep Blog into a search engine,
 and pages of options will come up. The point is, there are many ways that you
 can augment your preparation for the exam in addition to this book. So don't
 be shy -- try out some!
Book I
PMP Foundation




     Visit www.dummies.com for great Dummies content online.
Contents at a Glance
Book I: PMP Foundation

Book I: Chapter 1: The PMP Exam
   The PMP Exam Blueprint

   The Exam Domains

   Applying for the Exam

   Taking the Exam

   Preparing for the Exam


Book I: Chapter 2: Foundations of Project Management
   Grasping the Terminology

   The Project Management Office

   Understanding Environmental Constraints

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book I: Chapter 3: Project Life Cycles, Organizational Structures,
 and Organizational Process Assets
   The Project Life Cycle

   Organization Structures

   Leveraging Your Organization's Assets

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book I: Chapter 4: It's All about the Process
Managing Your Project Is a Process

Understanding Project Management Process Groups

Before the Project Begins

The Ten Knowledge Areas

Mapping the 47 Processes

Key Terms

Chapter Summary
Chapter 1: The PMP Exam
Chapter Objectives
      The PMP exam blueprint
      The exam domains
      The application process
      Taking the exam

 So you decided to take the Project Management Professional Certification
 Exam. That's a big step in moving forward in your profession.
 The Project Management Professional (PMP) certification is developed by
 the Project Management Institute (PMI), which has more than 400,000
 members worldwide. Its credentialing program is designed to ensure
 competence and professionalism in the field of project management. PMI
 offers several credentials, and the PMP certification is the most well known
 by far. In fact, the PMP is the most widely recognized project management
 certification in the world, and there are more than 500,000 certified PMPs
 around the globe.
 Adding this certification to your resume is important in the growing and
 competitive field of project management. A PMP certification gives
 employers confidence that existing employees have the level of knowledge to
 do their jobs well. It also gives employers a yardstick with which to measure
 new hires. And your project stakeholders can have confidence in your proven
 knowledge and experience when you have a PMP credential. Bottom line:
 With a PMP certification, you have more opportunities in your career path.
 Before spending the next 700 or so pages helping you prepare, I want to walk
 you through some information about the exam and the application process.



              How the PMP exam is developed
To develop a valid exam, you have to start by identifying the knowledge and skills that a
certified professional should be able to demonstrate. This is done by conducting a role
delineation study, which ensures that the content on the exam is valid and actually tests skills
and knowledge that a certified professional should have. Based on the information from the
role delineation study, an exam blueprint is developed.




The PMP Exam Blueprint
 The exam content is based on an exam blueprint that defines the domains that
 should be tested as well as the percentage of questions in each domain. The
 domains and percentages for the current exam are
  Initiating the project                      13%
  Planning the project                        24%
  Executing the project                       30%
  Monitoring and controlling the project 25%
  Closing the project                         8%
  Total                                       100%

 Knowledge and skills
 Each domain has tasks associated with it as well as the knowledge and skills
 needed to carry out the task successfully. For example, you might see
 something like this:
 Task
 Analyze stakeholders to identify expectations and gain support for the
 project.
 Knowledge and skills
     Stakeholder identification techniques
 The tasks for each domain have been translated into the exam objectives you
 see at the beginning of each chapter, starting in Book II. At the end of the
 final chapter for each domain, a sidebar summarizes the knowledge and skills
 needed for that domain and provides the location where you can find
 information related to the knowledge and skills. Here is the minibook and
 chapter where you find each domain's required knowledge and skills.
  Initiating                      Book II, Chapter 3
  Planning                        Book V, Chapter 3
  Executing                       Book VI, Chapter 3
  Monitoring and controlling Book VIII, Chapter 4
  Closing                         Book IX, Chapter 1

 Cross-cutting skills
 In addition to knowledge and skills specific to a domain, you need cross-
 cutting skills. A cross-cutting skill is one that goes across all domains (such as
 active listening, problem solving tools and skills, and leadership tools and
 techniques). At the start of the first chapter in a domain, I identify certain
 cross-cutting skills that you should pay particular attention to in domain.
 Always keep in mind that cross-cutting skills go across all domains. I just
 give specific examples in certain domains so you have a concrete example of
 the cross-cutting skill. Specifically, you can find the cross-cutting skill
 examples listed in the following minibooks and chapters.
  Initiating                      Book II, Chapter 1
  Planning                        Book III, Chapter 1
  Executing                       Book IV, Chapter 1
  Monitoring and controlling Book VII, Chapter 1
  Closing                         Book IX, Chapter 1

 Code of ethics and professional conduct
 The PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct ("the Code") identifies
 four ethics standards -- responsibility, respect, honesty, and fairness -- and
 divides them into aspirational standards (those that we, as project managers,
 should strive to achieve) and mandatory standards (those that we must
 follow). Both standards use statements that describe behavior, such as, "We
 negotiate in good faith" or "We listen to other's points of view, seeking to
 understand them."



                             Pre-test questions
Of the 200 test questions, only 175 are scored. The other 25 questions are "pre-test"
questions, which is a bit of a misnomer because they don't come before the other questions
but are sprinkled in with them. Those 25 unscored questions are a trial. PMI is looking at the
performance of those questions to see whether they can eventually be integrated into the
exam as scored questions. That's actually a good quality control process and good news for
you because you can be assured that only questions that have been through a rigorous
validation process are actually on the exam.



 The PMP exam does not test on the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
 explicitly although the standards are integrated into the test questions;
 therefore, you must be familiar with the Code to do well on the exam. To help
 you understand how the Code can show up on exam questions, I identify
 where specific content from the Code could be integrated into test questions
 throughout the book. Additionally, the final chapter (Book IX, Chapter 2)
 addresses the Code specifically. By spending time with the Code, you will be
 familiar with the ethical context of the questions you encounter on the exam.

 Exam scoring
 The PMP exam has 200 questions, and you are allowed four hours to
 complete all 200 questions. "Pre-test" questions are not scored. Therefore you
 will only be scored on 175 questions. In addition to receiving a pass/fail for
 the exam overall you will attain one of three proficiency levels for each
 domain:
     Proficient: Your performance is above the average for the domain.
     Moderately proficient: Your performance is average for the domain
     Below proficient: Your performance is below the average for the domain.

The Exam Domains
 The five domains on the exam have specific topics that they test. Here is a
 summary of the topics by domain.

 Initiating the project
 The initiating domain is worth 13% of the exam score. This domain
 comprises the initial project definition, identifying stakeholders, and getting
 project approval. You will see information about
     Evaluating project feasibility
     Defining high-level scope and related success criteria
   Analyzing stakeholders
   Proposing an implementation approach
   Completing a project charter
   Gaining project charter approval

Planning the project
The planning domain is worth 24% of the exam score. Topics in this domain
cover all aspects of planning the project from scope, time and cost to risks,
change, and holding the kick-off meeting.
   Gathering and documenting requirements
   Documenting assumptions and constraints
   Creating a work breakdown structure (WBS)
   Estimating and budgeting costs
   Developing a project schedule
   Defining project team roles and responsibilities and the organizational
   structure
   Developing a communication management plan
   Planning project procurements
   Defining how to engage and communicate with stakeholders over the life
   of the project
   Creating a change management plan
   Identifying risks and risk strategies
   Developing the project management plan
   Obtaining project management plan approval
   Conducting a project kick-off meeting

Executing the project
The executing domain is worth 30% of the exam score. These questions deal
with the day-to-day management of the project after the majority of the
planning is done.
   Managing internal and external resources and stakeholders to perform
   project activities
   Creating deliverables on time and in budget
   Following the quality management plan
   Following the change management plan
   Employing risk management techniques
   Providing leadership, motivation, and other skills to maximize team
   performance

Monitoring and controlling the project
Monitoring and controlling questions make up 25% of the test. The questions
are about managing performance and controlling change.
   Measuring project performance
   Applying change management
   Controlling quality for project deliverables
   Conducting risk management
   Managing issues
   Communicating status
   Managing procurements

Closing the project
This domain makes up 8% of the questions. The questions deal with closing a
phase, a procurement, or the overall project.
   Closing contracts
   Gaining final acceptance
   Transferring ownership and management
   Conducting a project review
   Documenting lessons learned
   Writing the final project report
   Archiving project records
    Measuring customer satisfaction

Applying for the Exam
 The PMP Credential Handbook has all the information you need to apply for,
 pay for, and schedule the exam. It includes information on cancelling and
 rescheduling, the audit and appeals processes, and the continuing certification
 requirements. In this section, I touch on a few highlights from the handbook,
 but I don't cover everything. For that, you need to download and review the
 handbook. Go to www.pmi.org and click the Certification tab. In the Quick
 Links box on the right, click Project Management Professional (PMP). Using
 the Quick Links box again, select PMP Handbook.
 To take the exam, you need to meet the following qualifications:
    A four-year college degree


            If you don't have a four-year degree, you can take the exam if you
    have 7,500 hours of project management experience over at least five
    years.
    At least three years of experience managing projects
    At least 4,500 hours of experience managing projects
    35 contact hours of project management education



         PMI audits a percent of the applications submitted for the exam. If
      your application is selected for audit, PMI may call your employer to
      validate your hours, or you may have to produce evidence to validate the
      information on the application. If you cannot validate the information,
      you cannot take the exam.

 The application process
 You can fill out your application online at the PMI website (www.pmi.org).
 Enter PMP Application in the Search field to get where you need to go.
        Filling out the entire application is time consuming. The easy stuff is
    the demographics and contact information. Even the education and
    training sections are relatively quick to fill out. But then you need to
    document your 4,500 hours of experience. That's right: You have to
    answer questions about projects you've worked on, and fill in the
    number of hours until you reach that 4,500-hour milestone. That can
    take a long time, so be prepared!
Then there is that not-so-small issue of payment. If you're a PMI member,
your exam fees are currently $405 US or 340 European. If you're not a PMI
member, you pay $555 US or 465 European.


       To become a PMI member, just go the PMI website (www.pmi.org).
    Click the Membership tab to get all the information you need to join.
    The price for a one-year membership is currently $129.
After you start your application process, you have 90 days to submit the
application. Then, PMI has five days to review your application for
completeness. To make sure your application isn't returned to you, follow
these steps:
1. Write your name exactly as it appears on your government-issued
  identification that you will present when you take the examination.
  Read more about the acceptable forms of ID in the upcoming section,
  "Exam day."
2. Ensure the application includes your valid e-mail address.
  This is PMI's primary way of communicating with you throughout the
  credential process.
3. Document your attained education and provide all requested
  information.
4. Document 35 contact hours of formal project management education
  in the experience verification section of the application.


         You must have completed the course(s) you're using for this
  eligibility option before you submit your application.
5. Affirm that you have done the following:
    * Read and understand the policies and procedures outlined in the
      credential handbook.
    * Read and accept the terms and responsibilities of the PMI Code of
      Ethics and Professional Conduct. This is included in the PMP
      Credential Handbook.
    * Read and accept the terms and responsibilities of the PMI Certificate
      Application/Renewal Agreement.
6. Affirm that you provided true and accurate information on the entire
  application, understanding that misrepresentations or incorrect
  information provided to PMI can result in disciplinary action(s),
  including suspension or revocation of your examination eligibility or
  credential.



        Make sure you fill out your application early enough to leave
     yourself time to go through the application and acceptance process and
     schedule your exam. I recommend giving yourself at least six weeks
     prior to when you want to take the exam.

Scheduling your exam
After your application is accepted and you submit payment for the exam, you
can schedule your exam. You have one year from the date your application is
approved to take your exam.
PMI will send you scheduling instructions and direct you to the Prometric
website (www.prometric.com) to schedule your exam date. Prometric is a
global testing service that administers the PMP exam for PMI. You will need
to go to a Prometric testing center to take the exam, but don't worry, there are
hundreds of exam centers.
Scheduling your exam is a simple process. On the Prometric website, select
the exam you want to take from the For Test Takers drop-down menu, select
the country and state, and follow the prompts from there. The scheduling
process should take less than five minutes.
         Do not misplace the unique PMI identification code you receive
      when PMI notifies you that your application was approved. This code
      will be required to register for the examination. In addition, you should
      print and save all examination scheduling verifications and
      correspondence received from Prometric for your records.
 Because PMI cannot guarantee seating at the testing centers, PMI
 recommends that you schedule your exam six weeks prior to when you want
 to take the test and at least three months before your eligibility expires.


         If you're scheduling your exam around the time a new exam is
      coming out, you should give yourself at least four months prior to the
      exam cut-over date. Many people try to get in before the new exam
      comes out!

Taking the Exam
 Taking the PMP exam can be stressful, to say the least. To help ease the stress
 a bit, here are five tips to keep in mind for the 24 hours before the exam.
    Don't cram. The night before the exam, you should know everything you
    need to know for the exam. Try to have a nice evening.
    Get plenty of sleep. "Have a nice evening" doesn't mean you should go
    out and stay up late. Your mind will be much clearer if you get a good rest.
    Leave plenty of time to arrive at the exam site. You cannot take the
    exam if you are late. Build in plenty of time for traffic snarls, getting lost,
    and so forth. Beforehand, perhaps take a practice test drive at the time of
    day you're scheduled to take the exam, just to see how long it takes.
    Don't drink too much caffeine. Or any kind of liquid for that matter.
    Use the restroom before you start the exam. After you start the exam,
    don't count on leaving the room until you finish.

 Exam day
 When you get to the exam site, you need to show a valid and current form of
government-issued identification with your photograph and signature. The
name on the ID must exactly match the name on your application. You also
have to show them your unique PMI identification number. The following are
acceptable forms of government-issued identification:
   Valid driver's license
   Valid military ID
   Valid passport
   Valid national ID card
The following are not acceptable forms of identification:
   Social Security cards
   Library cards
There are serious restrictions on what you can bring into the testing areas.
You may not bring anything into the testing area or to the desk where you
take the exam, including
   Purses
   Food and beverages
   Book bags
   Coats or sweaters
   Luggage
   Calculators
   Eyeglass cases
   Watches
   Pagers
   Cellular telephones
   Tape recorders
   Dictionaries
   Any other personal items
Also, you may not bring anyone into the testing area, including
   Children
   Visitors
Calculators are built into the computer-based training (CBT) exam. The
testing center administrator provides scrap paper and a pencil to all credential
candidates on the day of the exam.
You take the exam on a computer. When you go into the exam testing area,
you have the opportunity to take a tutorial and a survey. These are optional.
You have 15 minutes to do this.


        Use this time to do a memory dump on your scratch paper. Write
     down equations, tips, the process matrix, and any other memory joggers
     that will help you during the exam.
During the exam, you have the opportunity to flag questions to come back to
them. Make sure to first go through and answer all the questions you're sure
about and relatively sure about. For those questions that you're not sure
about, flag them to return to later.

Types of questions
The exam has several types of questions:
   Situational: The majority of questions are situational. In other words, you
   need the experience to know what they are talking about. These can be
   difficult. I include many of these in the test prep questions in this book,
   and they start something like this:
      Assume you are the PM on a project to upgrade the physical security on
      a university campus.
   Then you review a situation:
     The Dean of Students wants to make sure that all campus housing can
     only be accessed by the student, faculty, or staff ID cards. The Security
     Director states that the only way to provide 100% security is to use a
     biometric scanner. The Finance Director doesn't care what you do as
     long as you reduce the current operating costs by 15%.
   Finally, the question:
     What document should you use to record the expectations of each of
     these stakeholders?
   Only one possible correct answer: Some questions appear to have two
   correct answers; however, the exam allows only one correct answer per
   question. For those questions, ask yourself, "What is the first thing I
   would do? What is the best thing to do?" Remember that the PMBOK
   Guide is the source for many exam questions, so think of the PMBOK-ish
   response.
   Distracters: Distracters are a technique that test questions writers use to,
   well, distract you. In other words, they put in extra information that you
   don't need to answer the question.
   MSU (made stuff up): You might see some cool words slung together
   and think it makes sense. If you haven't heard of it before, it probably
   doesn't exist: for example, "charter initiation process." There are initiating
   processes, and one of the outputs of the initiating processes is a charter,
   but there is no charter initiation process.
    Calculations: There are a fair number of calculation questions. About 8
   to 10 questions will have earned value (EV) information and equations,
   and about 8 to 10 questions will have other types of calculations. If you
   know your equations, these are some of the easiest questions on the test.
    Identifications: Expect about 20 to 25 questions where you have to know
   a specific process name, input, tool, technique, or output.
Some tests are adaptive. That is, the more questions you get right, the harder
the questions become. If you miss questions, the easier the questions become.
However, the PMP is not adaptive. The questions are not adjusted based on
your answers.

Exam-taking tips
These tips should help you when the going gets tough:
   Keep moving. Don't spend a lot of time trying to figure out one question.
   You could lose the opportunity to answer many others.
   Skip to the end of a question. If you get a lengthy question, read the end
   of the question first. That usually tells you the question you need to
   answer. The rest of the information is just background.
     Go with your instincts. Your first choice is usually correct, so don't
    second-guess yourself! Change your answer only if you're certain that it
    should be changed.
     Think in broad terms. The exam is global and across all industries. If
    you apply too much of what you do on a day-to-day basis, you could miss
    some of the questions. Think about the questions from a global cross-
    industry perspective.

 Getting your results
 When you're done with the exam, you submit your test at the computer. This
 is a scary moment! To make it worse, the computer will ask you whether you
 are sure. (And, no, the computer isn't hinting that you failed.) Select Yes, and
 voila! You're informed whether you passed or failed. (I know you will pass!)
 The exam administrator will hand you a printout of your exam results,
 indicating your pass/fail status. The printout will also give you an analysis of
 your results indicating by area whether you are proficient, moderately
 proficient, or below proficient.
 About six to eight weeks after passing the exam, you will receive a
 congratulations letter, a certificate, and information on how to maintain your
 certification.
 In the unlikely event that you do not pass the exam, you may take the test up
 to three times during your one-year eligibility period. If you do not pass
 within three attempts, you need to wait for a year to reapply. There is more
 information on this in the PMP Credential Handbook.

Preparing for the Exam
 In addition to the PMP certification, PMI also puts out the Guide to the
 Project Management Body of Knowledge, or the PMBOK Guide. While
 information in the exam blueprint overlaps information in the PMBOK Guide,
 the exam blueprint identifies tasks, knowledge, and skills, and the PMBOK
 Guide identifies the artifacts, or the "what" of project management. Let me
 show you what I mean.
 Earlier in this chapter, I demonstrate how the exam blueprint might address
 information about stakeholders:
Task
Analyze stakeholders to identify expectations and gain support for the
project.
Knowledge and skills of
   Stakeholder identification techniques
The PMBOK Guide doesn't discuss knowledge and skills the same way that
the exam blueprint does. The PMBOK Guide identifies the outputs needed to
fulfill the task, such as a stakeholder register and a stakeholder management
strategy.
Although the PMBOK Guide isn't the only source of information for the PMP
exam, it is the primary source. The PMBOK Guide describes project
management practices that, generally, are considered good for most projects.
That means there is wide agreement that the outputs from the processes are
appropriate and that the tools and techniques used to develop the outputs are
the correct tools and techniques. It does not mean, though, that you should
use every input, tool, technique, or output on your project. The PMBOK
Guide is just a guide, not a methodology or a rulebook.
Additionally, the PMBOK Guide provides a common vocabulary for project
management practitioners. For example, when you want to "decompose" your
project into a set of deliverables, you use a "work breakdown structure"
(WBS). You don't use a "scope management plan" or a "requirements
traceability matrix." By having a common set of terms with an agreed-upon
meaning, you can communicate better with your project stakeholders. By
becoming familiar with the PMBOK Guide and using this book to help you
study, you'll be in good shape to pass the exam.
It's time to get started. The next chapter covers some of the foundational
principles you have to be familiar with to pass the exam.
Good luck!
Chapter 2: Foundations of Project
          Management
Chapter Objectives
    Define key project management terms to provide an understanding
    of foundational concepts
     Compare projects, programs, and portfolios
    Introduce the competing demands that project managers have to
    manage to achieve a successful project
     Describe the functions of Project Management Offices (PMOs)
    Introduce enterprise environmental factors and their affect on
    projects



 Before discussing the project management process, you need a foundation of
 key project management definitions and concepts. In this chapter, I discuss
 how projects relate to programs, portfolios, and the PMO. I also introduce the
 important concept of competing demands. Understanding how competing
 demands require you to balance time, cost, scope, quality, risk, and resources
 is important before looking at those topics individually in later minibooks.
 Competing demands can constrain your project, but they aren't the only
 things that you have to keep in mind when managing a project. You need to
 consider your internal and external environment. In this chapter, I also discuss
 enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) and their effect on your project.
                 Quick Assessment
1. A project is unique and ______.
2. Balancing scope, schedule, cost, quality, resources, and risk is
  managing the ______ ______.
3. Deciding how much rigor to apply to each process is ______.
4. (True/False). A portfolio is a group of related projects,
  subprograms, and program activities managed in a coordinated
  way to obtain benefits and control not available from managing
  them individually.
5. Market conditions and regulations are ______ ______ ______ that
  constrain how you can manage your project.
6. Successive iterations of planning where each iteration gets into
  more detail is ______ ______.
7. Managing one or more portfolios to meet a strategic objective is
  ______ ______.
8. (True/False). This following is an example of a technical advance:
  Your organization initiates a project to improve the efficiency in
  operations.
9. (True/False). In an administrative PMO, you will find a place that
  develops policies, procedures, templates, and forms to support
  project managers.
                          Answers
1. Temporary. Projects have a distinct beginning and end, as opposed
  to operations that are ongoing. Look over the Definition of a project
  section.
2. Competing constraints. Balancing scope, schedule, cost, quality,
  resources, and risk is managing competing constraints, which are
  also known as competing "demands." For more on this topic, see
  the Competing constraints section.
3. Tailoring. You will tailor the project management process and tools
  you use to fit the needs of your project. Check out the What makes
  a successful project manager section.
4. False. A program, not a portfolio, is a group of related projects,
  subprograms, and related program activities managed in a
  coordinated way to obtain benefits and control not available from
  managing them individually. See the Projects, programs, and
  portfolios section for more information.
5. Enterprise environmental factors. Market conditions and
  regulations are enterprise environmental factors that constrain how
  you can manage your project. Look over the Understanding
  Environmental Constraints section.
6. Progressive elaboration. Progressive elaboration is a technique
  used to provide more detail when more information is known. You
  can find more information on progressive elaboration in the What
  makes a successful project manager section.
7. Portfolio management. A portfolio of projects is grouped so that
  organizations can achieve strategic objectives. The projects can be
  independent or interconnected. Review the Projects, programs, and
  portfolios section for more information.
8. False. Improving operations is a business need. Automating them
  would be a technological advance. You can find out more in the
  Projects and organizational strategy section.
 9. True. The administrative PMO creates processes and documents
   to provide a consistent way of applying project management in the
   organization. Find more in the The Project Management Office
   section.


Grasping the Terminology
 The PMBOK Guide and the PMP exam use terms very specifically.
 Therefore, you should be familiar with the definitions I call out throughout
 this book.

 Definition of a project
 Starting with the term "project," I identify important terms with the
 Definition icon. You should understand the specific way these terms are
 defined because they apply to the PMP exam. The majority of the definitions
 come from the Glossary in the PMBOK Guide.
 For the exam, you need to distinguish between projects and operations:
    Project: A project is temporary and has a beginning and an end.
    Additionally, a project creates something unique.
    Operations: Operations are ongoing and produce identical or similar
    outputs.



         Project. A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique
      product, service, or result.
 Frequently, a project is used to launch something that's eventually taken over
 by operations. A project that launches a new product or a new product line is
 temporary and unique. After the product goes into production, though, it
 belongs to operations.
 Another aspect about a project is that it creates a unique product, service, or
 result. Here are some examples of each:
    Product: An artifact or a component of an artifact
    * A new computer component
     * A new office park
    * A new factory
   Service: A function or a series of steps and actions that supports the
   business or a stakeholder
    * Process improvement
    * Supply chain management
    * Online support capabilities
   Result: An outcome, information, or knowledge
   * Market research
    * Clinical trials
    * Annual studies
The PMBOK Guide doesn't define service, but it does define product, result,
and deliverable.


         Product. An artifact that is produced, is quantifiable, and can be
     either an end item unto itself or a component item. Additional words for
     products are material and goods.
Result. An output from performing project management processes and
activities. Results include outcomes (integrated systems, revised process,
restructured organization, tests, trained personnel, and so on) and documents
(policies, plans, studies, procedures, specifications, reports, and so on).
Deliverable. Any unique and verifiable product, result, or capability to
perform a service that is required to be produced to complete a process,
phase, or project.

Projects, programs, and portfolios
I want to talk about some close relatives of projects: programs and portfolios.
A program is a group of projects. It might have an aspect of ongoing
operations as part of the program.


        Program. A group of related projects, subprograms, and program
     activities managed in a coordinated way to obtain benefits and control
     not available from managing them individually.
Program Management. The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and
techniques to a program to meet the program requirements and obtain
benefits and control not available by managing projects individually.
Programs aren't just giant projects. Rather, they are a collection of projects
that supports a common goal. Here are some examples:
   Building a ship or an aircraft
   Producing a large event, such as the Olympics
   Developing a new product line with multiple products and distribution
   channels
Program management includes managing the integration of multiple projects,
the integration of projects with ongoing operations, governance throughout
the program, and realizing the benefits the program was initiated to deliver.
Portfolios are more strategic than projects. They are a group of projects or
programs that are grouped together to meet strategic business objectives.


        Portfolio. Projects, programs, subportfolios, and operations managed
     as a group to achieve strategic objectives.
Portfolio Management. The centralized management of one or more
portfolios to achieve strategic objectives.
An organization may have a portfolio of development projects and a portfolio
of maintenance projects. Another way to group portfolios is by product line
or geography.

Project management
Some additional definitions you need to be aware of are project management
and, of course, project manager.


        Project Management. The application of knowledge, skills, tools,
     and techniques to project activities to meet the project requirements.
Project Manager (PM). The person assigned by the performing organization
to lead the team that is responsible for achieving the project objectives.
Shortly, I talk about some fundamentals of what makes a successful project
manager.
The three main aspects of project management are
   Identifying requirements
   Managing stakeholder expectations
   Managing the competing constraints (or demands)
I cover requirements and stakeholders extensively in later chapters. For now,
I want to discuss the concept of competing constraints.
Competing constraints
For years, project management was taught around the concept of balancing
scope, schedule, and cost. Then project managers started asking, "Well, scope
is fine, but what about quality? What about risk?" While you are at it, you
might as well ask about resources and stakeholder satisfaction, too.
In essence, you're balancing competing constraints or demands. In reality,
your project will have its own unique constraints. Consider safety as a
constraint upon a construction site, or regulatory constraints for a new drug.
Therefore, part of your job as a project manager is to first identify the
competing constraints and then manage your project to balance them
appropriately. The PMBOK Guide explicitly lists the following six
constraints, as shown in Figure 2-1:
   Scope
   Quality
   Schedule
   Budget
   Resources
   Risk
Figure 2-1: Competing constraints.


  When any constraint changes, it affects one or more additional constraints.
  For example, a team losing a key resource will probably affect quality,
  schedule, and risk. If budget is reduced, that should affect scope and/or
  quality; if it doesn't, then the risk increases. A shortened schedule usually
  affects scope, quality, budget, and/or risk.
  What makes a successful project manager
  It isn't enough to know what's in the PMBOK Guide, or pass the PMP exam,
  to be a successful project manager. You also need subject matter knowledge,
  the appropriate personality, and good performance. Beyond that, you need to
  master progressive elaboration and the fine art of tailoring.
     Knowledge: Think about it: Without the requisite subject matter
     knowledge, how would you know whether an estimate a team member
     gives you is reasonable or out in left field? You have to know something
     about the type of project you're managing. How else can you expect
     people to respect you and your expertise?
     Personality: Another key aspect in project success comprises your
     personal traits. Your attitude, personality, and leadership ability are key
     aspects in your success. It might not seem fair that personality plays a role,
     but really, this job is not for everyone. Someone who is withdrawn or
     hypercritical won't do well in this job.
     Performance: You can know everything about project management and
   your industry and technical area, and you can be well liked and respected,
   but if you can't deliver or perform, you won't be successful.



        Don't be surprised if you run into a question that indicates that the
     project manager has to be knowledgeable about the technical and
     professional aspects of the project.
Progressive elaboration and tailoring
One of the key techniques that project managers use to ensure success is
progressive elaboration. There is no way you can know everything about a
project when it's first handed over to you. The planning process helps you
learn more about the scope and requirements of the project. This in turn helps
you develop more detailed and refined cost and time estimates as well as
build more accurate schedules and budgets.


        Progressive Elaboration. The iterative process of increasing the
     level of detail in a project management plan as greater amounts of
     information and more accurate estimates become available.
All areas of your project are progressively elaborated from assumptions to
risks and requirements to resources.
Another critical aspect in being successful is what I call "tailoring." You have
to figure out how formally you will apply the various project management
processes. You might do a very robust and thorough job of gathering and
documenting requirements. However, you might not spend as much time in
the procurement processes if you have a long-standing strategic relationship
with a vendor who is familiar with your organization. Your ability to tailor the
degree of rigor you bring to the project is one way you can make your job
easier.


        Although there are no exam objectives that tie directly to the
     information in this chapter, you still need to know all the concepts. The
     concepts and definitions in this chapter are integrated into exam
     questions. For example, a question may present a scenario that requires a
     risk response. Information in the question may indicate the priorities
     between the competing demands that you need to understand to answer
     the question correctly. Therefore, even though you aren't expected to
     name the competing demands, you need to understand the concept to be
     successful on the exam. The same applies to the definitions of project,
     programs, portfolios, progressive elaboration, and so forth.

Projects and organizational strategy
I mention earlier that projects are initiated to meet strategic objectives. The
PMBOK Guide lists these strategic reasons for initiating a project:
   Market demand: This includes new products and updating existing
   products.
   Business need: This can include projects to make operations more
   efficient and thereby increase net profits.
    Social need: Projects that improve the quality of life, such as improving
   literacy, drinking water, or reducing disease.
   Environmental consideration: This includes projects such as
   environmental remediation, improving air or water quality, or projects that
   reduce waste and environmental impact.
   Customer request: A customer request can occur via a bid process, or an
   existing customer can approach you and ask you to perform work.
    Technological advance: Anything that helps automate operations or helps
   your company do things better, faster, or less expensively.
    Legal requirements: When a new law or regulation is passed, you need
   to understand the implications and make sure your organization can
   comply.
The word "objective" is frequently misunderstood.


         Objective. Something toward which work is to be directed, a
     strategic position to be attained, or a purpose to be achieved; a result to
     be obtained, a product to be produced, or a service to be performed.
Did you notice that the definition has three of the key words from the
 definition of project? It talks about a product, service, or result. We undertake
 projects to achieve objectives. Objectives are enumerated in the project
 charter, which I talk about in Book II. When you initiate a project, you
 usually have scope and quality objectives: in other words, what you want to
 accomplish. And, generally, there are some expectations for schedule and
 budget objectives as well. These objectives guide the project manager in
 making decisions and trade-offs throughout the project.


The Project Management Office
 A Project Management Office (PMO) is common these days. PMOs can have
 all different functions, depending upon the needs of the organization.


         Project Management Office (PMO). An organizational structure
      that standardizes the project-related governance processes and facilitates
      the sharing of resources, methodologies, tools, and techniques.
 The responsibilities of a PMO can range from providing project management
 support functions to actually being responsible for the direct management of a
 project.
 Here are the three basic types of PMOs:
    Supportive: A supportive PMO develops policies, procedures, templates,
    forms, and reports for project management in the organization. The
    supportive PMO also serves as a project repository for project
    management resources. It has a low degree of control.
    Controlling: A controlling PMO also provides develops policies,
    procedures, templates, forms, and reports for project management in the
    organization; however, they require compliance with the project
    management methodology, the usage of the forms, policies, templates, and
    so forth. This type of PMO has a moderate level of control.
    Directive: Some large projects have a PMO set up to manage a specific
    project. The degree of control is high.
 Of course, PMOs can provide multiple functions, or a little bit of each, but
 those in the preceding list are the general descriptions of the most common
 services that PMOs provide. You may also see a PMO that is a home for
 project managers. In this type of PMO, all project managers (PMs) report to
 the director or head of the PMO. The head of the PMO assigns PMs to
 projects, monitors progress, and serves as the functional manager for project
 management. This PMO also serves as a communication hub and allocates
 resources across multiple projects.


Understanding Environmental
Constraints
 All projects are constrained by the environment in which they are performed.
 If you think about it, your company culture has a lot to do with how you
 manage your project. If you've managed projects in only one company, you
 might not see this as clearly as if you had worked with several different
 companies. Think about where you work. Do you have lots of policies,
 procedures, forms, rules, and so forth that guide how you manage projects?
 Or do you work somewhere that has very little formal structure, and you use
 your personal influence and ingenuity to get things done? Do PMs have a lot
 of position power or very little?
 A company's culture includes
    Shared vision, values, and beliefs
    Policies and procedures
    Authority relationships, leadership, and hierarchy
    Work ethic, code of conduct, and work hours
    Risk tolerance
    Reward and motivation systems

 Enterprise environmental factors

         Enterprise Environmental Factors. Conditions, not under the
      immediate control of the team, that influence, constrain, or direct the
      project, program, or portfolio.
The company culture, as described earlier, is an example of an enterprise
environmental factor (EEF). EEFs can be the result of any or all the
enterprises involved in the project; and in addition to company culture,
include
   Standards, codes, and regulations
   The organizations infrastructure, such as IT systems, supply chains, and
   organizational structure
    Marketplace conditions, including the availability of material and
   technical skills
   Stakeholder risk tolerances and the ability to work with uncertainty
   Extreme geography and weather
Generally, EEFs are considered to be a constraint. They might be almost
transparent, but you need to keep them in mind while you plan and execute
your project. You will see EEFs as an input to many of the project
management processes throughout this book.


        When you see EEFs as an input to a process, take some time to think
     about the various things in both the internal and external environment
     that could influence how you perform the process. This will get your
     brain used to thinking about how EEFs affect projects rather than being a
     bunch of words strung together.


        The following responsibility standard from the Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct relates to EEFs:
   We inform ourselves and uphold the policies, rules, regulations and laws
   that govern our work, professional and volunteer activities.

Project governance
The organization's governance structure can also be considered a constraining
factor. Project governance follows the organization's governance structure,
but it is focused on the project life cycle. Governance is a framework for
conducting the project and includes
    Guidelines for aligning organizational and project governance
    Project life cycle and phase reviews
    Decision-making processes
    Issue resolution procedures
    Change management procedures
    Project organizational chart and the relationship among the team, the
    organization, and external stakeholders


Key Terms
 These terms are foundational to understanding the rest of the information in
 this book. Make sure you understand them well enough to be able to explain
 them to a novice project manager.
    Project
    Product
    Result
    Deliverable
    Project manager
    Project management
    Progressive elaboration
    Program
    Program management
    Portfolio
    Portfolio management
    Objective
    Project Management Office (PMO)
    Enterprise environmental factor (EEF)
Chapter Summary
 The main points in this chapter are defining projects, project management,
 competing demands, PMOs, and enterprise environmental factors (EEFs).
 You will see these concepts repeated throughout this study guide, so make
 sure you are comfortable with them.
    A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product,
    service, or result. Projects produce deliverables to project requirements.
     Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and
    techniques to project activities to meet the project requirements.
     To manage projects successfully, you need to identify and balance the
    competing constraints. You will also need to practice progressive
    elaboration and tailor the various project management processes to meet
    the needs of your specific project.
    Programs manage a group of projects, subprograms, and program
    activities in a coordinated way to obtain benefits and control not available
    from managing them individually.
    Portfolios are projects, programs, subportfolios, and operations managed
    as a group to achieve strategic objectives.
    Projects are initiated to meet the organization's strategic objectives. An
    objective is a position to be attained or a purpose to be achieved.
    A Project Management Office (PMO) can have various structures and
    provide various roles to support project management in the organization.
    An organization's culture, infrastructure, organizational structure, IT
    systems can constrain (or enhance) the way a project is managed. These
    are enterprise environmental factors (EEFs). Other EEFs include
    regulations, market conditions, and available skill sets.
                          Prep Test
1. Performing routine maintenance for a company campus is an
  example of
 A    Project management
 B    Operational management
 C    Functional management
 D    Program management

2. Which of the following is not one of the PMI-identified
  competing constraints?
 A    Market conditions
 B    Quality
 C    Schedule
 D    Resources

3. Your project sponsor wants to know why the schedule you gave
  her has milestones listed with only the first 90 days worth of
  work defined in detail. You explain to her that you can provide a
  more detailed schedule as the project progresses, when you can
  have a greater understanding of what is involved. You tell her
  that this concept -- common in project management -- is
 A    Planning
 B    Life cycle planning
 C    Progressive elaboration
 D    Progressive estimating

4. You are tasked with completely updating your organization's
  communication infrastructure. You decide to break this into
  several components: one each for telephones, IT, and radio
  communication. Each will have its own manager. This is an
  example of
 A    A project
 B    A portfolio
 C    A program
 D    Operations

5. The centralized management of one or more portfolios --
  including identifying, prioritizing, authorizing, managing, and
  controlling projects, programs, and other related work to
  achieve strategic business objectives -- is
 A    Program management
 B    Portfolio management
 C    Strategic management
 D    Forecasting

6. Your company won a contract to update the security system for
  the local courthouse. This project is an example of
 A    A market demand
 B    A business need
 C    A customer request
 D    A legal requirement

7. Your company works with a number of chemical compounds.
  Your project is to update the handling and disposal of all
  chemicals to ensure that everyone is handling them correctly.
  You are doing this because of
 A    A market demand
 B    A business need
 C    A customer request
 D    A legal requirement

8. A PMO that develops policies and procedures and ensures
  compliance with the project management processes is what
 kind of PMO?
 A   Administrative
 B   Supportive
 C   Project specific
 D   Bureaucratic

9. You work for a commercial roofing contractor. You are asked to
  do a job in Barrow, Alaska. Which EEF do you need to pay
  closest attention to?
 A   Company culture
 B   Infrastructure
 C   Weather
 D   Availability of resources

10. The custom homebuilder you work for has a contract to build a
  10,000-square foot home. The customer wants marble from
  Florence, Italy. To work with the tile, you need extremely skilled
  craftsmen with special tools. This EEF is an example of
 A   Company culture
 B   Infrastructure
 C   Weather
 D   Availability of resources
                          Answers
1. B. Operational management. Routine maintenance is an example
  of operations. Review Definition of a project.
2. A. Market conditions. Market conditions might be an enterprise
  environmental factor, but they're not one of the competing
  constraints. Look over Competing constraints.
3. C. Progressive elaboration. Progressive elaboration is continuing to
  provide more detail as more is known about the project. Check out
  Progressive elaboration and tailoring.
4. C. A program. This is a program. Each component is a project.
  Look at Projects, programs, and portfolios.
5. B. Portfolio management. This is the definition of portfolio
  management. See Projects, programs, and portfolios.
6. C. A customer request. The fact that you won this from a bid on a
  contract defines it as a customer request. Go to Projects and
  organizational strategy.
7. D. A legal requirement. Ensuring the correct handling and disposal
  of chemicals is a regulatory requirement. Look over Projects and
  organizational strategy.
8. A. Administrative. Setting policies and procedures and ensuring
  compliance is the role of an administrative PMO. Check out The
  Project Management Office.
9. C. Weather. In Alaska, weather is always an EEF! Review
  Understanding Environmental Constraints.
10. D. Availability of resources. The material and the labor to work
  with it are constraints associated with the availability of resources.
  Go back to Understanding Environmental Constraints.
Chapter 3: Project Life Cycles,
Organizational Structures, and
Organizational Process Assets
Chapter Objectives
    Project life cycles provide a framework to manage projects by
    breaking them into phases. Each phase has a specific intent and
    deliverable(s).
    The organizational structure affects how you manage your projects.
    Organizations can be set up functionally, in a matrix, or project-
    oriented (also known as "projectized").
    Organizational process assets include policies, templates, information
    from previous projects, and similar tools to support project managers
    in managing projects.



 In the preceding chapter, I look at some foundational concepts and definitions
 used in project management. I want to discuss a few more key concepts
 before getting into the project management processes.
 To begin, I want to discuss a project life cycle and look at the various types of
 life cycles. Next, I discuss organizational structures and how they affect how
 you manage your project. The organizational structure is one of those
 enterprise environmental factors (EEFs), as discussed in the preceding
 chapter. In this chapter, I look at how the range of structures from functional
 to projectized influences how you can manage your project.
 I finish this chapter by looking at organizational process assets that can aid
 you in managing your project. Sometimes those pesky policies and
 procedures can seem like a pain in the neck to follow, but think about how
 chaotic it would be if everyone managed projects based on their own system
 and if everyone used different processes. Established processes, templates,
 and historical information are organizational process assets that can help you
 manage your project.
                  Quick Assessment
1. The series of phases that a project passes through from its
  initiation to its closure is a(n) ______ ______ ______.
2. (True/False). You might have several instances of a project life
  cycle inside the product life cycle.
3. A collection of logically related project activities that culminates in
  the completion of one or more deliverables is a ______ ______.
4. In the beginning of the project, the ability of stakeholders to
  influence the project is ______, and the cost of changes is the
  _______.
5. The organizational structure where the PM has the most power is
  a(n) ______ structure.
6. Elements that influence the project's success, such as policies and
  processes, are called ______ ______ ______.
                              Answers
 1. Project life cycle. The series of phases that a project passes
   through from its initiation to its closure. Read more about this in the
   The Project Life Cycle section.
 2. True. You might have several instances of a project life cycle inside
   the product life cycle. Often, the initial development of a product is a
   project. There might be projects along the way to improve product.
   Sometimes retiring a product is a project as well. This is discussed
   in the Product versus project life cycle section.
 3. Project phase. Project life cycles are made up of project phases,
   each of which has a specific set of activities or results associated
   with it. For more information, see the Project phases section.
 4. Highest, lowest. The ability of stakeholders to influence the project
   is highest in the beginning of the project, and the cost of changes is
   the lowest. Look over information in the Project phases section.
 5. Projectized. The organizational structure where the PM has the
   most power is a projectized structure. See the Projectized
   organization section.
 6. Organizational process assets. Elements that influence the
   project's success, such as policies and processes, are called
   "organizational process assets." You can read more about this in
   the Leveraging Your Organization's Assets section.

The Project Life Cycle
 All projects have certain things in common: They begin, there is some
 amount of organizing and planning, plans are turned into actions, and then
 they close. That is an example of a very simple project life cycle. A project
 life cycle is a framework for managing a project. The life cycle depends on
 the nature of the work. You wouldn't manage a technology project the same
 way you would manage a process improvement project. However, managing
 similar projects in a similar way is useful. And using a life cycle can provide
the framework to help you do that.


        Project Life Cycle. A series of phases that a project passes through
     from its initiation to its closure.
The three types of life cycles are predictive, iterative and incremental, and
adaptive. Each type of life cycle uses phases to better manage the work.

Project phases
You can make a project life cycle more specific to your type of projects by
thinking about the specific type of work and the particular deliverables you
have during the project. In other words, what are the various phases your
project goes through?


        Project Phase. A collection of logically related project activities that
     culminates in the completion of one or more deliverables.
Project phases are mainly completed sequentially, but they can overlap in
some project situations. A project phase is a component of a project life cycle.
A project phase is not a project management process group.
For example, an information technology project might have the following
phases:
   Concept definition
   Requirements gathering
   Planning
   Development
   Test
   Deploy
Those phases are appropriate for IT projects. However, for a process
improvement project, you would have different phases in the project life
cycle -- perhaps something like the following:
   Establish goals and objectives
      As-is process mapping
      Planning
      To-be process development
      Process deployment
  Product development, construction, pharmaceutical development, and other
  industries have their own life cycles. Many industries have similar life cycles,
  but the needs of the organization and the project should ultimately determine
  the number of phases and the deliverables associated with each phase.


            As I discuss earlier in this minibook, part of your governance role as
        the project manager is determining how to tailor an existing life cycle to
        fit your project -- or, if your organization doesn't have a set life cycle,
        figuring out the appropriate phases and their relationships.

  Predictive life cycles
  A predictive life cycle is used for projects where there is a clear
  understanding of the project scope. The scope, schedule, resources, and cost
  are determined as soon as possible in the project, and plans are developed to
  meet the project objectives. Figure 3-1 shows a predictive life cycle with a
  sequential relationship between phases. A sequential relationship means that
  one phase ends before the next phase begins. This is known as a "waterfall"
  life cycle in some industries.



Figure 3-1: A sequential project life cycle.


  An alternative to a sequential relationship is an overlapping relationship
  where you overlap phases, such as design and construction. For example, you
  might be able to start some of the rough construction before all the detailed
  design is complete. In Figure 3-2, the project life cycle shows phases of plan,
  design, and build that are overlapping. Sometimes this is called fast tracking.
Figure 3-2: Overlapping project life cycle.




           You may be familiar with the term "fast tracking" as it is used when
        referring to schedule compression. Overlapping project phases
        compresses the overall project duration. I talk more about fast tracking
        in Book III, Chapter 2.
  Another way of showing an overlapping project life cycle (see Figure 3-3) is
  to have multiple deliverables developed independently and then transition
  them at the same time. Sometimes an additional phase -- integration -- is in
  this type of life cycle.




Figure 3-3: Alternative overlapping project life cycle.


  Iterative and incremental life cycles
  In contrast to predictive life cycles, some projects have an iterative life cycle.
  For example, design-build-feedback would go through several iterations
  before finalizing the end product. In an iterative life cycle, each iteration
  refines and improves the deliverable. An incremental life cycle adds
  functionality to the product in each phase. Figure 3-4 shows an iterative or
  incremental life cycle.




Figure 3-4: Iterative project life cycle.


  In many iterative life cycles, high-level visioning and planning is conducted
  at the beginning of the project. Detailed planning at the phase level is
  completed one iteration or increment at a time.
  Iterative and incremental life cycles are useful when scope is not well defined
  or is subject to change. This type of life cycle can also be used when a
  deliverable with partial functionality is a viable option. Future iterations are
  used to add functionality. Many times, the iterations or increments are
  designed to incorporate stakeholder feedback in order to improve the product
  or service.

  Adaptive life cycles
  Adaptive life cycles are iterative and incremental, but the phases are rapid
  compared with a non-adaptive life cycle. Adaptive life cycles are also known
  as agile methods. At the end of each iteration (sometimes known as a sprint),
  the customer reviews a functional deliverable. At the review, the customer
  provides feedback, and the team updates the project backlog of features and
  functions to prioritize the next sprint based on customer feedback.
  One of the benefits of the adaptive life cycle is that making changes earlier in
  the life cycle is much easier. Project stakeholders have much more influence
  on the direction of the project and approach to the project in the early phases
  of the life cycle. An adaptive life cycle that gains stakeholder feedback early
  and often can reduce the number of changes that come late in the project.
  Figure 3-5 shows how changes to the project are much more costly to
  implement later in the project.




Figure 3-5: Stakeholder influence in the project life cycle.
Phase reviews
It is a common practice at the end of a phase to have a phase gate review,
during which you should compare your planned accomplishments against the
actual deliverables. This is also a good time to refine your plans for the next
phase and conduct a "lessons learned" session that will ultimately feed into
the overall lessons learned document at the end of the project. You can find
more information about lessons learned in Book IX, Chapter 1.


         Some organizations use the phase "gate review" to determine whether
     a project should continue. If the results are not as intended, the need for
     the project has changed, or the risk is too great, management may decide
     to cancel the project. Therefore, some organizations call phase gate
     reviews "kill points." In reality, it's better for a project to be killed early
     rather than continue expending resources on something not viable or no
     longer needed.

Product versus project life cycle
Sometimes confusion occurs about the difference between a product life cycle
and a project life cycle. A product life cycle is the life of a product from
conception through retirement. It is common for the development of a new
product to be considered a project. However, at some point, the development
project ends, and the product continues.


         Product Life Cycle. The series of phases that represent the evolution
     of a product, from concept through delivery, growth, and maturity to
     retirement.
Generally, a project life cycle is contained within one or more product life
cycles. Throughout the product life, the organization may use projects to
update and modify the product. Therefore, you can say that product life
cycles can include multiple project life cycles.


       The PMP exam deals with project life cycles, not product life cycles.
     You might see one or two questions that have to do with the relationship
      between the two, so make sure you to read the question carefully so you
      understand which life cycle is being discussed.


Organization Structures
 I describe enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) earlier in Chapter 2 of this
 minibook; in particular, I describe the company culture. I want to expand on
 that a bit from the perspective of a company's hierarchy and organizational
 structure. The three basic types of organizational structure are functional,
 matrix, and projectized. The three types of matrix organizations I will talk
 about as part of this discussion are weak, balanced, and strong.

 Functional organization
 A functional organization is the traditional hierarchical organization. It is
 organized by function, with a strong chain of command. A functional
 manager has almost total control over resources. In this situation, the project
 manager is usually part-time, has very little authority, and does not control the
 budget. Team members do project work when they can fit it into their daily
 activities.


         Functional Organization. A hierarchical organization where each
      employee has one clear superior, and staff are grouped by areas of
      specialization and managed by a person with expertise in that area.

 Matrix organization
 A matrix organization is a project-friendly structure (more so than the
 functional organization). As I mention earlier, the three types of matrix
 organizations I talk about here are weak, balanced, and strong.


         Matrix Organization. Any organizational structure in which the
      project manager shares responsibility with the functional managers for
      assigning priorities and for directing the work of persons assigned to the
      project.
    Weak: A weak matrix closely resembles a functional organization, but
   there is a little more understanding that projects require cross-functional
   communication and that project management is a discipline that can help a
   project's success.
   In a weak matrix, you might hear the project manager called a project
   expediter or a project coordinator.
    * A project expediter is similar to an administrative assistant and
      coordinates communications but has no decision-making or
      enforcement authority.
    * A project coordinator is similar to an expediter but has a bit more
      authority. The increased authority can be because of reporting to a
      higher-level manager than the expediter.
   Balanced: In a balanced matrix, you will see a full-time project manager
   position. This person has more authority to make decisions, can have some
   budgetary accountability, and might even have administrative support.
   Team members have more time to dedicate to projects, and there is usually
   a beginning or even full-fledged project management methodology.
   Strong: A strong matrix organization has dedicated project managers with
   a high level of authority, full-time administrative support, and team
   members who are fully dedicated to the project. They usually control the
   budget.

Projectized organization
A projectized organization is the opposite of a functional organization. In this
type of organization, work is organized around projects. The functions are
primarily in support of project work. The project manager has full authority
for the work and the budget. Project staff report directly to the project
manager as opposed to a functional manager.


        Projectized Organization. Any organizational structure in which the
     project manager has full authority to assign priorities, apply resources,
     and direct the work of persons assigned to the project.

Comparing organization types
There are pros and cons to each type of organization. Some large
organizations take a mixed approach. Perhaps some sections of the enterprise
are projectized, some are matrix, and some are functional. Such a blend is a
composite organization. Table 3-1 outlines some of the benefits and pitfalls
common to different organizational structures.




Figure 3-6 summarizes the PM's authority level and the time commitment
from team members relative to the type of organization.
Figure 3-6: Organizational structure relationship to project management.




           A tight organization is one in which all the team members work in the
        same location.


           Although you may not see questions on the exam that ask about a
        project life cycle or organizational structure specifically, this information
        might be integrated into a question, and you will have to understand it to
        answer the question correctly. For example, you might see a question
        like
      You are working in a weak matrix organization with your team members
      located in different locations. You are developing a communications
      management plan and want to make sure you identify all the stakeholders
      that need information about the project status. What type of information
      should you send to your team members' managers?

  By understanding the nature of a weak matrix (more power to the functional
  manager), you know that the functional managers will need to know how
  long their employees will be working on project activities. If you were in a
  strong matrix, it is more likely that team members would be assigned full-
  time, or would report to you directly.
Leveraging Your Organization's Assets
 As an organization moves along the continuum from functional to
 projectized, more information and more assets are available that project
 managers can use to help them perform their duties. A purely functional
 organization has little or no common terminology, scheduling software,
 understanding of the competing constraints, or information from past
 projects. On the other hand, a purely projectized organization has a robust
 project management methodology complete with governance, policies,
 procedures, templates, risk databases, estimating guidelines, and so on. These
 items are organizational process assets (OPAs).


         Organizational Process Assets. Plans, processes, policies,
      procedures, and knowledge bases that are specific to and used by the
      performing organization.
 The two major groups of process assets are processes and procedures, and the
 corporate knowledge base:
    Processes and procedures
    * Policies, procedures, processes, forms, and templates
     * Standard guidelines, work instructions, and performance thresholds
     * Guidelines for proposal evaluation criteria, estimating, communication,
       audits, and project evaluations
    Corporate knowledge base
    * Historical information from prior projects, past project files, and lessons
      learned
     * Risk databases, estimating databases, and configuration management
       knowledge bases
     * Prior change logs, assumption logs, issue logs, decision logs, and defect
       logs
 You can see how having access to this type of information would make your
 life a lot easier. You could spend more time problem-solving and managing
 stakeholder expectations rather than reinventing the proverbial wheel.
        When you see OPAs as an input to a process, take some time to think
     about the various assets in the organization that could influence how you
     perform the process. This will get your brain used to thinking about how
     OPAs influence projects.


        If you have a few spare moments to study, go through the glossary.
     The glossary in this book is consistent with the glossary in the PMBOK
     Guide. Understanding the way terms are defined will give you an edge
     during the exam.

Key Terms
 The following terms represent important concepts that you need to remember
 to do well on the exam. Make sure you can explain each of them.
    Project life cycle
    Project phase
    Product life cycle
    Functional organization
    Matrix organization
    Weak matrix
    Balanced matrix
    Strong matrix
    Projectized organization
    Composite organization
    Tight matrix
    Organizational process assets
Chapter Summary
 This chapter covers more fundamental concepts in project management.
 Although there are no direct exam objectives tied to this information, there
 are questions on the exam that reference the information. Make sure you are
 comfortable with these concepts before moving on.
    Projects are managed by using a project life cycle. The project life cycle is
    composed of phases. Each phase has a specific purpose and ends with
    defined deliverables. The name and number of the phases depend on the
    nature of the project. A project life cycle is different from a product life
    cycle.
     How organizations are structured affects how you can manage your
    project. In a functional organization, the PM is part-time, has part-time
    team members, and has very little authority. As the organization moves
    along a continuum to a matrix and then a projectized organization, the
    PM's authority, dedication of team members, administrative support, and
    control over the budget all increase.
    Organizational process assets help you manage your project. Some assets
    are policies, procedures, and processes; others are historical information
    and databases of information.
                         Prep Test
1. You're setting up your project and need to manage it so that
  you complete one phase and get customer sign-off before
  beginning the next phase. What type of project life cycle should
  you use?
 A    Overlapping
 B    Sequential
 C    Fast tracking
 D    Iterative

2. You want to start creating some high-level designs before all
  your requirements are collected and approved. You would also
  like to do some testing before all the work is complete. What
  type of life cycle should you use?
 A    Overlapping
 B    Sequential
 C    Waterfall
 D    Iterative

3. Which type of organizational structure is the traditional style
  where employees report up through their specialty area?
 A    Functional
 B    Tight matrix
 C    Balanced matrix
 D    Projectized

4. You report up through your organization's PMO. You don't have
  unlimited authority for your project, but you do control the
  budget, and most of your team members are dedicated to the
  project full-time. What type of organizational structure are you
  in?
 A    Weak matrix
 B    Composite
 C    Projectized
 D    Strong matrix

5. Which of the following is characteristic of a matrix
  organization?
 A    An interdisciplinary team performs the project.
 B    The organization is separate from functional departments.
 C    The PM has full authority and responsibility.
 D    The functional department performs the project.

6. Which of the following is an advantage of working in a
  projectized organization?
 A    Interdepartmental coordination
 B    Shared knowledge of the latest technology
 C    Better reporting
 D    Team members reporting to one manager

7. Which of the following is a disadvantage of working in a
  functional organization?
 A    Duplication of reporting
 B    No one responsible for the total project
 C    High corporate cost
 D    Low career security

8. The organizational structure that combines functional, matrix,
  and projectized structures, depending on the area, is
 A    A balanced matrix
 B    A tight matrix
 C    Composite
 D   Combined

9. Which of the following is not an organizational process asset?
 A   Risk database
 B   Information from past projects
 C   Change control policies
 D   Risk tolerance

10. You are assigned a project to upgrade the organization's
  operating system. You expect this to take six months. A similar
  upgrade was performed two years ago. Which organizational
  process asset should you look at first to help you plan?
 A Configuration management database
 B Project close out procedures
 C Assumption logs, issues logs, and decision logs from the prior
 project
 D Proposal evaluation criteria

                           Scenario 1
Your project is to produce the half-time show for a major football
game. The customer wants a light show, a marching band, a well-
known pop star, and an acrobat troop. You decide that the best way to
do this is to start with the main concept for the show and then get
customer sign-off. During the next phase, you fill in more details, get
customer feedback, incorporate it, and get sign-off. You do several
rounds of this until you receive approval for the whole show. What type
of project life cycle is this?
 A   Overlapping
 B   Sequential
 C   Fast tracking
 D   Iterative
                           Answers
                       Multiple Choice
1. B. Sequential. A sequential project life cycle requires you to
  complete one phase before initiating the next phase. See Project
  phases.
2. A. Overlapping. An overlapping project life cycle allows you to
  begin one phase before the previous phase is complete. Look over
  Project phases.
3. A. Functional. In a functional organizational structure, employees
  report up through their functional specialties. This is the traditional
  structure. Check out Functional organization.
4. D. Strong matrix. A strong matrix gives you a lot of control, but not
  total control. Review Matrix organization.
5. A. An interdisciplinary team performs the project. In matrix
  organizations, team members from different departments work on
  the project. Go over Comparing organization types.
6. D. Team members reporting to one manager. In a projectized
  organization, team members report to the project manager. Read
  about this in Comparing organization types.
7. B. No one responsible for the total project. In a functional
  organization, no one takes accountability for cross-functional
  success of the project. Review Comparing organization types.
8. C. Composite. A composite organization has some divisions that
  are functional, some that are matrix, and some that are projectized.
  Look at Projectized organization.
9. D. Risk tolerance. Risk tolerance is an enterprise environmental
  factor (EEF). Check out Leveraging Your Organization's Assets.
10. C. Assumption logs, issues logs, and decision logs from the prior
  project. The logs from the previous project will be most helpful in
  the beginning of the project. You might need the other information
  later in the project. Go to Leveraging Your Organization's Assets.

                           Scenario 1
D. Iterative. An iterative project life cycle allows you to evolve the
  concept, adding detail as you get customer input. Look over Project
  phases.
Chapter 4: It's All about the
         Process
Chapter Objectives
    Project management processes
    Learning the process groups
    Getting acquainted with the knowledge areas
    Mapping the processes

 In this chapter, I cover the framework for the rest of this book. This chapter
 corresponds to the information in Annex A1 of the PMBOK Guide, which
 identifies the processes needed to manage a project and the inputs and outputs
 associated with each process.
 Although the information in the Annex isn't very exciting, it is important
 because it establishes the framework for the PMBOK Guide and provides the
 architecture of the processes used in managing a project, by introducing the
 five process groups and the ten knowledge areas that the project management
 processes belong to.


         I give you a lot of information in this chapter. Don't expect to absorb
     it all in one sitting. Come back to this chapter every so often. By the
     time you're ready to take the exam, the information here should make
     sense. In fact, you should be able to re-create it for yourself. After you
     can do that, you are ready for the exam!
                 Quick Assessment
1. The five process groups are ______, Planning, ______, Monitoring
  and Controlling, and ______.
2. (True/False). The process groups are the same as a project life
  cycle.
3. A charter is an output from which process group?
4. (True/False). Project Contract Management is the knowledge area
  used to manage goods and purchases for the project.
5 ______ ______ are those processes performed to establish the
  total scope of the effort, refine the objectives, and define the course
  of action required to attain the objectives the project was
  undertaken to achieve.
6. Is the requirements traceability matrix part of the project
  management plan, or is it a project document?
7. Problem solving to determine appropriate corrective and preventive
  action takes place in which process group?
8 How many processes are in the Closing process group?
9. There are ______ process groups, _____ knowledge areas, and
  ______ processes.
                          Answers
1. Initiating, Executing, Closing. These five process groups contain all
  the processes used to manage a project. Read more about this in
  Understanding Project Management Process Groups.
2. False. Process groups are a collection of processes used to
  manage a project. The project life cycle is a series of phases used
  to develop the product service or result. I discuss this in
  Understanding Project Management Process Groups.
3. Initiating. A charter formally authorizes a project and is an output
  from the Initiating process group. Find more information in Initiating
  processes.
4. False. Project Procurement Management is the knowledge area
  used to manage the procurement of goods and services. Find the
  definition in the section on Project Procurement Management.
5. Planning processes. Per the glossary definition, "Planning
  processes are those processes performed to establish the total
  scope of the effort, refine the objectives, and define the course of
  action required to attain the objectives the project was undertaken
  to achieve." See Planning processes for more information.
6. Project document. The requirements traceability matrix is a project
  document that helps manage the project, but it is not a part of the
  project management plan. This is discussed in Planning processes.
7. Monitoring and Controlling process group. Problem solving to
  determine appropriate corrective and preventive action takes place
  in the Monitoring and Controlling process group as part of the
  Monitor and Control Project Work process. Look over the
  information in Monitoring and Controlling processes.
8. Two. The two processes in the Closing process group are Close
  Procurements and Close Project or Phase. Refer to Closing
  processes for more information.
 9. 5, 10, 47. There are 5 process groups, 10 knowledge areas, and
   47 processes. See the section, Mapping the 47 Processes.


Managing Your Project Is a Process
 A process is a set of interrelated of actions and activities performed to create
 a pre-specified product, service, or result. You manage projects via a series of
 processes, which have inputs that are needed to initiate the process. Then you
 apply tools and or techniques to transform the inputs into outputs. A simple
 example is making a cup of coffee. The inputs are the beans, water, a grinder,
 a pot, a heating mechanism, a filter, and a cup. The techniques you use are
 grinding the beans and boiling the water. The output is a cup of coffee. Here
 are the PMBOK Guide definitions for these terms.


         Input. Any item, whether internal or external to the project, that is
      required by a process before that process proceeds. May be an output
      from a predecessor process.
 Tool. Something tangible, such as a template or software program, used in
 performing an activity to produce a product or result.
 Technique. A defined systematic procedure employed by a human resource
 to perform an activity to produce a product or result or deliver a service, and
 that may employ one or more tools.
 Output. A product, result, or service generated by a process. May be an input
 to a successor process.


         Inputs can be outputs from previous processes, and outputs can
      become inputs to subsequent processes.
 PMI defines 47 project-related processes used to manage projects. Each
 process is part of one of five process groups:
    Initiating processes
    Planning processes
    Executing processes
    Monitoring and Controlling processes
    Closing processes
 In addition, each process belongs to one of the ten knowledge areas:
    Project Integration Management
    Project Scope Management
    Project Time Management
    Project Cost Management
    Project Quality Management
    Project Human Resource Management
    Project Communications Management
    Project Risk Management
    Project Procurement Management
    Project Stakeholder Management
 I talk about the process groups next and then the knowledge areas later in the
 chapter.


         You also need to apply product-related processes to your project, but
      those are dependent upon the nature of the product and thus are not
      covered by the PMBOK Guide. An example of a product-related project
      might be integration testing prior to deploying a new system, or editing
      before printing a technical manual. Those processes are dependent upon
      the nature of the work and are governed by your organization's policies.

Understanding Project Management
Process Groups
 The project management process groups (hereafter referred to as process
 groups) of Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and
 Closing interact with each other in each project phase and throughout the
project as a whole.


        Project management process group. A logical grouping of project
     management inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. The project
     management process groups include Initiating processes, Planning
     processes, Executing processes, Monitoring and Controlling processes,
     and Closing processes. Project management process groups are not
     project phases.


        Notice that the domains tested on the PMP are the same as the
     process groups identified in the PMBOK Guide. This means that the
     exam is based around your skills and knowledge in the various process
     groups, even though most of the information presented in the PMBOK
     Guide is presented by knowledge area.
Many people make the mistake of thinking that the process groups are a
project life cycle. They are not. Rather, they are a way of categorizing the
various processes by the nature of the work involved in the process. I
describe the project life cycle in Chapter 3 of this minibook if you want to
read up on the purpose and definition.
You apply each process group in each phase of the project life cycle although
to varying degrees. Figure 4-1 shows how the process groups interact.
Figure 4-1: Process group interactions.


  You can see that when you enter a phase of a project, you go through the
  Initiating processes. After that is complete, you begin the Planning processes,
  which lead to Executing processes. However, along the way, you will likely
  have to replan or progressively elaborate your plans. (I discuss progressive
  elaboration in Chapter 2 of this minibook.) Therefore, you are planning and
  executing throughout the majority of the project. Throughout all the processes
  groups, you conduct activities from the Monitoring and Controlling processes
  to make sure that the results from the Executing processes are on track with
  the plans from the Planning processes. When the project objectives have been
  met, you close out the phase or the project. Figure 4-2 shows how the process
  looks with a project with three phases.
Figure 4-2: Project life cycle and process groups.



Before the Project Begins
  I want to talk about some of the activities that happen before the project
  begins, and then I'll get into the initiating processes. In Chapter 2 of this
  minibook, I talk about the reasons why projects are initiated: a customer
  request, regulatory reasons, a technological advance, and so on. In that same
  chapter, I also discuss programs, portfolios, and Project Management Office
  (PMOs). Typically, one of these entities has the authority to initiate a project
  based on the preceding needs.


           The decision to initiate a project isn't made in a vacuum. Several
        steps occur before a project is initiated. Here is a brief generic summary
        of some of the activities that take place:
  1. Someone defines a need or proposes a concept.
  2. Some high-level project definition is done, and alternatives to meet the
    need are developed and discussed.
  3. A business case is put together, which can include market opportunity,
    financial investment, payback period, net present value, and other financial
    metrics.
  4. The business case is presented to the person or group with the authority to
    initiate projects.



            You might see a couple of questions on the exam that ask where
      projects come from, or about the work done prior to project initiation.
      Remember that some work is done prior to authorizing a project. Book II
      covers some of the information used to justify investing in a project.

Initiating processes
Initiating processes happen at the beginning of a project and are revisited at
the start of each project phase.


          Initiating Processes. Those processes performed to define a new
      project or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization
      to start the project or phase.
To help you absorb the information about each process in the process groups,
Table 4-1 shows the process name, the activities you perform as part of that
process, and the resulting outputs from the process. The activities aren't a
complete list, but they are complete enough to give you the idea of what
happens in each process. Of course, the complete list of activities would
depend upon the specific project. The outputs aren't the full list of outputs,
but they are the major outputs from each process. I won't always list outputs,
such as organizational process asset updates or change requests and so on.
However, the information listed is a solid summary of the information for
each process.

Table 4-1 Initiating Processes, Activities, and Outputs
Process      Activities                                                                      Output

             Assign a project manager (PM).Identify objectives.Identify stakeholder needs
             and expectations.Turn stakeholder needs and expectations into high-level
Develop      requirements.Define high-level project scope.Review information from similar
                                                                                             Project
Project      previous projects.Identify order of magnitude budget.Identify summary
                                                                                             charter
Charter      milestones.Define success criteria. Use organizational policies, procedures,
             and templates to develop the project charter.Present the charter for approval
             and formal authorization.

Identify     Identify stakeholders.Determine how to manage stakeholders.Communicate          Stakeholder
Stakeholders how the project is aligned with the organizations' strategic goals.             register




         Use the information in all the process group tables to quiz yourself.
      Try to look at the process and identify the activities and outputs.
Planning processes
Planning processes occur throughout the project. The bulk of your time
planning will occur right after the project charter is approved. At some point,
you will have done sufficient planning to finalize the project management
plan and the baselines contained within it. At that point, you begin managing
your performance according to those baselines. However, planning doesn't
end after you baseline. You will need to replan based on changes, risk events,
and performance. For large projects, you should be engaged in rolling wave
planning, where you have details for work in the near future and higher-level
information for work later in the future. A good time to develop detailed
plans for the upcoming phase is when you're closing out one phase and
initiating another.


        Rolling wave planning. An iterative planning technique in which the
      work to be accomplished in the near term is planned in detail, while the
      work in the future is planned at a higher level.
Planning Processes. Those processes performed to establish the total scope
of the effort, define and refine the objectives, and develop the course of
action required to attain those objectives.
In Table 4-2, outputs in regular type are part of the project management plan.
Outputs that are italicized are project documents. Project documents are not
part of the project management plan, but they help you manage the project. A
list of project management plan elements and project documents is in Book
III, Chapter 1.

Table 4-2 Planning Processes, Activities, and Outputs
Process          Activities                                              Outputs

                Determine how to manage scope, schedule, and cost for
                the project and document the information in a management
                plan.Determine how to manage change for the project and
                document the information in the change management
                plan.Determine the appropriate level of configuration
                management and document it in a configuration
                management plan.Document the project life
                cycle.Determine how performance will be measured and
Develop Project reviewed.Determine which processes are needed for the
Management      project and the degree of rigor.Review information from    Project management plan
Plan            past projects.Identify and follow organizational policies,
                  procedures, processes, and templates used for
                  planning.Identify EEFs* that will influence your
                  project.Identify organizational interfaces and other projects
                  you need to integrate with.Determine the methods used to
                  monitor and control the project.Negotiate and prioritize
                  project constraints.Baseline the plan.Get formal approval
                  and sign-off on the project management plan.Hold a team
                  kick-off meeting.
                  Document the approach to develop a scope statement and
                  WBS.**Describe how the WBS will be maintained and
                  approved.Describe how formal acceptance of deliverables
                  will take place.Determine how scope changes will be
                  integrated with the project change control system.Describe Scope management
Plan Scope
                  how requirements activities will be planned, conducted and planRequirements
Management
                  documented.Document how configuration management for management plan
                  requirements will be carried out.Define requirements
                  prioritization.Identify the metrics and acceptance criteria for
                  requirements.Determine the requirements traceability
                  structure.

                  Employ brainstorming, role playing, negotiating, facilitating,
                                                                                 Requirements
Collect           interviewing, and consensus-building skills to identify and
                                                                                 documentationRequirements
Requirements      agree on project requirements.Document and prioritize
                                                                                 traceability matrix
                  project and product requirements.

                  Document what is in and out of scope.Describe project
Define Scope      deliverables and their acceptance criteria.Document             Project scope statement
                  assumptions.Document constraints.

                  Decompose work into deliverables.Describe each work             WBS dictionaryScope
Create WBS
                  package.                                                        baseline
Plan Schedule     Document how the schedule will be developed and
                                                                                  Schedule management plan
Management        managed throughout the project.
                                                                                  Activity listActivity
Define Activities Identify activities needed to create deliverables.
                                                                                  attributesMilestone list

Sequence
                  Put activities in order.                                        Network diagram
Activities
                                                                                  Resource
Estimate Activity
                  Determine resource requirements.                                requirementsResource
Resources
                                                                                  breakdown structure

Estimate Activity
                  Estimate project duration.                                      Duration estimates
Durations

Develop                                                                           Project scheduleSchedule
                  Develop preliminary schedule.
Schedule                                                                          baseline

                  Document how cost estimates will be developed.Describe
                  how contingency funds will be determined and
Plan Cost
                  managed.Describe how the project budget will be                 Cost management plan
Management
                  developed.Identify the control mechanisms that will be
                  used to monitor and control the project budget.

Estimate Costs    Estimate project costs.                                         Cost estimates

Determine                                                                         Cost performance
Budget            Develop project budget.                                         baselineProject funding
                                                                                  requirements
                                                                               Quality management
Plan Quality                                                                   planQuality metricsQuality
                   Document project quality standards and requirements.
Management                                                                     checklistsProcess
                                                                               improvement plan
Plan Human         Document project roles and responsibilities.Develop
Resource           project organization chart.Determine how to manage          Human resource plan
Management         project staff.
Plan
               Document who needs what information, in what format,            Communications
Communications
               and how often.                                                  management plan
Management
Plan Risk
                   Document approach to risk management.                       Risk management plan
Management

                   Interview stakeholders for threats and
Identify Risks                                                                 Risk register
                   opportunities.Document project threats and opportunities.

Perform
Qualitative Risk   Assess probability and impact of risks.                     Risk register updates
Analysis

Perform
                   Apply simulation, expected monetary value, decision trees,
Quantitative                                                                  Risk register updates
                   and other quantitative analysis techniques to risk events.
Risk Analysis
Plan Risk          Brainstorm risk responses and develop strategies to
                                                                               Risk register updates
Responses          effectively manage threats.
                                                                               Procurement management
Plan               Document approach to procurements.Select contract           planMake-or-buy
Procurement        types.Develop procurement documents, including an           decisionsSOWsProcurement
Management         SOW.***                                                     documentsSource selection
                                                                               criteria
Plan               Identify and documents methods to effectively engage
                                                                               Stakeholder management
Stakeholder        stakeholders in the project.Determine how to manage
                                                                               plan
Management         stakeholder expectations.


EEF: enterprise environmental factor*WBS: work breakdown structure***SOW: statement of
work


You can see that a lot of work goes on in the planning processes!
Table 4-2 doesn't show the loops and iterative nature of planning. However,
considering that you're at the point of taking the PMP exam, you've been
managing projects long enough to know that you go through many iterations
of planning before you reach a point where the key stakeholders can reach an
agreement. For example, you might go around several times in the scope,
schedule, cost, and risk processes to find an agreeable approach.


           All plans are preliminary until you do a thorough risk analysis and
      incorporate the risk management activities, risk responses, and
      contingency reserves into your scope, schedule, and cost documents.
      Only then can you baseline. You can find more about the risk
      management processes in Book V, Chapter 1.


         Planning goes on throughout the project. You can and will revisit any
      or all of these processes and activities at various points in the project.

Executing processes
The Executing processes are where the majority of the project budget is
expended and the majority of time is spent. This is where the project team
creates the deliverables and meets the requirements and objectives of the
project. See Table 4-3.


         Executing Processes. Those processes performed to complete the
      work defined in the project management plan to satisfy the project
      objectives.

Table 4-3 Executing Processes, Activities, and Outputs
Processes         Activities                                                   Outputs

                  Coordinate people and other resources to execute project
Direct and        activities.Problem-solve issues and risks, and analyze the
                                                                               DeliverablesWork
Manage Project    best approach to them.Implement changes, corrective and
                                                                               performance data
Work              preventive actions, and defect repairs.Implement risk
                  responses as required.

Perform Quality
                  Audit utilization and effectiveness of the quality plan.     Change requests
Assurance

Acquire Project   Negotiate and influence to ensure the appropriate type and
                                                                             Staff assignments
Team              number of resources are assigned to the team.

Develop Project Motivate, team build, and mentor to improve individual and Team performance
Team            overall team performance.                                  assessmentsEEF updates

                                                                               EEF updatesOrganizational
                                                                               process asset
Manage Project    Manage and lead team throughout the project.Resolve
                                                                               updatesChange
Team              conflicts and solve problems.
                                                                               requestsProject
                                                                               management plan updates

Manage         Develop communications.Collect and distribute
                                                                               Project communications
Communications information.
Conduct           Negotiate contract elements, terms, and conditions.        Selected
Procurements                                                                 sellersContracts/agreements
                  Document, negotiate, and resolve issues and                Issue logsChange
Manage            conflicts.Facilitate meetings and present information to   requestsProject
Stakeholder       ensure a common understanding among                        management plan
Engagement        stakeholders.Communicate to manage stakeholder             updatesProject document
                  expectations.                                              updates



Monitoring and Controlling processes
Monitoring and Controlling processes measure the performance of the
project, take action based on the performance analysis, and maintain the
integrity of the baseline by ensuring that only approved changes are
integrated into the project management plan.


         Monitoring and Controlling Processes. Those processes required to
      track, review, and regulate the progress and performance of the project,
      identify any areas in which changes to the plan are required, and initiate
      the corresponding changes.


           Almost every process in this process group has the following outputs:
    Change requests
    Project management plan updates
    Project document updates
    Organizational process asset updates
Table 4-4 lists the four consistent outputs only once, but you should know
that they are common outputs from the Monitoring and Controlling processes.

Table 4-4 Monitoring and Controlling Processes,
Activities, and Outputs
Processes         Activities                                                      Outputs

                                                                                    Organizational
                  Measure and analyze project performance to identify any           process asset
Monitor and                                                                         updatesProject
                  variances from plan.Problem-solve to determine appropriate
Control Project
                  corrective and preventive action.Perform a root cause analysis of management plan
Work                                                                                updateProject
                  variances.Manage time and cost reserve allocation.
                                                                                    document updates
                  Evaluate change request impacts.Negotiate competing
Perform           constraints with stakeholders for requested changes.Maintain
                                                                                    Approved change
Integrated        baseline integrity by ensuring only accepted changes are
                                                                                    requests
Change Control    integrated into the project.Communicate status of project
                  changes to all impacted stakeholders.
Validate Scope    Inspect deliverables for acceptance.                              Accepted deliverables
                                                                                    Work performance
Control Scope     Measure performance against the baselines.
                                                                                    information

Control
                  Perform EV* analysis.
Schedule
Control Cost      Calculate estimates to complete.                                  Forecasts

                  Inspect and review all deliverables for compliance with
                                                                                    Quality control
                  specifications.Apply control charts, histograms, cause-and-effect
Control Quality                                                                     measurementsVerified
                  charts, and other quality control tools to deliverables.Identify
                                                                                    deliverables
                  areas to improve project and product performance.

Control        Determine the effectiveness and efficiency of the                    Work performance
Communications communications management plan and update it as necessary.           information
                  Continually monitor status of existing risks.Identify new risks to
                  the project.Negotiate risk response strategies with
Control Risks     stakeholders.Problem-solve to identify appropriate risk            Risk register updates
                  responses.Evaluate effectiveness of risk management processes
                  and risk responses.

Control                                                                             Procurement
                  Inspect vendor work and work sites.
Procurements                                                                        documentation
Control
                  Determine the effectiveness and efficiency of the stakeholder     Work performance
Stakeholder
                  management plan and update it as necessary.                       information
Engagement


*EV: earned value




         Monitoring and Controlling processes are applied throughout the
      project. They are conducted for each phase and for the project as a
      whole.

Closing processes
Even though there are only two processes in the Closing process group,
several activities occur. See Table 4-5.


           Closing Processes. Those processes performed to finalize all
       activities across all project management process groups to formally close
       the project or phase.

 Table 4-5 Closing Processes, Activities, and Outputs
 Processes      Activities                                                    Outputs

               Review project management plan to ensure all aspects of the
               project are complete.Follow all organizational policies
               regarding phase exit criteria or project closure.Evaluate and
               document team member performance and update information
               on new skills as appropriate.Interview stakeholders and
                                                                             Final product
 Close Project document lessons learned.Objectively evaluate project
                                                                             transitionOrganizational
 or Phase      performance and write a project closeout report.Present final
                                                                             process assets updates
               project results.Collect, compile, and organize all project
               records for archives.Interview and survey stakeholders to
               analyze and rate customer satisfaction.Acknowledge team
               members with rewards and/or celebrations.Release and return
               all project resources.

              Review contracts to ensure all contractual obligations have
              been met.Negotiate and manage conflict to resolve any open
              issues or claims associated with procurements.Manage and
                                                                             Closed
 Close        coordinate relationships with internal procurement resources
                                                                             procurementsOrganizational
 Procurements and vendors.Obtain sign-off from legal and the vendors to
                                                                             process assets updates
              close contracts.Organize all procurement documentation for
              archives.Conduct a procurement audit to improve the
              procurement process in the future.




          Figure A1-2 in the Annex of the PMBOK Guide has a high-level
       view of how the various process groups interact with one another. You
       should study this and make sure you understand it and can explain the
       interactions.


The Ten Knowledge Areas
 Another way of looking at the project management processes is by grouping
 them in knowledge areas. There are ten knowledge areas.


          Project Management Knowledge Area. An identified area of
       project management defined by its knowledge requirements and
       described in terms of its component processes, practices, inputs, outputs,
       tools, and techniques.
In the following pages, I give you the PMBOK Guide definition of the
knowledge area, and then list the processes contained in that area. The
glossary definitions for each process and significantly more detail about each
process are included in upcoming chapters.

Project Integration Management
This knowledge area is the centerpiece of project management: Here's where
you combine and coordinate the work of all the processes so they flow
smoothly.


        Project Integration Management. Project Integration Management
     includes the processes and activities needed to identify, define, combine,
     unify, and coordinate the various processes and project management
     activities within the Project Management Process Groups.
   Develop Project Charter
   Develop Project Management Plan
   Direct and Manage Project Work
   Monitor and Control Project Work
   Perform Integrated Change Control
   Close Project or Phase

Project Scope Management
Scope management is the backbone from which all the rest of the knowledge
areas build. Scope processes are concerned with requirements, defining
project and product scope, creating the work breakdown structure (WBS),
getting acceptance of the scope, and managing changes to the scope.


        Project Scope Management. Project Scope Management includes
     the processes required to ensure that the project includes all the work
     required -- and only the work required -- to complete the project
     successfully.
   Plan Scope Management
   Collect Requirements
   Define Scope
   Create WBS
   Validate Scope
   Control Scope

Project Time Management
Project Time Management processes create and control the schedule. The
processes needed to create a reliable schedule can be done at one time,
especially for smaller projects, but they are presented here as discrete
processes because the skills and techniques used are distinct for each process.


        Project Time Management. Project Time Management includes the
     processes required to manage the timely completion of a project.
   Plan Schedule Management
   Define Activities
   Sequence Activities
   Estimate Activity Resources
   Estimate Activity Durations
   Develop Schedule
   Control Schedule

Project Cost Management
The cost estimates and project budget are some of the most closely
scrutinized elements in the project management plan. Estimating costs can be
one of the more challenging activities you undertake. This knowledge area
looks at estimating and budgeting costs. It also looks at controlling them and
introduces earned value (EV) management.


        Project Cost Management. Project Cost Management includes the
     processes involved in planning, estimating, budgeting, financing,
     funding, managing, and controlling costs so that the project can be
     completed within the approved budget.
   Plan Cost Management
   Estimate Costs
   Determine Budget
   Control Costs

Project Quality Management
If project scope is about what the project and product are supposed to deliver,
project quality is about how good it has to be. These processes look at project
and product quality from the perspective of planning, maintaining, and
controlling.


        Project Quality Management. Project Quality Management
     includes the processes and activities of the performing organization that
     determine quality policies, objectives, and responsibilities so that the
     project will satisfy the needs for which it was undertaken.
   Plan Quality Management
   Perform Quality Assurance
   Control Quality

Project Human Resource Management
Much of the PMBOK Guide is about the techniques and outputs associated
with managing a project. For this knowledge area, I talk about the most
important component of performing the work: the people. This knowledge
area focuses on the tools you use as well as many of the interpersonal skills
needed to effectively manage the project team.


        Project Human Resource Management. Project Human Resource
     Management includes the processes that organize and manage the
     project team.
   Plan Human Resource Management
   Acquire Project Team
   Develop Project Team
   Manage Project Team

Project Communications Management
Project Communications Management is where you make sure the right
people get the needed information in the most effective and efficient way and
at the appropriate time.


       Project Communications Management. Project Communications
    Management includes the processes required to ensure timely and
    appropriate planning, collection, creation, distribution, storage, retrieval,
    management, control, monitoring, and ultimate disposition of project
    information.
   Plan Communications Management
   Manage Communications
   Control Communications

Project Risk Management
You can have the best plans in the world, but if you don't incorporate risk
management into your project planning, your plans can all go down the tube
in an instant. This knowledge area defines the processes needed to keep
project risk to an acceptable level.


       Project Risk Management. Project Risk Management includes the
    processes concerned with conducting risk management planning,
    identification, analysis, responses, and monitoring and control on a
    project.
   Plan Risk Management
   Identify Risks
   Perform Qualitative Risk Management
   Perform Quantitative Risk Management
   Plan Risk Responses
   Control Risks

Project Procurement Management
In many projects, your organization won't have the skills or capacity to
perform all the activities or create all the deliverables necessary. Therefore,
procurement management is an important part of managing your projects.
The larger the project, the more likely you are to need to procure project
scope.


        Project Procurement Management. Project Procurement
     Management includes the processes to purchase or acquire the products,
     services, or results needed from outside the project team to perform the
     work.
   Plan Procurement Management
   Conduct Procurements
   Control Procurements
   Close Procurements

Project Stakeholder Management
You can meet every milestone, have a fully functioning product, and come in
on budget, but if your stakeholders are not happy, you can't really call your
project a success. The larger your projects are, the more important it is to
manage your stakeholders.


        Project Stakeholder Management. Project Stakeholder
     Management includes the processes required to identify all people or
     organizations impacted by the project, analyzing stakeholder
     expectations and impact on the project, and developing appropriate
     management strategies for effectively engaging stakeholders in project
     decisions and execution.
    Identify Stakeholders
    Plan Stakeholder Management
    Manage Stakeholder Engagement
    Control Stakeholder Engagement
 Interestingly enough, the PMBOK Guide presents the project management
 processes by their knowledge areas. However, the PMP exam evaluates exam
 performance based on process groups. Because the exam is based on process
 groups, I present the information by process group and then by knowledge
 areas in the process groups.

Mapping the 47 Processes
 Because each process is part of a process group and part of a knowledge area,
 it's useful to see how those intersect. Table 4-6 shows how each process maps
 to a knowledge area and a process group.


        One of the best study tips I can give you is to create a table like the
     one shown in Table 4-6 and fill it in with the processes. Being able to
     identify the process, the process group, and the knowledge area will help
     you recollect the information you will need as you take the exam. In
     fact, I suggest to my students that when they get into the exam, they take
     a moment and re-create that chart on a piece of paper to reference during
     the exam.
Key Terms
 There are many terms in this chapter. You don't have to know the definitions
 verbatim, but you should be able to describe the main points associated with
 each term.
    Input
Tool
Technique
Output
Project management process group
Initiating processes
Rolling wave planning
Planning processes
Executing processes
Monitoring and Controlling processes
Closing processes
Project management knowledge area
Project Integration Management
Project Scope Management
Project Time Management
Project Cost Management
Project Quality Management
Project Human Resource Management
Project Communications Management
Project Risk Management
Project Procurement Management
Project Stakeholder Management
Chapter Summary
 In this chapter, I explain how projects are managed via processes. Processes
 are categorized by process group and knowledge area. Here are the high
 points:
    Projects are managed via a series of processes. Processes receive inputs
    and then apply tools and/or techniques to develop outputs.
    Processes can be grouped into five process groups: Initiating, Planning,
    Executing, Monitoring and Controlling, and Closing. The process groups
    are applied in each phase of the project. They are not a life cycle. Each
    process group has distinct activities leading to specific outputs.
    Processes can also be categorized by ten different knowledge areas. Each
    knowledge area highlights a specific aspect of the project:
     * Integration
     * Scope
     * Time
     * Cost
     * Quality
     * Human Resources
     * Communications
     * Risk
     * Procurement
     * Stakeholders
                        Prep Test
1. Which of the following is not a process group?
 A   Closing
 B   Integrating
 C   Executing
 D   Planning

2. The initiating processes have two outputs. Which of the
  following are the outputs?
 A   Project charter
 B   Stakeholder register
 C   Stakeholder management plan
 D   Business case

3. An iterative planning technique in which work to be
  accomplished in the near-term is planned in detail, and work in
  the future is planned at a higher level, is called
 A   Detailed planning
 B   Phase gate planning
 C   Life cycle planning
 D   Rolling wave planning

4. In which process group should you document the project life
  cycle?
 A   Initiating
 B   Planning
 C   Integration
 D   Develop Project Management Plan
5. During which process group is the majority of the project
  budget expended?
 A   Executing
 B   Planning
 C   Integrating
 D   Monitoring and Controlling

6. You just got the majority of your project team on board and are
  getting ready to do some team building with them. Which
  process group are these activities a part of?
 A   Initiating
 B   Planning
 C   Executing
 D   Monitoring and Controlling

7. Accepted Deliverables is an output from which process in the
  Monitoring and Controlling Process group?
 A   Control Quality
 B   Perform Quality Assurance
 C   Validate Scope
 D   Control Scope

8. Conducting Procurements is part of which process group?
 A   Initiating
 B   Planning
 C   Executing
 D   Monitoring and Controlling

9. Collecting requirements is part of which knowledge area?
 A   Integration
 B   Quality
 C   Communication
 D   Scope

10. In which process group do you identify stakeholders?
 A   Scope
 B   Stakeholders
 C   Initiating
 D   Planning
                           Answers
1. B. Integrating. Integrating is not a process group. Project
  Integration Management is a knowledge area. Look over
  Understanding Project Management Process Groups.
2. A and B. Project charter and stakeholder register. The business
  case is an input to the Develop Project Charter process, which is an
  Initiating process. The stakeholder management plan is an output
  of Plan Stakeholder Management. Go to Initiating processes.
3. D. Rolling wave planning. Rolling wave planning allows you to plan
  near-term work in detail and keep the work in the far future at a high
  level. See the definition in the Planning processes section.
4. B. Planning. You document the project life cycle as part of the
  developing the project management plan. Review Planning
  processes.
5. A. Executing. The majority of the time and funds are expended in
  the Executing process group. Look at Executing processes.
6. C. Executing. Acquiring the project team and developing the
  project team are part of the Executing process group. Review
  Executing processes.
7. C. Validate Scope. Accepted deliverables are an output from the
  Validate Scope process. Review Monitoring and Controlling
  processes.
8. C. Executing. Conducting Procurements is part of the Executing
  processes. See Executing processes.
9. D. Scope. Collecting requirements is part of the Project Scope
  Management knowledge area. Review Project Scope Management.
10. C. Initiating. Stakeholders are identified in the Initiating Process
  Group. Check out Initiating processes.
Book II
Starting Off Right




        Check out the article on initiating knowledge and skills at
www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book II: Starting Off Right

Book II: Chapter 1: OMG! It's a Project!
   Knowledge and Skills for the Initiating Processes

   Internal Needs or External Influences

   Selecting the Right Projects

   Alphabet Soup: ROI, NPV, FV and Other Project-Selection Metrics

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book II: Chapter 2: Chartering Your Project
   What a Project Charter Is and Why You Need One

   Develop Project Charter: Inputs

   Develop Project Charter: Tools and Techniques

   Develop Project Charter: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book II: Chapter 3: Identifying Project Stakeholders
   Who Cares about Your Project?

   Identify Stakeholders: Inputs

   Identify Stakeholders: Tools and Techniques

   Identify Stakeholders: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary
  Chapter 1: OMG! It's a Project!
Exam Objective
    Meet with the sponsor, customer, and other subject matter experts
    and review available information to evaluate the feasibility of new
    products or services, keeping in mind given assumptions and
    constraints.



 It seems that everything is a project these days, whether you are reorganizing
 the company, launching a new product, or even having a holiday party.
 Where do all these projects come from? In this chapter, I discuss the internal
 and external factors -- such as business needs and market demands -- that
 initiate the need for a project.
 Next, I talk about the methods that organizations use to select the right
 projects, given that there are usually more projects than there are resources to
 do them. Some variables that organizations look at include strategic
 alignment, funding, and project risk.
 I wrap up the chapter by describing some of the metrics -- such as return on
 investment (ROI), net present value (NPV), and payback period -- that are
 commonly used to evaluate the financial impact of investing in projects.
                 Quick Assessment
1. The seven reasons for initiating a project are ______ ______,
  ______ ______, ______ ______, ______ ______, ______ ______,
  ______ ______, and ______ ______.
2. A business process improvement project is an example of starting
  a project because of a/an ______ ______.
3. Retrofitting your electrical system to bring it up to code is an
  example of initiating a project based on a/an ______ ______.
4. If your organization decides to upgrade to the latest new operating
  system, this is an example of a project that was initiated based on
  a/an ______ ______.
5. Organizations can do projects for financial benefits or for
  nonfinancial benefits. A holiday toy drive is an example of which
  kind of project?
6. ______ ______ is the amount of time it takes you to recover your
  initial investment in a project.
7. The three items you need to know before you can compute the
  present value of investing in a project are ______ ______, ______
  ______, and ______ ______ ______ ______.
8. (True/False). Present Value calculates the future value of current
  cash flows.
                           Answers
 1. Market demand, organizational need, customer request,
   technological advance, legal requirement, ecological impacts, and
   social need. The PMBOK Guide lists these seven things as reasons
   for initiating a project. See Internal Needs or External Influences.
 2. Organizational need. A business process improvement project is
   responding to a need the organization has to improve its operations
   and become more efficient. Go over Internal Needs or External
   Influences.
 3. Legal requirement. Meeting building codes is a legal requirement.
   Look over Internal Needs or External Influences.
 4. Technological advance. A new operating system is an
   advancement in technology. You might think this is an
   organizational need, and they really aren't mutually exclusive, but
   the fact that the project is based on the new technology makes this
   a better answer. See Internal Needs or External Influences.
 5. Nonfinancial benefit. The toy drive does not contribute to the
   organization's bottom line, but it does provide value to the
   organization's reputation, employee morale, and the community.
   Look over Criteria for project selection.
 6. Payback period. The amount of time it takes you to recover your
   initial investment in a project is the payback period. Take a look at
   Payback period.
 7. Future value, interest rate, and number of time periods. These are
   the three items you need to know before you can compute the
   present value of investing in a project. Check out Present Value.
 8. False. Present Value calculates the current value of future cash
   flows. Look at Present Value.


Knowledge and Skills for the Initiating
Processes
 The Initiating process group is the first set of processes you perform when
 you start a project or start a new phase in a project. To be successful, you will
 need to bring the following skills to the processes in this group:
    Active listening
    Facilitation
    Oral and written communication techniques, channels, and applications
    Stakeholder impact analysis
 As you go through the chapters in this minibook, keep these in mind and see
 where you would apply them to make your project a success.

Internal Needs or External Influences
 Some projects are initiated because of internal needs, and others are initiated
 because of external influences. The PMBOK Guide lists seven reasons why
 projects can be initiated:
    Organizational need: Internal projects that help an organization operate
    better.
    Market demand: Projects that respond to external influences in the
    market. These projects can be initiated in response to a change in the
    market, new markets, or developing markets.
     Customer request: Projects generally initiated based on external
    influences, such as responding to a customer request or winning a
    competitive bid. There are times when an internal customer in an
    organization requests a project, such as a division asking the IT
    department for a new functionality in company software.
    Technological advance: Projects that can be the result of internal needs
    or external influences. They are initiated to take advantage of better or
    faster results because of new technology or technology upgrades.
    Legal requirement: External influence projects that are mandatory in
    nature. They respond to regulatory, legal, or compliance issues.
   Ecological impacts: Projects that reactively clean up ecological
   problems, or proactively implement ecologically sound practices.
   Social need: Projects that improve the quality of life. They can be
   reactive to a particular situation, or proactively planned, such as
   developing a new medical device.

Organizational need
Organizational need is the umbrella term for internal needs. Examples of
organizational needs include
   The company has grown, and the payroll system is no longer sufficient to
   meet the needs of the company.
   The organization wants to reduce the amount of time it takes to bring new
   employees on board from eight weeks to four weeks.
   To improve production time and reduce defects, the production line is
   being reorganized. The reorganization includes staff, production
   equipment, processes, quality control, and supply chain management.
You can see that these types of projects can be quite complex, depending
upon the organization. They can include business process improvement
projects, relocations, reorganizations, or any kind of project designed to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the organization.
The next sections cover the external influences that initiate projects.

Market demand
A market demand can include projects that are designed to create new
markets, respond to changes in the marketplace, or gain market share. These
projects support the reason why the organization is in business. They address
the product, service, or result that the organization provides. Here are some
examples:
    Because of the high cost of gasoline, a car manufacturer initiates a project
   to develop a car that runs on biofuel.
   A new type of mobile phone comes out, and your organization decides to
   create a line of products that can be downloaded onto the phone.
   A competitor has released a new product that's eroding your market share,
   and your company needs to develop a competing product ASAP!
Customer request
Customer requests can be the result of bidding on a contract. In this case, the
statement of work (SOW) in the contract becomes the driving force in
initiating the project. You see more information about a statement of work in
Book V, Chapter 2.


        Statement of Work. A narrative description of products, services, or
     results to be delivered by the project.
A customer request can also come from an existing customer asking you to
change, increase, or improve something about an existing product or service
you're providing. Here are some situations where a customer request would
initiate a project:
   Your engineering firm is designing a new world headquarters for a client.
   The client is so pleased that they ask your firm to design the new service
   center they'll be opening after headquarters is complete.
   The state has issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to resurface 150 miles
   of road. Your company responds to the RFP and wins the bid.



        Request for Proposal. A type of procurement document used to
     request proposals from prospective sellers of products or services.
Find more information about RFPs in Book V, Chapter 2.
    Your organization provides safety training for a company with 20
   locations. The company is so pleased with the results that they ask your
   organization to provide consulting services the following year as they
   update their safety program.

Technological advance
These types of projects can affect internal operations or market place
opportunities. Because of the rate of technological advances as well as the
need to keep up with the market's adaptation of technological advances, these
types of projects have increased dramatically. They can be smaller projects
lasting a couple of months or huge programs that take years to complete.
Examples of technological advances that can lead to the initiation of a project
are
   A new version of your organization's inventory control system has been
   released, and you initiate a project to upgrade to the new version.
   A technological advance in microprocessors has made it possible to store
   much more data in a smaller space. Your firm initiates a project to
   redesign an entire line of products to take advantage of the smaller size
   and lighter weight now possible.
   Your organization does sensitive work for the government. Because of
   heightened security concerns and the development of cost-effective
   retinal-imaging systems, your organization is upgrading the security
   protocols for entrances, exits, and computer access to sensitive data.

Legal requirement
Legal requirements can include new laws, regulations, code compliance,
safety requirements, or any other type of situation where a government
agency imposes a new requirement. For example
   The emissions standards for a specific chemical that your organization
   uses have gotten more restrictive. Your organization initiates a project to
   upgrade or replace several pieces of equipment and be recertified by the
   enforcing agency.
    Because there have been several instances of organizations in your field
   misappropriating funds and not following good accounting practices, the
   government has passed new reporting, accountability, and transparency
   regulations for reporting. Your reporting system doesn't support the new
   requirements, so a project is initiated to implement the new reporting
   regulations.
    Your company builds high-end custom homes. Last month, a number of
   homes in the area were damaged by mud and debris run-off from a
   particularly wet rainy season. The local city council enacted a law that
   requires all retaining walls to support heavier weight. Your company
   initiates a project to retrofit all homes in the impacted area.

Ecological impacts
These types of projects are often mandated, and thus in some cases can be
 considered a combination of ecological impact and legal requirements. For
 example
    To become more environmentally conscientious, your company institutes
    a recycling program. The initial start-up of the program is considered a
    project.
     To reduce wastewater treatment costs, your organization decides to build
    its own wastewater treatment facility and sell the treated water back to the
    city for irrigation and other nonpotable uses.
     To be considered an "eco-friendly" firm, your organization undertakes a
    project to get all its buildings Leadership in Energy and Environmental
    Design (LEED) certified.

 Social need
 Many government agencies do projects based on social needs. These projects
 can also be in response to a disaster. Some organizations undertake social
 need projects to be good corporate citizens. Examples of social needs that can
 lead to the initiation of a project are
     An earthquake causes significant damage to a Third World country. Your
    organization provides 10 workers for 20 weeks to help rebuild the
    infrastructure.
    A county agency initiates a project to collect coats and blankets for the
    homeless and poor for the coming winter months.
    A hospital produces a 10K run to raise awareness for heart-healthy eating
    habits and exercise.


Selecting the Right Projects
 As you can see, there are many different avenues that lead to projects. Most
 times, there are more projects than there are resources to work on them;
 therefore, organizations need a way to select the projects they will work on
 now and those they will delay. Organizations have different ways of selecting
 projects. Some organizations have a very structured process, and others don't
 seem to have any kind of process whatsoever.
        Questions on the exam assume that an organization has a structured
     project-selection process. This selection process can entail using a
     project portfolio committee, a Project Management Office (PMO), or
     some other method to evaluate in which projects to invest.

Project portfolio committee
One method that organizations use to select projects is a project portfolio
committee, which
1. Selects new projects
2. Prioritizes projects
3. Measures the progress of existing projects
4. Makes decisions when to cancel projects
The project portfolio committee generally has guidelines for financial and
nonfinancial contributions that need to be met in order to launch a project.


        The project portfolio committee may be known by other names, both
     in organization and for the exam. Some examples include portfolio
     steering committee, project selection committee, and project evaluation
     committee.

Project Management Office (PMO)
Another approach to selecting projects is to use the Project Management
Office (PMO) -- sometimes known as the Project Office (PO) -- to select
and manage projects. The PMO or PO undergoes a similar process as a
project selection committee (see the preceding section) when deciding which
projects to launch.
Of course, some projects must be done, such as projects that address changes
to legislation or regulations. These projects will still go through the selection
process, but they will be automatically approved.

Criteria for project selection
Many variables influence project selection. The importance of these variables
is different for each organization; generally, the bullets toward the top of the
list that follows tend to be more influential than the bottom of the list.
   Strategic alignment: Is the proposed project aligned with the company's
   strategic plan? Does it help the company meet stated objectives or key
   performance indicators as documented in an annual operating plan, or
   similar document? If it doesn't, it should not be selected.
    Environmental factors: Do competitive factors necessitate undertaking
   the project? Will doing the project create a competitive advantage or
   respond to an opportunity in the market?
    Expected financial benefit: Because commercial entities are in business
   to make a profit, the financial payback is a significant driver in deciding
   whether to begin a project. In the next section, I present different ways of
   evaluating the financial benefit of projects.
   Available funding: What is the estimated cost of the project? Are
   sufficient funds available for the year and for the entire project life cycle?
   Will other projects need to be canceled to afford the proposed project?
    Availability of resources: Regardless of how appealing a project may be,
   if you don't have enough human resources available, the project should
   not be initiated. If it is, other projects should be canceled or delayed.
   Starting new projects without concern for the resources availability will
   eventually lead to one or more projects in the portfolio failing.
    Riskiness of the project: High-risk projects are generally less appealing
   than those with lower risk. If the rest of the project portfolio is
   conservative, sometimes initiating a higher risk project is acceptable as
   long as the organization has the resources to recover if the project doesn't
   pay off. Another consideration is if the reward is substantial, an
   organization may be willing to take on more risk.
   Balance in the portfolio of types of projects: Most organizations that
   have a formal portfolio of projects balance the type of projects they are
   undertaking. Some are internal, some are market driven, some are to gain
   market share, some are product development, and so on. It is wise to
   balance the types of projects so that no one type of project dominates the
   portfolio.
   Project size: Strive for a balance in the size of projects in the portfolio.
    Undertaking too many jumbo projects is risky. Most projects should be
    small to medium in size, with only a few large projects going on at any
    one time.
    Expected nonfinancial benefits: As important as profit is, it isn't the
    only reason to do a project. Some projects are done for social needs.
    Public works projects are not done for profit. Therefore, the nonfinancial
    benefits need to be considered as well.



         Selecting the right projects can be complicated. Generally, this
      process takes place at a level above the project manager's level.
      However, as a project manager, you should understand the variables
      associated with selecting projects and balancing a project portfolio. You
      will find a few questions on the PMP exam that expect you to
      understand these concepts.

Alphabet Soup: ROI, NPV, FV and
Other Project-Selection Metrics
 The first part of this chapter discusses where projects come from and how
 they are selected. In this section, I cover some of the project selection metrics
 -- financial and otherwise -- that project portfolio committees use to
 determine which projects to initiate. These metrics are used to evaluate the
 feasibility of new products or services. I will also describe some finance and
 accounting terms you may see on the exam. These don't require any
 calculations, but you should be familiar with the concepts.

 Financial metrics

          On the PMP, you should expect to see two to five questions on the
      exam that are concerned with project selection metrics. Knowing the
      following definitions will help you in this section.
        Present Value (PV). The current value of future cash flows.
Net Present Value (NPV). The present value minus the cost over the time
periods the costs are invested.
Future Value (FV). The value in the future of funds invested now.
Payback period. How soon you will recapture your investment and begin
making a profit
Benefit-cost ratio. Compares the benefit or revenue of a project with the cost
or investment of a project.
Present Value
   PV = FV / (1 + r)n

where
   PV = Present Value
   FV = Future Value
   r = Interest rate
   n = Number of time periods

Here is an example of a question you might see on the exam:
   Your company provides project management consulting and outsourcing.
   The selection committee is deciding whether to invest in a Project to
   update and upgrade your PMO information systems infrastructure with
   all new software, cloud computing, collaboration sites, and real-time
   reporting software. The new capabilities will not be available until Year 2.
   The enhanced infrastructure is projected to increase business by
   $2,500,000 in Year 2; $5,250,000 in Year 3; and $6,000,000 in Years 4
   and 5. After that, you expect to need a new upgrade to keep pace with
   changes in technology.
   The other viable project the selection committee is looking at is
   developing a new line of business by creating a virtual project
   management training curriculum. The projected revenue is $1,500,000 in
   Year 1, and $3,500,000 in Years 2-5.
   If the money were invested, the assumed interest rate is 5%.

Given the PV equation, you would end up with the following calculations:




Based on solely this information, the investment in the PMO infrastructure
has a higher PV and is the better choice.
For PV calculations, the higher PV is the better investment!


         Present value is just one way of evaluating the value of a project.
     Notice that you don't see the investment in this equation. You will see
     the amount invested if you use a Net Present Value calculation. In
     addition, when selecting a project, you should look at ancillary benefits,
     such as the benefits the project infrastructure has to other business units
     or the opportunity to leverage the virtual training into additional lines of
     business.


        Be careful of the abbreviation PV. It can mean Present Value, as
     presented here, or Planned Value. Planned Value is an Earned Value
     Management term that describes the budgeted value for the planned
     work. You can read a lot more about this in Book VIII, Chapter 1.
Net Present Value
Net Present Value (NPV) takes the PV amount and subtracts the cost over the
time periods they are invested. Like the PV, the higher the NPV, the better the
project opportunity.
        For the exam, you won't have to calculate the NPV, but you should
     be able to select the best project opportunity given the NPV of multiple
     projects.
Future Value
Future Value (FV) looks at the value in the future of funds invested now. To
calculate the FV of current funds you need to know the interest rate and the
number of time periods. The equation is
   FV = PV x (1 + r)n

Assume that you can invest $500,000 to upgrade your production facility now
and expect an increase in efficiency of 7% for each year for five years.
Another option is to invest in $500,000 in a new product, which should give
you a 20% return in Year 1, but then only a 5% return in Years 2 and 3, and
then need to be retired.
By calculating the options, you can determine that the FV of the $500,000 of
investing in the production facility is $701,276, and the FV of investing in the
new product is $661,500. Therefore, the investment in the production facility
is a better investment.
   Production facility: FV = $500,000(1.07)5
   New product: FV = ($500,000 x 1.2) x 1.052



        For FV calculations, the higher future value is the better investment!
Payback period
The payback period calculates how soon you will recapture your investment
and begin making a profit. This calculation doesn't take into consideration the
time value of money the way PV, NPV, and FV do.


        You might see a question like this on the exam:
   Assume that you're investing $2,300,000 in a project to automate a
   manual process. Your calculations show that during the first year, you will
   gain $550,000 in efficiency. Every year after that, you expect to save
   $710,000 annually. What is the payback period?




You can see that the payback period occurs in Year 4.
Benefit-cost ratio
Benefit-cost ratio compares the benefit or revenue of a project with the cost
or investment of a project. The benefit number is always the first number.
Therefore, if you have a project that involves a $2,000,000 investment and
will return $2,500,000, you calculate the benefit-cost ratio as
   2,500,000 / 2,000,000 = 1.25

You can see that the higher the ratio, the better the project. Any project with a
benefit-cost ratio higher than 1.0 means the project will be profitable.


        You might see questions on the exam that expect you to calculate a
     benefit-cost ratio, or you might need to select between various projects
     with different ratios, or even define what a particular ratio means.

Financial terms
The metrics in the preceding section are the most prevalent metrics used in
analyzing the financial contribution a project will make to the organization.
This section describes some financial and accounting terms you should also
be familiar with although you won't have to use them for calculations.
Sunk cost
Sunk cost is an accounting principle that states that money you have already
spent should not be factored into future expenditures. In other words, just
because you already spent $5 million on a project, that doesn't justify
spending another $2 million. The $5 million is a sunk cost.
Opportunity cost
Opportunity cost is incurred by selecting one project over another. For
example, say you have a budget for projects, and you have Project A with an
NPV of $2 million and Project B with an NPV of $1.5 million: You should
select Project A. However, the opportunity cost of selecting Project A is the
$1.5 million NPV of Project B.
Table 1-1 offers a synopsis of the financial metrics you need to know for the
exam.

Table 1-1 Financial Metrics Summary
Metric                  Summary                                            Higher or Lower

Present Value (PV)     Current value of future cash flows                 Higher is better.

Net Present Value (NPV) PV minus costs                                    Higher is better.
Future Value (FV)      The future value of funds currently invested       Higher is better.

Payback period         How long to recapture investment and make a profit Lower is better.
Benefit-cost ratio     Revenue divided by cost                            Higher is better.



Nonfinancial metrics
In addition to the financial metrics, organizations often include nonfinancial
contributions or impacts from investing in projects. Some of the more
common ones are
    Customer satisfaction and retention
    Employee satisfaction
    Employee retention
    Process improvement
    Organizational learning
    Public opinion
    Synergistic effect of doing specific related projects



           The financial metrics and nonfinancial considerations are only part of
       what goes into evaluating the feasibility of a new project. In Chapter 2
       of this minibook, I look at how assumptions, constraints, and other
       variables are reviewed before a project is formally authorized.
Key Terms
 The terms from this chapter are all finance related. If you can describe what
 each of these means, you will be in good shape!
    Project portfolio committee
    Present value (PV)
    Net present value (NPV)
    Future value (FV)
    Payback period
    Benefit-cost ratio
    Sunk cost
    Opportunity cost
Chapter Summary
 The information in this chapter usually occurs before a project is chartered;
 therefore, you, as a project manager, may not be involved in this pre-project
 work. However, you need to understand what goes into selecting projects.
 The PMP reflects the importance of these topics by including questions that
 cover this information on the exam.
    Projects can be initiated based on internal or external factors.
    The Project Management Institute (PMI) assumes there is some type of
    project portfolio committee that selects projects.
    Projects are selected based on a set of criteria.
    Financial and nonfinancial metrics are used when selecting projects.
                         Prep Test
1. Your organization has eight divisions, and they all have their
  own project management procedures and templates. You have
  been designated as the project manager and assigned to lead a
  team in reviewing all existing project management policies and
  procedures across the organization. Your team will identify
  gaps, develop policies to fill the gaps, eliminate redundancies,
  and make recommendations on how to improve the adoption of
  the new policies and procedures across all divisions. This is an
  example of initiating a project based on
 A    A technological advance
 B    A regulatory requirement
 C    Market demand
 D    Organizational need

2. Your company builds medical devices. You want to modify an
  existing device so it can send back more data to the physician's
  office. Your project is to conduct a clinical study for the FDA to
  prove that the modified device is effective and safe. This is an
  example of
 A    Technological advance
 B    Legal requirement
 C    Ecological impact
 D    Social need

3. You have just been notified that your company won a bid to
  conduct an independent verification and validation of
  requirements for a new campus in the state university system.
  You will be assessing the construction, IT, quality of life, and
  administrative processes prior to the campus opening. This is
  an example of
  A   Customer request
  B   Legal requirement
  C   Ecological impact
  D   A social need

4. A new project manager approaches you, annoyed that her
  software upgrade project has been put on hold and all her
  project resources have been pulled to work on a big new
  initiative. You explain to her that this decision is actually good
  because
  A The new project has a better strategic alignment with the
  organization.
  B It is better to cancel or put other projects on hold rather than run
  too many projects without enough resources.
  C The nonfinancial benefits outweigh the financial benefits.
  D Doing too many large projects at one time is risky.

5. Your organization provides a multitude of electronic
  components to the aircraft industry. You have heard there are
  likely to be layoffs in the commercial aircraft companies. You
  put together a presentation that shows the financial benefits of
  providing temporary staff to these companies after they
  downsize. The portfolio steering committee turns down the
  project because
  A The information is unreliable.
  B There are too many large projects going on right now to start up
  a new company.
  C It is not strategically aligned with the organization's business.
  D The temporary staffing industry has a historically low rate of
  return.

6. You work for a state agency that sets up literacy programs for
  economically challenged counties and cities. Which of the
  following is not a criterion that your agency would use when
 selecting projects?
 A    Strategic alignment
 B    Nonfinancial benefits
 C    Riskiness of the project
 D    Financial benefits

7. Which financial measurement identifies how soon you will
  recapture your investment and start making a profit?
 A    Benefit-cost ratio
 B    Payback period
 C    Net present value
 D    Sunk costs

8. If the future value, four years from now, of a project investment
  is $8,500,000, and the interest rate is 6%, what is the present
  value, rounded to the nearest 100?
 A    $6,732,800
 B    $6,351,700
 C    $7,136,700
 D    $10,731,100

9. What is the future value of $4,200,000 in three years at an
  interest rate of 5.5%, rounded to the nearest 100?
 A    $5,203,100
 B    $4,931,800
 C    $3,576,800
 D    $3,773,500

10. Your organization is weighing which project to invest in.
  Project Alpha has a benefit-cost ratio of 1:1.1, Project Beta has a
  benefit-cost ratio of 1:1.33, and Project Charlie has a benefit-
  cost ratio of 1:1.17. Using a financial analysis, which project is
the best investment?
A   Not enough information to determine the answer
B   Project Alpha
C   Project Beta
D   Project Charlie
                           Answers
1. D. Organizational need. Improving project management processes
  and capabilities will help the organization. Look at Organizational
  need.
2. B. Legal requirement. Performing a study for the FDA is an
  example of a legal requirement. Check out Legal requirements.
3. A. Customer request. Winning a bid is an example of responding to
  a customer request. See Customer request.
4. B. There are times when it is better to cancel a project or put it on
  hold to avoid over-allocating resources. Review Criteria for project
  selection.
5. C. It is not strategically aligned with the organization's business.
  The organization supplies parts. Establishing a temporary staffing
  organization isn't in alignment with the company's core competency
  even though it serves the same industry. Review Criteria for project
  selection.
6. D. Financial benefits. A state agency provides services. It's not
  looking to make a profit; rather, its mission is to provide value to
  citizens. See Criteria for project selection.
7. B. Payback period. The payback period calculates the initial
  investment and the estimated income over time to determine when
  you should recapture your investment. Look over Payback period.

8. A. $6,732,800. $8,500,000 / 1.064. Take a look at Present Value.

9. B. $4,931,800. $4,200,000 x 1.0553. Look over Future Value.
10. C. Project Beta. Project Beta has the best benefit-to-cost ratio.
  Review the information from Benefit-cost ratio.
Chapter 2: Chartering Your Project
Exam Objectives
    Given business and compliance requirements, define the high-level
    scope needed to meet customer expectations.
    Use historical data, information on the environment, and expert
    judgment to identify and document high-level risks, assumptions, and
    constraints. Use the information to propose an approach to carry out
    the project.
    Analyze stakeholder requirements to document the scope, milestones,
    and deliverables, and complete a project charter.
    Gain commitment for the project and formalize project management
    authority by obtaining approval for the project charter.



 Before a project is officially authorized, there is work to be done. The first
 thing you have to do on a project is come to an agreement on the scope of the
 project with the sponsor and the customer. As part of defining the scope, you
 also identify boundaries and limitations for the project. This means
 documenting some of the high-level risks associated with the project as well
 as any constraints, such as funding limitations, hard due dates, and so forth.
 For those areas you can't define, you will have to document some
 assumptions. For instance, you may have to assume you will have the
 resources you need inhouse or that funding will be available at specific
 intervals. Until you have done more work on the scope, you may not know
 these things for certain, but you document them as assumptions for later
 validation. Working through the scope, high-level risks, constraints, and
 assumptions helps you to appropriately set customer expectations and gain
 acceptance to initiate the project.
 A project charter is the very first piece of official documentation for a
 project. Of course, you will probably see previous documents that go into
evaluating whether to initiate a project. You will find information about those
in Chapter 1 of this minibook. After the decision to initiate a project is
approved, the project charter documents the high-level information and
becomes the first written communication about the project.
                 Quick Assessment
1. The four main purposes for a charter are to ______ ______
  ______, identify the project manager, authorize the project manager
  to apply organizational resources, and link the project to the
  organization's strategic plan.
2. The ______ ______ demonstrates the project's value to the
  organization.
3. Which input to the charter provides a narrative description of the
  project?
4. (True/False). Marketplace conditions influence project initiation.
5. A template provided by your PMO can assist you in completing the
  project charter. This template is an example of a/an ______ ______
  ______.
6. The charter should identify the project manager's authority level
  and limitations with regards to ______, ______ ______, ______
  ______, and ______ ______.
7. (True/False). You should document the initial communication
  strategy in the project charter.
                             Answers
 1. Authorize the project. See the section, What a Project Charter Is
   and Why You Need One.
 2. Business case. The business case provides financial and
   nonfinancial metrics that show how the proposed project benefits
   the organization. Peruse the section Business case.
 3. Statement of work. The statement of work (SOW) describes the
   business needs the project will fulfill and provides a narrative
   description of the product. Look over Project statement of work.
 4. True. The marketplace conditions, such as resource availability,
   lending rates, and competition definitely influence whether a project
   is initiated and the approach to the project. Review Enterprise
   environmental factors.
 5. Organizational process asset. A charter template is something the
   organization can provide that can assist you while you're
   completing the charter, by saving you time and organizing the
   information you need to initiate a project. Check out Organizational
   process assets.
 6. Staffing, technical decisions, conflict resolution, and budget
   management. For more detail, peruse Develop Project Charter:
   Outputs.
 7. False. The communication strategy will be in the project
   management plan, not in the project charter. Look over Develop
   Project Charter: Outputs.

What a Project Charter Is and Why
You Need One
 The first process you undertake when you start a project is Develop Project
 Charter. As you can read in Book I, Chapter 4, each process belongs to a
process group and to a knowledge area. This process is in the Initiating
process group and in the Project Integration Management knowledge area. If
you want a refresher on the knowledge areas or process groups, you can find
it in Book I, Chapter 4.
Developing a project charter entails developing a document that formally
authorizes a project or a phase and documenting initial requirements that
satisfy the stakeholder's needs and expectations. Simply put, a project charter
is the official document that authorizes a project. A charter is the green light
that gives the project manager the authority to expend organizational
resources to achieve project objectives.


        Project Charter. A document issued by the project initiator or
     sponsor that formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides
     the project manager with the authority to apply organizational resources
     to project activities.
Different organizations have different terms for a charter. Other terms I have
heard include
   Project initiation document
   Project description
   Project authorizing document



        Regardless of the name that your organization gives the initial project
     documentation, the project charter document has the following
     characteristics:
   Identifies the project sponsor and the project manager


            Someone other than the project manager initiates projects. This
   person could be the project sponsor, a customer, the Project Management
   Office (PMO), a portfolio steering committee, or senior management. The
   initiator should have authority consistent with the size, complexity, and
   critical nature of the project.
    Demonstrates commitment for the project and formalizes project
    manager authority
    Links the project to the strategic plan of the organization and shows
    how the project aligns with the organization's operations
    Obviously, organizations should undertake only those projects that tie
    explicitly to a strategic plan.



         Some organizations refer to their chartering documents as a
      Statement of Work (SOW). A Statement of Work is defined as "a
      narrative description of products, services, or results to be delivered by
      the project." PMI does not consider a SOW and a charter to be the same
      thing!


Develop Project Charter: Inputs
 Preparing a useful project charter requires gathering a good bit of information
 about the project's purpose and its expected benefits to the organization. The
 PMBOK Guide identifies these five inputs for the Develop Project Charter
 process:
    Project statement of work (SOW): This narrative description of a
    project does the following:
     * Explains the business need that the project will fulfill
     * Clarifies the product of the project
     * Tells how the project aligns with the organization's strategic plan
    Business case: This information demonstrates the project's value to the
    organization. Such value can be judged by these metrics:
     * Financial: Increased revenue, expense reduction
     * Nonfinancial: Customer loyalty, innovation
    Agreement: For a project based on a contractual obligation, the
    agreement (contract) is an input to the project charter. Its contents include
     * The contract statement of work
     * Contractual requirements, terms, and conditions
   Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs): These internal factors (such
   as organizational structure and human resource capabilities) and external
   factors (such as competition and regulations) affect whether you do a
   project and how you approach it. I talk about EEFs in Book I, Chapter 2.
   Organizational process assets (OPAs): These comprise the policies,
   procedures, templates, and prior-project documentation that organizations
   use to manage projects in a consistent way. I talk about OPAs in Book I,
   Chapter 3.

Project statement of work
Not all organizations create a formal statement of work (SOW), so don't be
surprised if you haven't seen one. For organizations that do have a formal
project SOW, it could be created by the person requesting the project, or by a
portfolio steering committee, the project sponsor, or the PMO.


        When the PMBOK Guide refers to a SOW, it isn't necessarily
     referring to one from a contract. Instead, this use of SOW refers to a
     narrative description of the project. If the SOW is from a contract, the
     term contract will be used in conjunction with SOW.
The SOW describes the business need and how the project will meet that
need. It can also describe how the project is in alignment with the
organization's strategic plan.
The following is a fictional SOW for creating an on-site childcare facility at
Cynergy, Inc. corporate headquarters:
   Cynergy, Inc. Childcare Facility Statement of Work
   Our company values state that we are an organization that values a work-
   life balance. We believe that our employees are our greatest asset, and we
   strive to make the work environment a supportive place for our
   employees.
   We have a young work force. Forty percent of our employees are under
   35, and as such, there are many young families. Commercial childcare
   facilities have varying quality and can have restrictive hours and policies.
   To alleviate the stress and issues associated with childcare needs, we have
   decided to open an on-site childcare facility at our corporate
   headquarters.
   The project will identify the childcare wants and needs for all local
   employees and develop a proposal for meeting those wants and needs.
   Once an approach is agreed upon, the project manager will create a full
   set of requirements, project documents, and a project management plan to
   fulfill the project objectives. Project work includes hiring and managing a
   contractor to develop plans and construct the facility. Staffing, furnishing,
   installing playground equipment, and landscaping are included in the
   project scope.
   The finished childcare facility will have a capacity for up to 75 children
   ages 3 months to 5 years. It will include separate rooms for age groups
   and special activities, such as art, music, nap time, etc. There will be a
   food area that includes a place to store cold snacks and room-
   temperature snacks, but no food preparation. The outside play area will
   have separate sections that are age appropriate.

You can see where the following elements are documented:
   Narrative description
   Business need
   Product description
   Alignment with strategic plan

Business case
The business case documents the business reason for undertaking the project
as well as the cost-benefit analysis. Much of the financial information used in
the cost-benefit analysis comes from the project selection process described
in Chapter 1 of this minibook. Many organizations use nonfinancial metrics
to justify a project as well, such as customer loyalty, business process
improvement, reduced employee turnover, innovation, and so on.


        Review the business case periodically throughout the project to
     ensure that the assumptions on which the business case was built are still
     valid. If they're not, the portfolio steering committee (or another body
     that selects projects) may want to revisit the project and determine
     whether it should continue.

Agreements
Agreements can take the form of contracts, memorandums of understanding
(MOU), letter of intent, or other written agreements. When doing work for an
external customer a contract is used. If this is the case, you use the SOW
contained in the contract to document information in the charter. You would
also look at any terms and conditions that provide direction on how the
project should be performed, key milestone dates, funding constraints, and
any other relevant information in the contract.

Enterprise environmental factors
Think about some of the enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) that might
constrain or guide how a project is chartered. What are some of the internal
factors? What are some of the external factors?
Internal factors that you definitely want to keep in mind include
   Organizational structure of any organizations that are involved in the
   project
    Information systems in an organization and their ability to share
   information
   Human resources: their skills and availability
   Portfolio management policies and processes
   Project Management Office (PMO) policies and processes
   Estimating, risk, and defect-tracking databases
External factors that can influence your project include
   Industry standards that apply to products or services
   Regulatory laws or codes you need to comply with
   Governmental policies, restrictions, and political climates
   Marketplace conditions that influence pricing and availability of materials
   and services
   Competitor information, such as the number of competitors, opportunities,
   and threats based on your competition
   Financing availability and rates
   Pending legislation that could impact your products, services, and
   processes
   Availability of resources, both physical and labor
   Changes in the market, either from competition or economic factors
   Economic influences, such as unemployment and availability of credit
All these EEFs can have an effect on whether you do a project, and how you
approach it. Here are a few quick examples:
   You work in a weak matrix organization. Therefore, your ability to
   negotiate for team members will frequently be overridden by functional
   managers. Additionally, most of your team members will have their
   regular work, and work for your project and other projects. This is an
   example of an internal environmental factor that relates to the
   organization. For more information on organizational structure, see Book
   I, Chapter 3.
    Your organization does work for a government agency. The government is
   getting ready to mandate a particular type of reporting for all projects.
   This external environmental factor relates to governmental and regulatory
   topics.
    The interest rate for borrowing money has been rising lately. Assumptions
   about the cost of money now may be different than it will be in six months
   when you're estimating needing to draw from a line of credit. This is an
   example of an external environmental factor that relates to financing and
   the economy.

Organizational process assets

       Organizational process assets (OPAs) are supposed to help you do
    your project. I know it often seems that they don't really help, but that is
    PMI's approach to this category of inputs. Some of my favorites for this
    particular process include
   Organizational policies, procedures, and intranet sites
    Templates for forms, reports, and documentation
    Documentation from prior projects
    Lessons learned from prior projects
 I see many organizations that have plenty of policies and procedures. Some
 have templates. But, surprisingly, information from prior projects is not
 centralized, easily accessible, or easily searchable. I see the same thing on
 lessons learned. Every organization says, "We must do `lessons learned'!", so
 people do it. However, I rarely see project manager consulting lessons learned
 from prior projects before embarking on new projects. Although the PMBOK
 Guide has this lessons learned concept throughout many of the processes, it
 isn't always implemented well in the real world. You read more about lessons
 learned in Book IX, Chapter 1.


Develop Project Charter: Tools and
Techniques
 Putting together the information from the SOW, the business case, and the
 contract takes a fair amount of organization, analysis, and synthesis,
 especially for large and complex projects. This analysis needs to be done with
 a keen eye for the EEFs and OPAs that influence the way you do the project.
 It takes expert judgment to accomplish all this thinking!


         You will notice that expert judgment is the primary technique for all
      the Project Integration Management processes. Here's what expert
      judgment really means, according to the PMBOK Guide Glossary:


         Expert Judgment. Judgment provided based upon expertise in an
      application area, knowledge area, discipline, industry as appropriate for
      the activity being performed. Such expertise may be provided by any
      group or person with specialized education, knowledge, skill,
      experience, or training.
 Think about the types of expertise you might need for developing a project
 charter. Who could help you? What kind of knowledge would they need? You
 should consider resources both internal to the organization and external to the
 organization.
 Some internal resources might include
    Sponsor
    Potential team members
    Prior team members and project managers (PMs)
    Other key stakeholders and subject matter experts
    The PMO
 External resources you might consider include
    Consultants
    Industry and professional associations
 You can also do research either online or using various publications.


         Developing a charter is not done in a vacuum, so you will likely need
      facilitation techniques, such as meeting management, conflict resolution,
      brain storming, and problem solving to come to agreement on the high-
      level scope of the project.


Develop Project Charter: Outputs
 After all this information gathering and analysis, you can start to document
 information in an organized fashion, and voila! The charter is created. In
 some organizations, the charter is created by the sponsor, customer, PMO, or
 some other entity and then handed to the PM. In other organizations, the PM
 either assists in the creation or actually creates the charter and then gets
 approval from the sponsor, PMO, or whoever is appropriate. Regardless, it is
 a good practice to make sure that the project manager is involved in some
 manner when developing the charter.
 The charter should provide a summary of the project with enough information
 that the initial project team can read it, absorb it, and then use progressive
elaboration to plan the project in detail. Table 2-1 shows the items that the
PMBOK Guide says are contained in the charter.


          The needs of the organization and the project should determine the
       actual contents.

Table 2-1 Sample Charter Contents
Charter Content
                      What It Does
Item

                      The reason why the project is being undertaken. May refer to the business case, the
Purpose and
                      strategic plan, external factors, a contract, or any other document or reason for
justification
                      performing the project.

                      The strategic position the project is being undertaken to deliver, or the result to be
Objectives            achieved.There are usually multiple objectives, such as objectives for scope,
                      schedule, cost, quality, customer satisfaction, and so on.

                      Measurable criteria that correspond to each objective to indicate that the objective
Success criteria
                      has been successfully met.
                      The high-level business and compliance requirements must meet customer
High-level
                      expectations. (These are not detailed requirements but merely initial, high-level
requirements
                      requirements.)
Assumptions and       The initial assumptions about scope, resources, funding, approach, and other project
constraints           variables.Constraints are the initial limitations, such as a fixed due date or budget.

High-level project    A summary-level description of the project. May include information on high-level
description           project and product deliverables as well as the approach to the project.
                      The initial risks. These will later be progressively elaborated and entered into a risk
High-level risks
                      register.

Summary               Significant events in the project. May include the completion of deliverables, phases
milestones            or product acceptance.
Summary budget        The initial range of estimated expenditures for the project.

                      The initial list of stakeholders who can influence or will be influenced by the project,
Stakeholder list
                      product, service or result.
Approval
                      Who can approve and sign off on each deliverable and the criteria for acceptance.
requirements

                      The authority to hire, fire, discipline, accept, or not accept project staff.
PM Authority:         The authority to make technical decisions about deliverables or the technical
Staffing              approach.
Technical decisions   The authority to resolve conflict within the team, the organization, and external
Conflict resolution   stakeholders.
Budget management     The authority to commit, manage, and control project funds. Includes variance
                      thresholds.

Sponsor, PM
signatures, and
other relevant   Demonstrates commitment and approval for the project.
signatures



In some organizations, you see high-level assumptions and constraints
documented in the charter. In others, you might see an Assumption and
Constraint log that would start with the high-level assumptions during project
initiation. While the project progresses, you would see more detailed
assumptions. Examples of high-level assumptions include
    We will use internal resources to staff the project.
    The market will accept the new product.
    Funding will be available.
Examples of high-level constraints can include regulations, fixed delivery
dates, and a budget cap.
I'll show you an example of a project charter for the childcare center. Assume
that since receiving the statement of work, you have identified the following
additional information:
    The facility must be open from 6:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
    It needs to be completed by December 31 of the current year.
    The budget is $2.5 million.
    The facility will use 20,000 square feet of space not currently occupied at
    Cynergy, Inc.
    There is a 2,500-square feet outdoor area for play.
     Cynergy, Inc. is located in a temperate climate with daytime lows of 40
    in the winter and daytime highs of 90 in the summer.
    There are local strict building and licensing codes for childcare facilities.
    You have a team of six people, not including vendors. These people have
    already been identified and assigned to your team.
     Team members are available approximately 50 percent of their time, and
    they are all excited about working on the project.
     Cynergy, Inc. is a matrix organization.
For areas you don't have information about, you would make an assumption
and document it. Figure 2-1 shows a sample project charter.


       Go to the beginning of this chapter and review the exam objectives.
    See whether you can explain the content in this chapter and how it meets
    the exam objectives.
Figure 2-1: A sample solution.



Key Terms
  Congratulations! You just finished the first process! Here are a few key terms
  associated with initiating a project and developing the project charter.
      Project charter
      Project statement of work (SOW)
Business case
Expert judgment
Objectives
Success criteria
Chapter Summary
 In this chapter, I discuss the components that go into a project charter.
 Projects don't fall from the sky. They need to align with corporate objectives
 and have a business case that justifies the investment. Keep the following in
 mind as you prepare for the exam:
     A project charter is the very first piece of documentation for a project. A
    project charter officially authorizes a project. It links the project to the
    strategic plan of the organization and shows how the project aligns with
    the organization's operations.
     The charter should provide a summary of the project with enough
    information that the initial project team can read it, absorb it, and then use
    progressive elaboration to plan the project in detail.
    The statement of work (SOW) provides a narrative description of the
    project. If you are performing the work under contract, you will use the
    SOW in the contract.
    The business case identifies financial and nonfinancial metrics to
    demonstrate value to the organization.
     You must keep in mind the enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) and
    organizational process assets (OPAs) and how they can influence and
    impact your project!
     Use expert judgment and needed facilitation techniques with all the inputs
    to document the high-level scope, risks assumptions, and constraints for
    the project.
     Expert judgment is used throughout the Project Integration Knowledge
    Area. Any group or person with specialized education, knowledge, skill,
    experience, or training can provide expert judgment.
                         Prep Test
1. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor
  (EEF) that would influence charter development?
 A Charter from a similar project that was done eight months ago
 B Documentation that describes lessons learned from a similar
 project
 C Charter template
 D Ability to get funding for the project

2. You are preparing your project charter. You need to find a
  narrative description of the project. What document will provide
  you with what you are looking for?
 A    Statement of work (SOW)
 B    Business case
 C    Scope statement
 D    Strategic plan

3. You are preparing to pitch a project to the portfolio steering
  committee. You want to demonstrate the value of the project to
  the organization, not just in financial terms but also in terms of
  developing customer satisfaction and loyalty. Where would you
  document this information?
 A    Statement of work (SOW)
 B    Business case
 C    Project charter
 D    Concept of operations

4. Your company has won a bid to conduct research on the impact
  of CO2 in a remote part of the Northwest Territories. You have
  been assigned to lead the project. Your sponsor, the VP of
 Research, wants to see a charter for the project on his desk next
 Tuesday. What document should you pay particular attention to
 as you develop the charter?
 A    Requirements documentation
 B    Business case
 C    Contract
 D    Stakeholder analysis

5. Your organization outsources the IT Help Desk to another
  company. You need to use them on a project you were just
  assigned. Because they are a vendor, there are certain protocols
  you have to follow. This is an example of
 A    Assumption
 B    Enterprise environmental factor (EEF)
 C    Organizational process asset
 D    Risk

6. You are helping a junior project manager on his first project.
  You walk him through a repository of forms that include
  business case templates, charter templates, and a myriad of
  other helpful forms. This repository is an example of
 A    Organizational process asset (OPA)
 B    Enterprise environmental factor (EEF)
 C    Constraint
 D    Statement of work (SOW)

7. The project justification, summary milestones, and project
  manager (PM) authority are described in which document?
 A    Statement of work (SOW)
 B    Stakeholder analysis
 C    Business case
 D    The charter
8. Which of the following persons or entities is not typically
  authorized to initiate a project?
 A    The project manager
 B    The project sponsor
 C    The Project Management Office (PMO)
 D    The portfolio steering committee

9. If you are seeking expertise (expert judgment) to help develop
  your project charter, which resource are you most likely to use?
 A    The functional managers
 B    The accounting department
 C    The PMO
 D    The chief operating officer

10. Which of the following is not included in the project charter?
 A    High-level requirements
 B    Contingency funds
 C    Objectives
 D    Success criteria
                           Answers
1. D. Ability to get funding for the project. The ability to get funding is
  an external environmental factor (EEF) that influences the project.
  The other options are organizational process assets (OPAs). See
  Enterprise environmental factors.
2. A. Statement of work (SOW). The statement of work (SOW)
  provides a narrative description of the work to be done. Take a look
  at Project statement of work.
3. B. Business case. The business case demonstrates the financial
  metrics as well as nonfinancial metrics to justify undertaking a
  project. Review Business case.
4. C. Contract. Because this project was won in a bidding situation,
  there will be contractual obligations that are outlined in the contract.
  These need to be reflected in the project charter. Look at
  Agreements.
5. B. Enterprise environmental factor (EEF). The company's staffing
  is an external environmental factor (EEF) you need to consider. See
  Enterprise environmental factors.
6. A. Organizational process asset (OPA). Forms and templates are
  organizational process (OPAs) assets that assist project managers
  in doing their jobs. Check out Organizational process assets.
7. D. The charter. All these items are documented in the charter. The
  statement of work and the business case may provide relevant
  information, but the charter pulls it together and documents it in one
  place. Spend some time with Develop Project Charter: Outputs.
8. A. The project manager. The project manager is not usually
  authorized to initiate a project. They may participate in developing a
  charter. See Develop Project Charter: Outputs.
9. C. The PMO. The PMO often has the expertise to help you with
  high-level information needed for your charter. Review Develop
  Project Charter: Tools and Techniques.
10. B. Contingency funds. Contingency funds are used to protect the
  project from risk. This information is not available when a charter is
  developed. Check out Develop Project Charter: Outputs.
Chapter 3: Identifying Project Stakeholders
Exam Objective
    Analyze stakeholders to identify expectations and gain support for
    the project.



 This chapter focuses on identifying those people and groups of people who
 can affect your project -- or think they can! They are stakeholders. You will
 see ways to identify them and then analyze their interests, involvement, and
 potential impact on your project.
 Stakeholders may also be affected by your project, sometimes negatively,
 sometimes positively. Identifying affected stakeholders and understanding
 their interests and influence will help you manage their engagement level on
 your project. Ultimately, your goal is to maintain stakeholder satisfaction
 during the execution of your project.
 Keeping track of all your stakeholders can be challenging, so read this
 chapter to discover such techniques as brainstorming, interviewing, and
 methods to identify, categorize, and document information about project
 stakeholders. Then you can develop effective strategies for working with
 them and getting them to work with you!
                 Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). Stakeholders are only those people who are
  positively affected by your project and are working to help it
  succeed.
2. (True/False). A sponsor is a key stakeholder on a project.
3. Someone who provides resources to help you perform your project
  is a(n) ______. After you identify stakeholders on your project, you
  should ______ them.
4. A way to record the level of authority and the degree of
  involvement of stakeholders is to create a(n) ______ ______ grid.
5. Someone who actively and vocally does not support your project is
  a(n) ______.
6. Someone who provides resources to help you perform your project
  is a(n) ______.
7. The ______ ______ is where you record information about your
  project stakeholders.
8. (True/False). Vendors and suppliers are not considered
  stakeholders because they are external to the organization.
                             Answers
 1. False. Stakeholders can be affected positively or negatively by
   your projects, and not all stakeholders want you to succeed. Read
   about this in the section, Who Cares about Your Project?
 2. True. Sponsors can significantly influence the project, and they are
   very interested in the outcome. Review the content in Common
   stakeholders.
 3. Supporter, classify. The first step in working with stakeholders is to
   identify them. After that, you classify them. Look over Stakeholder
   analysis.
 4. Power/Influence grid. A Power/Influence grid maps the level of
   authority and the amount of participation of each stakeholder.
   Check out Stakeholder analysis.
 5. Resistor. A resistor exerts a negative influence on accomplishing
   your project. You can learn more about this in the Stakeholder
   analysis section.
 6. Supporter. Supporters provide resources, such as staff to your
   project. Look over Stakeholder analysis.
 7. Stakeholder register. This contains details about the stakeholders
   on your project. Find more in Identify Stakeholders: Outputs.
 8. False. Vendors and suppliers should definitely be considered
   stakeholders because they can affect your project and can be
   affected by your project's outcome. Peruse the section, Common
   stakeholders.


Who Cares about Your Project?
 After you have your charter (which you can read about in the preceding
 chapter of this minibook), you should start identifying those people who are
 affected by your project, have expectations or needs associated with your
 project, or can influence your project. These people (and sometimes things)
 are stakeholders. In the Glossary of the PMBOK Guide, PMI expands the
 definition of a stakeholder a bit. You should know this definition for the
 exam:


         Stakeholder. An individual, group, or organization who may affect,
      be affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision, activity or
      outcome of a project.
 Identifying stakeholders and understanding their needs and expectations is
 critical to the success of your project. Think about the implications of not
 identifying key stakeholders. Most likely, they will have requirements that
 need to be part of the project. If you don't incorporate their interests from the
 start, you will most likely need to make changes when you do identify them
 as stakeholders. And changes that occur late in the project are much more
 expensive than those that are identified early on. Therefore, thinking through
 all the people and groups involved in or affected by your project early and
 often will help you identify the correct approach for each stakeholder.

Identify Stakeholders: Inputs
 So how do you go about finding these stakeholders? Start with the project
 charter. Look at procurement documents, and don't overlook enterprise
 environmental factors (EEFs), organizational process assets (OPAs), and
 common stakeholders.


         Identify Stakeholders. Identify Stakeholders is the process of
      identifying the people, groups, or organizations that could impact or be
      impacted by a decision, activity, or outcome of the project; and
      analyzing and documenting relevant information regarding their
      interests, involvement, interdependencies, influence, and potential and
      impact on project success.

 Project charter
 A good place to start is the project charter. The purpose, project description,
 and requirements are a good first place to look to identify people who will be
involved with your project, or will have an interest in the outcome. Pay
particular attention to the project sponsor, customer, and stakeholders that
will be significantly affected by the project.

Procurement documents
If you're outsourcing part of your project or purchasing goods or services,
you should look at your procurement documents. For example, if you need to
bring in consulting help or perhaps temporary workers, the consultant, temp
agency, and the workers are all stakeholders. You have to consider their needs
and expectations to be successful. For example, a consultant hired to help
plan the childcare center might have expectations that he or she would have
office space on-site, a company computer, and access to the network while
working for Cynergy2, Inc.

Enterprise environmental factors
Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) that affect this process include
regulations and the company culture. (To refresh your memory about EEFs,
read Book I, Chapter 2.) If your project needs any kind of permit, license, or
approval by any kind of agency, that agency is a stakeholder. Believe me:
That can exert influence, and it's almost always negative! So identify those
stakeholders early on and identify a plan to keep them satisfied.
Your company culture will influence how detailed your stakeholder analysis
is and also the type of decision making that is prevalent. Some organizations
have very collaborative atmosphere that makes certain that all stakeholders
have a chance to voice their opinion and influence project direction. Other
organizations require cursory communication and a top-down style of
information distribution about the project. The culture will influence the time
and techniques you will use to identify and analyze your stakeholders.

Organizational process assets
The organization infrastructure can also have an influence if you're
considering IT systems and infrastructure components as stakeholders.
Organizational process assets (OPAs) you can use include
   Information from prior projects
   Policies and procedures for identifying stakeholders
   Templates or forms to record information about your stakeholders
For a refresher on OPAs, review Book I, Chapter 3.

Common stakeholders
Think about the projects you have worked on. Who and what are the
stakeholders that are present on almost every project? You can probably come
up with a list with five to ten common stakeholders, like the following:
   Customer
   Sponsor
   Project manager
   Project management team
   Project team
   End user
You can easily expand this list to include additional stakeholders, such as
   Functional managers (because they provide the team members)
   The Project Management Office (PMO) or a portfolio steering committee
   Program office (if you have one)
Additional stakeholders will be project-dependent, but the preceding list is a
decent starting place.
Now look at the example from the Cynergy2, Inc. Childcare Center, as
discussed in the preceding chapter. Using the Project Charter shown in Figure
2-1 in the previous chapter, you can identify the following stakeholders:
   Sponsor: Morgan Cuthbert
   Project manager: You
   Project team
   Project customer: Cynergy2, Inc. Employees
   Parents
   Children
   Human Resources department
    Legal department
    Facilities department
    Project vendors: Playground, Inc., General Contractor, Carpentry,
    HVAC, Electrical, Plumbing
    Suppliers: Furniture, equipment, supplies
    Existing vendors: Maintenance, janitorial, food prep
    Childcare teachers/caregivers
    Childcare administration
    City
 As the project continues into the planning phase, you will probably expand
 the list, filling in the names of the stakeholders instead of their positions in
 the company. This is an example of progressive elaboration, which I discuss
 in Book I, Chapter 2.
 However, for a first round, this is a good start. The next step is to understand
 stakeholders' interests and influence.

Identify Stakeholders: Tools and
Techniques
 Identifying stakeholders is the first step. Here are some techniques you can
 use to identify stakeholders and analyze the degree of influence that
 individual stakeholders can have on your project.

 Stakeholder analysis
 Face it: Not all stakeholders have the same degree of influence on your
 project. Furthermore, not all stakeholders care that much about your project.
 Some stakeholders will be affected positively by your project and others
 negatively. Understanding which stakeholders are influential, which are
 concerned, and which can help or harm your project are necessary to help you
 develop strategies to maximize the influence of project supporters while
 minimizing the influence of resistors.
 The three steps to analyze stakeholders are
  1. Identify stakeholders.
    This initial step includes identifying and recording stakeholder roles,
    interests, influence, and expectations. After you identify and record
    information about the most common stakeholders, you can expand the list
    by interviewing the identified stakeholders to uncover additional
    stakeholders.
  2. Classify stakeholders.
    Classify stakeholders based on the potential degree of support, influence,
    and power they have on the project.
  3. Assess support.
    Consider how each stakeholder would react in various situations. Then
    determine the best way to influence them to enhance their support for your
    project and minimize any negative influence they might exert.
  One simple way to consolidate stakeholder information is to create a grid that
  maps stakeholder positions across two variables. Here's an example: Say you
  want to figure out who has the most influence and who is the most supportive
  of your project. You can create a Power/Support grid like the one shown in
  Figure 3-1. You analyze each stakeholder to determine whether she is an
  advocate, neutral, or a resistor and whether she has a high, medium, or low
  amount of power.




Figure 3-1: Use a Power/Support grid to assess stakeholders.
The PMBOK Guide shows an example of a Power/Interest grid. The grid in
the PMBOK Guide is a 2 x 2 grid, and the one in Figure 3-1 is 3 x 3. Point
being, you can create any kind of grid, depending on what you think is best
for the project, but the overall goal is to develop a strategy for managing
stakeholders and for planning your project communications.
   Resistor: A resistor actively and vocally does not support your project.
   He can cause disruption to your project and take up your time in trying to
   work with him. You want to find ways to show the resistor the WIIFM
   (What's in it for me?) in supporting your project. You may also try to find
   ways to minimize his influence on the project. Here's an example: A
   resistor for the childcare center may be an employee without children who
   would rather see the space used as a workout area.
    Neutral: A neutral stakeholder doesn't support or detract from your
   project. Ideally, you want her to support your project, but she won't do any
   real harm by being neutral. A neutral stakeholder for the childcare center
   might be someone without children who doesn't care whether there is a
   childcare center on-site.
    Advocate: An advocate is actively and vocally in favor of your project.
   Try to find ways to encourage him to voice his support and try to
   maximize his influence. An advocate for the childcare center could be
   someone with one or more children who will use the center and is thrilled
   to have quality daycare nearby.
Using the list of stakeholders you identified earlier for the childcare center,
you can then plot them on a Power/Support grid as shown in Figure 3-2.
Figure 3-2: Filled-out Power/Support grid.


  The childcare center scenario is an unusual situation because there are few
  resistors. In most projects, you will usually have at least a few. For example, a
  resistor could be someone who likes the status quo and doesn't want change.
  In the case of a childcare center, though, which will improve the quality of
  work-life balance, not too many people will likely speak out against it.
  You might disagree with some of the placement of stakeholders on this grid.
  In the real world, the project manager and the team would discuss the
  placement and work together to come to consensus on the placement and the
  correct strategy.
  Another way to categorize stakeholders is to analyze the types of role they
  have on the project:
      Driver: A person who has the authority to determine the direction of the
      project and make decisions that affect the project. Morgan Cuthbert is a
      driver for the childcare center.
      Supporter: A person who provides assistance or resources used by the
      project to meet objectives. Department managers who are providing team
      members to work on the project are supporters.
      Observer: A person who does not interact with, or directly influence, the
      project. The janitorial services vendor is an observer.
  This information is entered into the stakeholder register along with the
 information from the Power/Support grid. I show you an example and
 describe a stakeholder register in the next section.


         You may see different names for the stakeholder grid. For example,
      interest/influence, interest/support, power/interest, and so forth. The
      important point is to understand the variables that are being assessed.

 Expert judgment
 For smaller projects, identifying all the stakeholders isn't difficult. However,
 the PMP focuses on larger projects. For large projects, you want to pull
 together people that can help you identify the various stakeholders. For
 example, you can interview senior management or the key stakeholders you
 have already identified. You may want to send questionnaires to project
 managers who have worked on similar projects.
 Other groups you can consider include
    Other organizational units
    Subject matter experts in the technical or business area
    Industry groups
    Consultants
    Associations

 Meetings
 You can gather and compare information about stakeholders in meetings with
 any of the people mentioned in preceding section on expert judgment.
 Meetings may consist of a brainstorming session, interviews, focus groups, or
 virtual meetings to help you identify the pool of stakeholders that you need to
 analyze.

Identify Stakeholders: Outputs
 The stakeholder register, which records relevant information for each
 stakeholder or group of stakeholders, is a wonderful tool to keep information
 organized. This will become an input into the communications management
plan because communication is the main way you can manage stakeholder
engagement. You can read more information on the communications
management plan in Book IV, Chapter 4 and about planning stakeholder
management in Book V, Chapter 3.

Stakeholder register
You can have whatever fields in the stakeholder register you want. Common
fields include
   Name
   Position
   Expectations
   Information from your stakeholder analysis
Figure 3-3 shows an example of a generic stakeholder register.
Another approach is to use the example from the childcare center (see Figure
3-4). In Figure 3-4, I don't list expectations, but I do list information from the
stakeholder analysis and the stakeholder function on the project. Again, like
all things in the project management world, tailor the use of the forms and
techniques to suit your needs!
Figure 3-3: Sample stakeholder register.
Figure 3-4: Filled-out stakeholder register.




                             Initiating summary
The chapters in this minibook are all about initiating the project. This process group
comprises 13% of the test, or 26 questions. For these questions, you need to have knowledge
and skills in the following techniques:

        Cost-benefit analysis                Book II, Chapter 1

        Business case development            Book II, Chapter 2

        Project selection criteria           Book II, Chapter 1

        Risk identification techniques       Book II, Chapter 2

        Elements of a project charter        Book II, Chapter 2

        Stakeholder identification techniques Book II, Chapter 3




          This process and the process to develop the project charter interact.
       Notice the exam objectives in the prior chapter reference analyzing
       stakeholder requirements to complete the project charter. Therefore, you
       should expect to conduct these processes concurrently and iteratively
       until your charter is signed off and approved and you have identified
       your project stakeholders to the extent possible during project initiation.

Key Terms
 The terms in this chapter provide a means to identify, analyze, and document
 information about stakeholders.
     Stakeholder
     Resistor
     Neutral
     Advocate
     Driver
     Supporter
     Observer
     Stakeholder register
Chapter Summary
 The intent of identifying and analyzing stakeholders is to identify the
 appropriate approach for each stakeholder to gain support for your project.
    Identifying stakeholders and understanding their needs and expectations is
    critical to the success of your project.
    Information about stakeholders is progressively elaborated throughout
    your project.
     Use expert judgment from groups and individuals in the organization to
    identify a robust list of stakeholders.
    You can use a grid to map stakeholders against specified variables, such
    as power, interest, influence, type of role, or support.
    Record information about your stakeholders in a stakeholder register.
                          Prep Test
1. People who have an interest in your project, or who can
  influence your project, are called
 A    Observers
 B    Drivers
 C    Customers
 D    Stakeholders

2. Your organization has an enterprise architecture that is tightly
  controlled. All new IT projects must comply with the enterprise
  architecture. This is an example of
 A    A stakeholder
 B    An enterprise environmental factor (EEF)
 C    An organizational process asset (OPA)
 D    A constraint

3. Which of the following is not a stakeholder you are likely to see
  on most projects?
 A    Sponsor
 B    End user
 C    Regulatory agency
 D    Project team

4. You are collecting information about people involved with your
  project. Where should you document that information?
 A    A stakeholder register
 B    A stakeholder management strategy
 C    A Power/Influence grid
 D    A stakeholder management record
5. You are assessing the amount of help each stakeholder will give
  you and the ability they have to steer the project. What type of
  vehicle should you use to record this information?
 A   A stakeholder register
 B   A stakeholder management strategy
 C   A Power/Support grid
 D   A Power/Interest grid

6. What type of grid would you use to record the amount of
  involvement and the ability to effect changes on a project?
 A   Interest/Influence
 B   Power/Support
 C   Power/Observer
 D   Support/Interest

7. There are three steps in analyzing project stakeholders. Which
  of the following is not one of those steps?
 A   Identify stakeholders.
 B   Classify stakeholders.
 C   Assess support.
 D   Plan engagement strategies.

8. Which processes provide inputs to the Identify Stakeholders
  process?
 A   Plan Communications and Develop Project Charter
 B   Plan Procurements and Develop Project Charter
 C   Develop Project Charter and Conduct Procurements
 D   Collect Requirements and Plan Communications

9. Which stakeholder categories would be appropriate for a
  project sponsor?
 A   Observer, supporter
 B   Driver, resistor
 C   Driver, advocate
 D   Supporter, neutral

10. Which document provides input to the Identify Stakeholders
  process and lists the sponsor, team members, and others
  participating in the project?
 A   The project scope statement
 B   The statement of work
 C   A contract
 D   A project charter
                           Answers
1. D. Stakeholders. A stakeholder is someone who is actively involved
  in your project or who is affected by the execution or completion of
  the project. Check out the definition in Who Cares about Your
  Project?
2. B. An enterprise environmental factor (EEF). The organization's
  infrastructure, including the enterprise architecture, is an enterprise
  environmental factor. See Enterprise environmental factors.
3. C. Regulatory agency. Regulatory agencies are not involved in all
  projects. The others listed are part of almost all other projects. See
  Common stakeholders.
4. A. A stakeholder register. The stakeholder register is the document
  used to record stakeholders, their interests, and other relevant
  information. Review Stakeholder register.
5. C. A Power/Support grid. The amount of help a stakeholder can
  give you refers to whether a stakeholder is an advocate or resistor
  of your project; the ability to steer the project refers to the
  stakeholder's power. Look at Stakeholder analysis.
6. A. Interest/Influence. The amount of involvement refers to the
  interest in the project and the ability to affect changes refers to the
  amount of influence on the project. See Stakeholder analysis.
7. D. Plan engagement strategies. You will plan stakeholder
  management and stakeholder engagement strategies in the
  planning processes. The initiation process of Identify Stakeholders
  is concerned only with identifying stakeholders and documenting
  information about them. Peruse Stakeholder analysis.
8. B. Plan Procurements and Develop Project Charter. The project
  charter and procurement documents are inputs to this process.
  They come from the Develop Project Charter and the Plan
  Procurements processes. Check out Project charter and
  Procurement documents.
9. C. Driver, advocate. The sponsor has the authority to determine the
  direction of the project, and as a project champion, advocate for the
  project. Look at Stakeholder analysis.
10. D. A project charter. The project charter can identify the sponsor
  and team members. It is an input to this process. Check out Project
  charter.
Book III

 Planning Integration, Scope, and
             Schedule




          Take a look at the article on the role of the project management
plan at www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book III: Planning Integration, Scope, and Schedule

Book III: Chapter 1: Constructing the Project Management Plan
   Knowledge and Skills for the Planning Processes

   The Project Management Plan

   Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs

   Develop Project Management Plan: Tools and Techniques

   Develop Project Management Plan: Outputs

   The Project Management Plan and the Executing, Controlling, and Closing Processes

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book III: Chapter 2: Defining Project Scope
   Project and Product Scope

   Plan Scope Management

   Collect Requirements

   Define Scope

   Create WBS

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book III: Chapter 3: Creating Your Schedule
   Planning Schedule Management

   Sequence Activities: Inputs

   Estimate Activity Resources: Inputs
Estimate Activity Resources: Tools and Techniques

Estimating Activity Durations

Developing the Schedule

Key Terms

Chapter Summary
     Chapter 1: Constructing the
      Project Management Plan
Exam Objectives
    Define and document how changes will be addressed to track and
    manage changes throughout the project.
    Present the project management plan to attain approval before
    executing the project.
    Hold a kick-off meeting to start the project and communicate key
    project information.

 I begin this minibook by identifying the cross-cutting skills you will need
 when planning a project. Skills such as active listening and decision-making
 are necessary when developing a project management plan, which is the
 master plan for the project. It comprises all the other subsidiary management
 plans, the project baselines, and additional components that are used to
 execute, monitor, control, and close the project. Nearly all (22 of the 47
 processes are directly related to the Develop Project Management Plan
 process covered in this chapter. For more on this, turn to Figure 4-5 in the
 PMBOK Guide, which shows how these processes provide inputs to, and
 receive outputs from, this process.
 The project management plan is started after the project charter is approved.
 However, it is developed iteratively, as the subsidiary plans and the baselines
 evolve. When the initial detailed planning is complete, the project
 management plan should be baselined. This controlled document should be
 changed only via a defined change control process. I discuss the change
 control process and a change control plan in this chapter.
 The elements of the project management plan are dependent upon the needs
 of the project. The plan may be robust and detailed or high level. The real art
 of project planning takes place in integrating, combining, and unifying the
 planning information while making trade-offs between the project constraints
 and managing stakeholder expectations. Projects are successful to the degree
 that you can balance and integrate all the project management processes. The
project management plan is the vehicle to do that.
A kick-off meeting introduces the team to the project, communicates the
relevant project information, and outlines the high-level milestones.
                 Quick Assessment
1. The ______ ______ system is a collection of formal documented
  procedures that define how project deliverables and documentation
  will be controlled, changed, and approved.
2. The project management plan is a controlled document. This
  means it can be changed only by using a defined ______ control
  process.
3. The project management plan comprises subsidiary management
  plans, ______, and various other documents that give direction on
  executing, monitoring, controlling, and closing the project.
4. The following are not part of the project management plan, but you
  need them to help manage the project: issue log, milestone list,
  resource requirements, and risk register. These, and many other
  elements, are called ______ ______.
5. (True/False). The source selection criteria are part of the project
  management plan.
6. The cost baseline, which is part of the project management plan, is
  an output from which process?
7. Which subsidiary plan identifies team member training needs?
8. Two plans that are developed as part of the Develop Project
  Management Plan process are the ______ management plan and
  the ______ management plan.
9. (True/False). The change control plan is part of the project
  management plan.
10. You announce the start of the project and communicate key
  milestones via a(n) ______-______ ______.
                          Answers
1. Change control. The change control system should, at the very
  least, define how to submit a change, describe how the change
  should be analyzed, and who can approve changes. For more on
  this topic, see Planning for change.
2. Change. The project management plan is a controlled document.
  This means that it can be changed only by using a defined change
  control process. You can find this discussion in the The Project
  Management Plan and the Executing, Controlling and Closing
  Processes section.
3. Baselines. The scope, schedule, and cost baselines are part of the
  project management plan. This information is contained in the
  Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs section.
4. Project documents. The following are not part of the project
  management plan, but you need them to help manage the project:
  issue log, milestone list, resource requirements, and risk register.
  These and many other elements are called "project documents." To
  read more about this, see Project documents.
5. False. The source selection criteria are part of a project document.
  Find a list of the project documents in the Project documents
  section.
6. Determine Budget. The cost baseline, also known as the
  performance measurement baseline, is an output from the
  Determine Budget process. You will see the documents that each
  process contributes to the project management plan in the section
  Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs.
7 Human resource plan. The human resource plan includes training,
  rewards, and recognition, and how team members will be added
  and released from the team. Find more on this is in the Develop
  Project Management Plan: Inputs section.
8. Change, configuration. These plans are developed when
    developing the project management plan. Take a look at the
    Planning for change section.
 9. True. The change control plan and (if needed) the configuration
   management plan are components of the project management
   plan. See the Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs section
   and the Planning for change section.
 10. Kick-off meeting. The kick-off meeting officially announces the
   beginning of the project and goes over the key milestones. This is
   discussed in the The project kick-off meeting section.

Knowledge and Skills for the Planning
Processes
 There are more processes in Planning than in any other process group. Many
 of the cross-cutting skills described in Book I, Chapter 1 are represented
 strongly in this process group. The following is a list of skills you need to
 apply to plan your project successfully. Keep these in mind as you go through
 the chapters in the next three minibooks.
    Active listening
    Brainstorming techniques
    Conflict-resolution techniques
    Cultural sensitivity and diversity
    Data-gathering techniques
    Decision-making techniques
    Facilitation
    Information management tools, techniques, and methods
    Leadership tools and techniques
    Negotiating
    Oral and written communication techniques, channels, and applications
    Problem-solving tools and techniques
    Project management software
    Relationship management
    Stakeholder impact analysis
    Targeting communications to intended audiences (for example, team,
    stakeholders, customers)


The Project Management Plan
 The project management plan is the master document where all subsidiary
 plans and the project approach are documented. It also contains standard
 information you will use for the project, such as organizational policies and
 procedures, templates, the project life cycle, and any project-specific
 information needed to develop a robust road map for conducting the project.


         Project management plan. The document that describes how the
      project will be executed, monitored, and controlled.
 Develop Project Management Plan. The process of defining, preparing and
 coordinating all subsidiary management plans and then integrating them into
 a comprehensive management plan.

Develop Project Management Plan:
Inputs
 The information in the project management plan comes from the planning
 processes discussed in this minibook and also Books II, IV, and V. Most of
 the subsidiary management plans come from the other planning processes, the
 exceptions being the change management plan and the configuration
 management plan, discussed later in this chapter. Table 1-1 shows the
 contributions from the outputs from various planning processes.

 Table 1-1 Planning Process Outputs
 Process                        Contribution

 Plan Scope Management          Scope management planRequirements management plan
Define Scope                             Project scope statement
Create Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) Scope baseline
Plan Schedule Management                 Schedule Management Plan

Develop Schedule                         Schedule baseline
Plan Cost Management                     Cost Management Plan
Determine Budget                         Cost performance baseline
Plan Quality Management                  Quality management planProcess improvement plan
Plan Human Resource Management           Human resource plan
Plan Communications Management           Communications management plan
Plan Risk Management                     Risk management plan

Plan Procurement Management              Procurement management plan
Plan Stakeholder Management              Stakeholder management plan




          Table 1-2 lists the subsidiary management plan content for each
       knowledge area. (See Book I, Chapter 4 for a list of the knowledge
       areas.) This is a generic list. You will need to tailor it for your project,
       but it's sufficient to get an idea of what each type of plan has for the
       exam.

Table 1-2 Subsidiary Plan Content
Plan               Content

                Guidance for how scope will be defined, documented, verified, managed, and
Scope
                controlledInformation on how to create the WBSInstructions for gaining formal
management
                acceptance and verification of project deliverablesProcess for controlling changes to the
plan
                project scope

Requirements    Describes how requirements will be collected, tracked, and reportedDescribes the
management      configuration management plan for requirementsDefines requirements
plan            prioritizationDefines the product metricsEstablishes a requirements traceability structure

Schedule
                Describes the scheduling methodologyIdentifies the scheduling toolSets the format for
management
                developing the project scheduleEstablishes criteria for controlling the project schedule
plan

Cost
                Defines the precision level of estimatesDefines the units of measureEstablishes cost
management
                control thresholdsDefines earned value (EV) rulesProvides reporting formats
plan
Quality
                Identifies quality management roles and responsibilitiesDefines the quality assurance
management
                approachDefines the quality control approachDefines the quality improvement approach
plan
Process           Describes the steps to analyze processesDefines process metricsIdentifies targets for
improvement       improvement
plan
               Outlines roles, authority, and responsibilitySets the project organizational
               structureDescribes staff acquisition and release processesIdentifies training
Human resource
               needsEstablishes criteria for rewards and recognitionOutlines information on regulations,
plan
               standards, and policy complianceDescribes policies for informing about and enforcing
               safety procedures
               Describes the type of information that will be distributed, including level of detail, format,
Communications
               content, and so onIdentifies the person responsible for communicating
management
               informationOutlines the timing and frequency of distributionDocuments a glossary of
plan
               terms
                  Describes the risk methodologyOutlines roles and responsibilities for risk
Risk
                  managementIdentifies budgeting and timing for risk management activitiesDescribes risk
management
                  categoriesProvides definitions of probability and impactProvides a probability and impact
plan
                  (PxI) matrixDescribes reporting formats

Procurement       Outlines procurement authority, roles, and responsibilitiesDocuments the standard
management        procurement documentsIdentifies the contract typeDocuments selection criteriaDefines
plan              constraints and assumptionsLists integration requirements

                  Identifies the current and desired level of stakeholder engagement for categories of
Stakeholder
                  stakeholdersIdentifies relationships and interdependencies among stakeholdersOutlines
management
                  communication requirements for stakeholdersDiscusses the impact of a change to
plan
                  stakeholders


You will also have a change management plan and possibly a configuration
management plan as part of your project management plan. In addition to the
information from the subsidiary management plans listed earlier, industry
standards, organizational policies, expert judgment, and project management
plans from previous projects will have information that should go into the
project management plan as well. For example, depending on your industry,
there may be standards for such areas as
    Safety
    Information security
    Validation
    Training
    Transition
    Integration
    Testing
Obviously, this list is not complete, but it should give you an idea of the types
of additional information that you can expect to see in a complete project
management plan. In addition to the various plans, you should indicate the
organizational policies and/or procedures that will be used on your project.
For example:
   Work authorization procedures
   Guidelines for tailoring the project management plan and project
   documents
   Reporting requirements
   Project life cycle identification and Go/No-go decision criteria
   Acceptable variance thresholds
   Performance measurement guidelines
   Key management reviews
   Baseline management and control
The enterprise might require specific information or specific ways of tracking
information. Consider the following:
   Systems to track progress and costs
   Document management and control systems
   Change control systems
   Configuration management systems
   Portfolio management systems



        A project management plan is not a schedule. Many times, I hear
     people refer to their project schedule as a "project plan." On the exam,
     pay attention to language. The exam might use project plan and project
     management plan interchangeably. However, it will not use project
     schedule and project management plan interchangeably!

Planning for change
I discuss change control and configuration management in detail in Book
VIII. For now, you should understand the definitions of the change control
system and the configuration management system as well as the type of
information you would find in a change control plan and a configuration
management plan.


       Change control system. A set of procedures that describes how
     modifications to the project deliverables and documentation are
     managed and controlled.
The change control plan outlines at least the following information:
   How change requests will be submitted
   The process for evaluating change requests
   Who should sit on the change control board
   Levels of authority for approving changes
Figure 1-1 shows a sample of a simple change management plan.
Figure 1-1: A change management plan.



Introduction to configuration management
  The configuration management plan outlines how you will identify product
  components and project documents. It describes the processes and approvals
  needed to change a configuration item's attributes. The process for
 configuration verification and audit are also outlined along with the roles and
 responsibilities associated with configuration management.


         Configuration management system. A subsystem of the overall
      project management system. It is a collection of formal documented
      procedures used to apply technical and administrative direction and
      surveillance to: identify and document the functional and physical
      characteristics of a product, result, service, or component; control any
      changes to such characteristics; record and report each change and its
      implementation status; and support the audit of the products, results, or
      components to verify conformance to requirements. It includes the
      documentation, tracking systems, and defined approval levels necessary
      for authorizing and controlling changes.
 Figure 1-2 shows a sample of a simple configuration management plan.

Develop Project Management Plan:
Tools and Techniques
 The two broad tools and techniques for this process are expert judgment and
 facilitation techniques.

 Expert judgment
 You must make sure your team will have the expert judgment needed to
 determine how the components and the details should work within the project
 management plan for your project. Consider the following areas where expert
 judgment is required:
    Tailoring the components in the project management plan to meet the
    project needs
    Defining the change control process
    Providing technical details and information for the project management
    plan
    Providing input for the appropriate life cycle
Identifying the resources and skill levels needed to perform the work
Identifying the items and documents that should be under configuration
control
Figure 1-2: A configuration management plan.


  Facilitation techniques
  The process of developing the project management plan is lengthy. It starts
  immediately after the project charter authorizes the charter and continues
  throughout the planning process. During the iterative development of the
  project management plan, you will have plenty of need for facilitation
  techniques. Here are a few examples:
     Brainstorming: You might use brainstorming to help define workflows,
     approaches to accomplish project work, and the processes you will use on
     your project.
      Problem solving: Projects that work with new technology or new
     processes are often fraught with problems, issues, and challenges. You
     may find yourself needing to plan work about which you have very little
     information. You will need to engage in a problem-solving session with
     your team members to identify solutions to problems and challenges.
     Conflict resolution: During the beginning stages of a project, there may
     be conflict as people get to know one another and establish a hierarchy.
     This is called storming, which I discuss in greater detail in Book VI,
     Chapter 2.
     Meeting management: You can't have a project without meetings! You
     also can't have a successful project without well-managed and productive
     meetings. You will need to exercise your meeting facilitation skills to
     ensure that your agenda is covered, people's questions are answered, and
    you achieve the results you want from the meeting.


Develop Project Management Plan:
Outputs
 The project management plan is an input to all the initial planning processes
 in each knowledge area (such as Plan Scope Management, Plan Schedule
 Management, and so forth). Updates to the project management plan are an
 output from many of the planning processes. In other words, it is an iterative
 process.
 Consider that the framework or a template for the project management plan is
 an input to the initial planning processes in each knowledge area. The
 template would have a placeholder for each subsidiary management plan,
 such as the scope management plan, schedule management plan, and so on.
 After these subsidiary management plans are created, they update the project
 management plan by being incorporated as part of the plan.
 The form in Figure 1-3 shows an example of a simple project management
 plan framework, which offers places for a description of the life cycle,
 variance and baseline management, project reviews, and tailoring decisions.
 The form also has room to address each subsidiary management plan either as
 a paragraph or as an attachment. Finally, note the area that requires attaching
 the scope baseline (Book III, Chapter 2), the schedule baseline (Book III,
 Chapter 3) and the cost baseline (Book IV, Chapter 1).
Figure 1-3: A project management plan.



The Project Management Plan and the
Executing, Controlling, and Closing
Processes
  After you understand where the information that contributes to the project
  management plan comes from, you need to know where it goes. The project
  management plan, including specific components included in it, will be
  inputs to processes in the Executing Process Group, the Monitoring and
  Controlling Process Group, and the Closing Process Group. The following
  list shows nonplanning processes that have the project management plan as
an input:
   Executing processes
   * Direct and Manage Project Work
   Monitoring and Controlling processes
   * Monitor and Control Project Work
    * Perform Integrated Change Control
    * Control Scope
    * Control Schedule
    * Control Costs
    * Control Quality
    * Control Communications
    * Control Risks
    * Control Procurements
    * Control Stakeholder Engagement
   Closing processes
   * Close Project or Phase
    * Close Procurements

Project documents
You might wonder why not every planning process contributes to the project
management plan, or why not every executing and monitoring and control
process updates the project management plan. Many documents that you use
to manage projects aren't part of the project management plan. For lack of a
better term, they are called "project documents." Take a look at the
documents in the following list to see how the other planning processes
contribute to project documents.
Activity attributes        Activity cost estimates   Activity duration estimates
                           Activity resource
Activity list                                        Agreements
                           requirements
Assumption Log             Basis of estimates        Change log
Charter                    Change requests           Forecasts
Issue log                  Milestone list              Project funding requirements
                                                       Project organizational
Proposals                  Procurement documents
                                                       structure
Quality control
                           Quality checklists          Quality metrics
measurements
Responsibility assignment Requirements                 Resource breakdown
matrix                    traceability matrix          structure (RBS)
Resource calendars         Resource requirements       Risk register
Roles and responsibilities Schedule                    Schedule data
Sellers list               Source selection criteria   Stakeholder analysis
Stakeholder management
                           Stakeholder register        Stakeholder requirements
strategy
                           Team performance            Work performance
Statement of work (SOW)
                           assessments                 information
Work performance
                           Work performance data
measurements

Project management plan approval
After the plan and all its components are finalized, you need to get it
approved and signed off. At the very least, the sponsor and the customer need
to approve your approach to the project. The stakeholder register and
communication management plan will identify the specific stakeholders that
need to sign off on the plan. After the plan is agreed to and signed off, it can
be rolled out to the project team.

The project kick-off meeting
Depending on the size of the project and the project team, you might hold a
kick-off meeting to introduce the project to the team. For a small project, the
project team will probably have been intimately involved with creating the
project management plan. The kick-off meeting would have been held after
the project charter was developed. However, for a large project with more
than 100 team members, the project management plan approval allows the
project to move into the development phase, and the kick-off meeting is the
appropriate venue to accomplish that.
You will want to have all the key stakeholders at the kick-off meeting. At that
 meeting you will introduce the project, describe the intended outcomes and
 discuss the key milestone deliverables and target due dates. If there is other
 relevant information, such as teaming agreements, external influences, a
 specific development methodology, and so on, you should discuss that as
 well.


Key Terms
 As you kick off the planning processes, here are some terms you should be
 familiar with:
    Project management plan
    Change control system
    Configuration management system
    Project documents
Chapter Summary
 The project management plan is a foundation for the repository of the
 information from all planning processes. It provides the initial template to
 collect the planning information from each knowledge area and puts it into
 one cohesive project management plan.
    The project management plan defines how the project will be executed,
    monitored, controlled, and closed. It comprises subsidiary management
    plans, baselines, and other information necessary to effectively manage the
    project.
    The project management plan compiles and combines information from
    many planning processes and develops an integrated plan.
    Information on how to manage and control change and implement
    configuration management is documented in the plan as well.
    Some project documents that are not part of the project management plan
    are used to help manage the project.
                        Prep Test
1. The requirements management plan is an output from which
  process?
 A   Plan Scope Management
 B   Collect Requirements
 C   Define Scope
 D   Develop Project Management Plan

2. The requirements management plan, risk management plan,
  and procurement management plan are referred to as
 A   Project documents
 B   Supporting documentation
 C   Subsidiary management plans
 D   The project management plan

3. Elements that help you manage the project, but are not part of
  the project management plan, are called
 A   Subsidiary management plans
 B   Supporting documentation
 C   Backup
 D   Project documents

4. Which subsidiary management plan defines the precision level
  of estimates, the units of measure, and reporting formats?
 A   Quality management plan
 B   Cost management plan
 C   Earned value plan
 D   Configuration management plan
5. Where would you find a description of how to submit change
  requests and the process for evaluating them?
 A   The configuration management plan
 B   The scope management plan
 C   The change management plan
 D   The project documents

6. Which system is used to apply technical and administrative
  direction and surveillance to identify and document the
  functional and physical characteristics of a product, result,
  service, or component?
 A   Change control system
 B   Configuration management system
 C   Project control system
 D   Project management information system

7. The tools and techniques used in the Develop Project
  Management Plan are
 A Expert judgment and facilitation techniques
 B Project management information system and analytical
 techniques
 C Information-gathering techniques and expert judgment
 D Expert analysis and enterprise environmental factors

8. Which of the following is not a component of the project
  management plan?
 A   Change management plan
 B   Communications management plan
 C   Cost performance baseline
 D   Requirements traceability matrix

9. Depending on the nature of the project, you might have many
 people approving your project management plan. What is one
 signature you should be sure to get?
 A    The chair of the change control board
 B    The core team
 C    The sponsor
 D    The PMO Director

10. For a large project, what is the appropriate time to introduce
  the project and get team buy-in on the project management
  plan?
 A    At the kick-off meeting
 B    After the baselines are set
 C    After the project charter is signed
 D    At the end of the project planning phase
                         Answers
1. A. Plan Scope Management. Both the requirements management
  plan and the scope management plan are outputs from the Plan
  Scope Management process. Go over Develop Project
  Management Plan: Inputs.
2. C. Subsidiary management plans. Subsidiary management plans
  are usually outputs from other planning processes, such as the
  Collect Requirements, Plan Risk Management, and Plan
  Procurements processes. Look at Develop Project Management
  Plan: Inputs.
3. D. Project documents. Project documents are not part of the
  project management plan, but they help you manage the project.
  Check out Project documents.
4. B. Cost management plan. The cost management plan defines the
  level of precision, units of measure, reporting formats, and more.
  Review Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs.
5. C. The change management plan. The change management plan
  describes how to submit change requests and the process for
  evaluating them. Look into Planning for change.
6. B. Configuration management system. The configuration
  management system defines how to apply technical and
  administrative direction and surveillance and much more. Review
  Introduction to configuration management.
7. A. Expert judgment and facilitation techniques. You need people
  familiar with the product and also your ability to facilitate
  brainstorming, conflict management, and problem solving. You'll
  see reference to this in the section, Develop Project Management
  Plan: Tools and Techniques.
8. D. Requirements traceability matrix. The requirements traceability
  matrix is a project document. Look at the Project documents
  section.
9. C. The sponsor. You should at least have the project sponsor and
  the customer sign off on the project management plan. Check out
  Project management plan approval.
10. A. At the kick-off meeting. The kick-off meeting is the right time to
  introduce the team to the project and the project management plan.
  Go over The project kick-off meeting.
Chapter 2: Defining Project Scope
Exam Objectives
    Using the project charter, lessons learned, and requirements
    gathering techniques (such as interviews, brainstorming, focus
    groups, and so on), assess the detailed project requirements,
    assumptions, and constraints to determine project deliverables.
    Deconstruct the project into a WBS in order to manage the project
    scope.



 Everything in the project is a function of the project and product scope.
 Therefore, getting the scope right and managing it effectively are the best
 ways to ensure project success. The first step in this process is to plan how
 you will gather requirements, define project and product scope, organize the
 scope using a work breakdown structure (WBS), validate the scope with the
 customer, and control the scope.
 Gathering requirements will transition your project from the Initiation process
 group into the Planning process group. If you need a refresher on process
 groups, review Book I, Chapter 4. Your ability to fully identify, document,
 organize, and control requirements and scope is the difference between a
 successful project and a nightmare!
 After you know your requirements, then you can define the scope with a
 scope statement. When your scope is understood, you develop a WBS to
 organize the scope into deliverables. This then becomes the foundation for the
 planning processes in the other knowledge areas, such as time, cost, quality,
 and so forth.
                 Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). Project scope refers to all the features and functions
  you need to deliver to meet project objectives.
2. Completion of the product scope is measured against product
  ______.
3. (True/False). Requirements are the foundation for developing the
  work breakdown structure (WBS).
4. Developing requirements begins with analyzing the ______ ______
  and the ______ ______.
5. Project deliverables and their acceptance criteria are documented
  in the ______ ______ ______.
6. The ______ ______ ______ is the foundation for all future
  planning. It is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition of
  the work to be done on the project.
7. The lowest level of the WBS is the ______ ______.
8. The document that provides details about the components in the
  WBS is the ______ ______.
9. A ______ ______ ______ links requirements to their origin and
  tracks them throughout the project life cycle.
10. (True/False). The best way to organize a WBS is by phase.
                          Answers
1. False. Project scope refers to all the work you need to do to create
  the features and functions. The features and functions are the
  product scope. Look at Project and Product Scope.
2. Requirements. Product scope completion is measured against
  requirements. Project scope completion is measured against the
  project management plan. Go over Project and Product Scope.
3. True. Requirements documentation is an input of the scope
  statement and the work breakdown structure (WBS). See Define
  Scope: Inputs and Create WBS: Inputs.
4. Project charter, stakeholder register. These two documents are
  outputs from the Initiating process group and are inputs for
  collecting requirements. See Collect Requirements: Inputs.
5. Project scope statement. The information from the project charter
  is progressively elaborated in the project scope statement. Among
  other information, the deliverables and acceptance criteria are
  documented in the project scope statement. See the Define Scope:
  Outputs section.
6. Work breakdown structure. The work breakdown structure (WBS)
  organizes the project work. After deliverables are identified in the
  WBS, the schedule, budget, quality requirements, and procurement
  decisions can be developed. Review the information in Create
  WBS: Inputs.
7. Work package. The work package is where you can assign
  resources. You will see how to decompose work packages into
  schedule activities in the next chapter. Go over Create WBS: Tools
  and Techniques.
8. WBS dictionary. The WBS dictionary describes the work that needs
  to be done in the WBS element, the resources needed, the duration
  and costs, and other information as appropriate. See Create WBS:
  Outputs for more information on this topic.
 9. Requirements traceability matrix. The requirements traceability
   matrix is used to organize and manage requirements throughout
   the life of the project. You can find more information on this topic in
   the Collect Requirements: Outputs section.
 10. False. The needs of the project dictate the best way to organize
   the WBS. Go over the information in Create WBS: Outputs.

Project and Product Scope
 All projects start out by defining what is supposed to be accomplished: the
 scope. But did you know about the two types of scope?


         Product scope. The features and functions that characterize a
      product, service, or result.
 Project scope. The work performed to deliver a product, service, or result
 with the specified features and functions.


         When reading exam questions, keep in mind that project scope and
      product scope look pretty similar. If you read over these two terms
      quickly, you might misinterpret the question. Take your time on the
      exam and make sure to read the question right!
 Using my threaded example of a childcare center (see the preceding
 chapters), here's how to identify some of the product and project scope
 deliverables.
     Product scope is easy because it comprises all deliverables for the
    childcare center. Product scope includes tangible things, such as a
    playground, a food-prep area, furniture, and so forth.
     Project scope is a little trickier, though, because to identify it, you have to
    think a bit harder. Consider activities, such as preparing procurement
    documentation for the general contractor, creating the project management
    plan and project documents, reporting project status for the childcare
    center, and so forth.
 Here are some common types of project scope:
    Documentation
    Testing
    Training
    Planning
    Reporting
    Collecting requirements
    Creating project documents and the project management plan
    Managing risk
    Managing change
    Managing the project team, vendors, and other stakeholders
    All other project management work


        Here's another comparison: Product scope completion is measured
     against the product requirements. Project scope completion is measured
     against the project management plan.

Plan Scope Management
 Speaking of the project management plan, one of the components in the
 project management plan is a scope management plan. Because the scope
 management plan describes how you will plan, manage, and control project
 and product scope, it is one of the first documents you create. Here is the
 official definition of the Plan Scope Management process.


        Plan Scope Management. The process of creating a scope
     management plan that documents how the project scope will be defined,
     validated, and controlled.

 Plan Scope Management: Inputs
The primary inputs to consider when developing a scope management plan
are the project charter and the project management plan. The project charter
contains
   High-level project description
   Product characteristics
   Project statement of work (SOW)
For more information on the project charter, you can check out Book II,
Chapter 2.
In the preceding chapter, I discuss how the project management plan is an
input to the first planning process in each knowledge area. It provides a
framework for planning the project and describes the life cycle for the
project. Because the development of the project management plan is iterative,
the project management plan is an input to creating the scope management
plan -- and the scope management plan becomes a component of the project
management plan.
The organizational culture, such as whether the organization is very
structured or perhaps more agile in its approach to project management will
influence scope management planning. Information from past projects as well
as policies, procedures, and templates can assist the project manager in
developing the scope management plan.

Plan Scope Management: Tools and Techniques
The two techniques used to plan scope management are expert judgment and
meetings. Expert judgment can come from team members who understand the
scope of the project and how to decompose, validate, and control the scope.
Additionally, team members who are experienced with eliciting,
documenting, and controlling requirements are helpful in determining how to
manage the requirements collection, validation, and control activities on the
project.
Meetings should include those stakeholders who will be collecting and
managing requirements, validating the scope, and helping control the scope.

Plan Scope Management: Outputs
The scope management plan and the requirements management plan are the
two outputs from the Plan Scope Management process.
Scope management plan
The scope management plan describes how the rest of the scope planning
processes will be managed. As such, it is an input to the other scope planning
processes.


        Scope Management Plan. A component of the project or program
     management plan that describes how the scope will be defined,
     developed, monitored, controlled, and verified.
The scope management plan defines
   Techniques that will be used to define the project scope, such as product
   analysis or structured workshops
   How to structure the work breakdown structure (WBS)
   The elements in the WBS dictionary
   Methods that will be used to validate deliverables
   The process for managing and controlling scope change, including
   membership on the change control board, the change submittal process,
   and so forth

Requirements management plan
Any project manager can tell you that one of the most common reasons for
project failure is the lack of requirements management. This is a key
contributor to scope creep. Missing requirements, changes to requirements,
and losing control of requirements all lead to failure in meeting project
objectives. Therefore, you should establish a plan to manage them.


        Requirements management plan. A component of the project or
     program management plan that describes how requirements will be
     analyzed, documented, and managed.
Your requirements management plan should describe
   How you will elaborate your existing requirements (if needed)
    The method for documenting requirements
    How you will show traceability
    Relationships among requirements and methods for verification
 Your requirements management plan should also contain a section on
 configuration management. I discuss configuration management in more
 detail in Book VII, Chapter 1 (where I discuss change management). For
 purposes of this process, though, you should establish a system that will do or
 have the following:
    Define an identification system, such as a numbering system that allows
    for parent/child relationships
    A traceability structure that tracks specified relationships
    The authority levels to add, delete, or change requirements
    A system to audit and determine whether the process is being used and is
    effective



         Some projects assign a Requirements Manager to control
      requirements. This person is in charge of documenting, managing,
      tracking, controlling, and verifying requirements. In some organizations,
      a Business Analyst performs this role.


         The PMP exam assumes that to collect and manage requirements
      effectively, you have an understanding of configuration management
      principles.

Collect Requirements
 One of the first questions you should ask when you get a new project is,
 "What are the requirements?" Another way of asking this is, "What do you
 need? What do you want? What conditions have to be met for you to be
 satisfied?"
         Requirement. A condition or capability that is required to be present
     in a product, service or result to satisfy a contract or other formally
     imposed specification. Requirements include the quantified and
     documented needs, wants, and expectations of the sponsor, customer,
     and other stakeholders.
Collect Requirements. The process of determining, documenting, and
managing stakeholder needs and requirements to meet the project objectives.
You can group or categorize requirements however it makes sense for your
project. Some examples of requirements categories include
   Solution requirements, such as functional and nonfunctional
   requirements. Nonfunctional requirements include reliability,
   supportability, performance, and so forth.
   Stakeholder requirements, such as communication and reporting
   requirements.
    Project requirements, such as business or project management
   requirements.
    Quality requirements that define the conductions that need to be met for
   the end result to be acceptable.



        While you collect requirements, you should also determine how to
     prove that they are met. To help you do that, make sure that all
     requirements are quantifiable. In other words, stating that you want "the
     employee hiring process to work better" isn't quantifiable.
     Comparatively, stating that you want "the process reduced from 16 steps
     to 7 steps" is quantifiable. Stating that you want "the new process to be
     40% faster" is also quantifiable.

Collect Requirements: Inputs
Stakeholders are the sources of requirements, so you need to start with your
stakeholder register. As I discuss in the preceding minibook, some people
also document high-level requirements or expectations -- such as "improve
employee productivity by 20%," or "the new system needs to be easy to
maintain" -- in the stakeholder register. If this is the case for your project,
you can progressively elaborate the high-level requirements into detailed
requirements in this process. You may document how you are going to
manage stakeholder engagement in a stakeholder management plan -- for
example, you may manage external stakeholders differently than internal
stakeholders, or you may collect requirements from technical stakeholders
differently than business stakeholders.
You also need to have your project charter. As I also discuss in the preceding
minibook, the charter describes the justification for the project and should
include high-level requirements.


        The scope management plan and requirements management plan
     developed in the previous process provide guidance in eliciting
     requirements to develop the product scope.
Using information from your charter, stakeholder register, and various
management plans, you can begin gathering and documenting project
requirements. During this process, you transition from the high-level business
requirements that you documented in the charter to detailed requirements for
the product and project.

Collect Requirements: Tools and Techniques
Because all projects are different and because some projects have many
stakeholders, there are several ways you can collect requirements. The most
obvious one is interviewing people, but you can also use focus groups,
workshops, surveys, brainstorming, and other group techniques.


        In addition to the inputs listed in the previous section, the exam
     assumes you have knowledge of requirement-gathering techniques, as
     discussed in the following sections.


        To perform these activities well, you're expected to have skills in
     negotiating, active listening, brainstorming, and facilitating.
Interviews
Interviews can be informal or formal, done one-on-one or conducted in
groups. Many times, an interview is the first step in identifying requirements.
Using my running example of the childcare center, you might meet with the
facilities manager, several parents, and the legal department to discover their
product and project requirements.
Focus groups
Focus groups are a more formal method of gathering requirements. A group
of prequalified or preselected stakeholders is brought together with a
facilitator who asks questions about the stakeholder's expectations for the end
product. When selecting members for a focus group, make sure to get a
diverse group. You don't want the information you collect to be skewed or
represent only one viewpoint. Focus groups can have an established set of
questions, or they can be more of a dialog with which you generate and
capture ideas, feelings, and reactions.
For the childcare center, you could bring together a group of 5 to 10 parents
and discuss their needs and expectations for the center.
Facilitated workshops
For larger projects -- especially IT, high-tech, or new product development
projects -- facilitated workshops can be highly productive. Key stakeholders
are brought together to identify their requirements and work through any
conflicting requirements.
The IT sector often has joint application development (JAD) sessions. In
these sessions, system engineers, end users, developers, and business analysts
can all work together to identify product features and functions.
Group creativity techniques
"Group creativity techniques" is a catch-all phrase for working with a group
of people to generate information. There are a number of group creativity
techniques, many of which you will no doubt recognize:
   Brainstorming
   Nominal group technique
   Delphi technique
     Idea/mind mapping
     Affinity diagram
     Multicriteria decision analysis
 By the way, these aren't presented in any particular order. No technique is
 better or more common than another technique.
 Brainstorming
 When you employ brainstorming to identify requirements, make sure you
 have representation from all the various stakeholder groups. This helps ensure
 you have input from everyone impacted by the product and project.
 Nominal group technique
 The nominal group technique is often used in conjunction with brainstorming.
 When all the requirements have been generated (or as many as can be
 generated at the time), the group ranks them. This can be as simple as
 members listing their top five requirements. The requirements are then
 prioritized for development, based upon the stakeholder ranking.
 Delphi technique
 The Delphi technique was designed to bring a group of experts to consensus.
 The thought process is that a group of experts reaching a conclusion is better
 than any one expert's conclusion.


                             Delphi technique
The RAND think tank developed the Delphi technique for forecasting (thus the reference to
the Oracle of Delphi, a Greek prophetess in the eighth century BC) the impact of technology
on warfare.



 Some benefits to using the Delphi technique are that it allows you to get
 information from a wide group of people that are geographically disbursed,
 and you can do it easily by using an automated survey tool.
 Here are the steps for the Delphi technique:
 1. A group of stakeholders or experts are identified, depending on the needs
   of the project.
2. Each stakeholder is sent a list of high-level requirements and asked to
  expand that list and send it back to the facilitator.
3. The facilitator compiles a comprehensive list of requirements and sends it
  back to the stakeholders for prioritization.
4. Each stakeholder prioritizes the requirements and sends it back to the
  facilitator.
5. Several rounds of this take place until you can reach a reasonable amount
  of consensus on the requirements and their priority.
One of the important things to know about the Delphi technique is that
stakeholders must remain anonymous to each other, at least for the first
couple of rounds. This allows free and unbiased participation by participants.
Being anonymous also frees stakeholders from being intimidated by people
with more knowledge, or a bigger title, or more experience. Sometimes, the
facilitator will modify the technique by conducting a round or two
anonymously and then gather the group to finalize the list.
If you were using this technique to gather requirements for the childcare
center, here are some example questions you could send to the parents:
   What type of outdoor activities would you like at the center?
   What type of indoor activities would you like at the center?
   What topics would you like to see taught?
   What types of food do you think should be available?
After you generate options, you could then ask the parents to rank all the
possible requirements.
Idea/mind mapping
A mind map is a technique that starts with the idea (or in this case, the
project) in the middle, and then stakeholders branch out from the central idea
and generate more ideas (or in this case, requirements).
A mind map can give you an overview of the project. This overview allows
you to determine whether there is an imbalance in requirements or whether
one set of needs was weighted more heavily than others. Figure 2-1 shows a
mind map for the childcare center. You can see the overview of the activities
planned for the children.
Figure 2-1: Mind map for the childcare center.


  Affinity diagram
  An affinity diagram takes ideas and groups them into categories with similar
  ideas or requirements. Thus, they are grouped with ideas that they have an
  "affinity" with. Affinity diagrams can be used alone or in conjunction with
  brainstorming and the nominal group technique. Figure 2-2 shows a sample
  affinity diagram with the same information as the mind map, but the display
  here is in a list versus the visual display in the mind map.




Figure 2-2: Affinity diagram for the childcare center.


  Multicriteria decision analysis
  When gathering requirements, you often need to balance several criteria to
  determine the best set or requirements for a product, service, or result.
  Multicriteria decision analysis identifies the various criteria that you will use
  to evaluate requirements and then assigns a weighted value to each criteria.
  Then solutions are rated against the criteria.
For the childcare center, assume that requirements for the cafeteria vendor
were
   Healthy meals
   Locally sourced ingredients
   Experience in a preschool environment
   Price
Three vendors were evaluated against all criteria, which were weighted
differently and then ranked on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 being low, and 5 being
high). You could set up a table to show how each vendor scored to establish a
quantitative method for selecting the best vendor based on the requirements.
Vendor                       Banana Bob's Jodi's Kitchen Tasty Tots
Criterion            Weight Rating Score Rating Score Rating Score
Healthy              .50    2      1     3      1.5   4      2
Locally sourced      .15     3       .45      5    .75    4      .60
Preschool experience .25     4       1        3    .75    3      .75
Price                .10     5       .50      4    .40    3      .30
Total                1.0             2.95          3.40          3.65

To determine the score, follow these steps:
1. Identify the criteria you will use to evaluate the requirements.
2. Establish a weight for each criterion.


          The sum of the criteria weights needs to add to 1.0.
3. Rate each vendor with regards to how well they meet the criteria.
4. Multiply the weight times the rating to determine a score for each
  criterion.
5. Sum the scores for each vendor and select the vendor with the highest
  score.
Combining group creativity techniques
You aren't limited to using just one group creativity technique. Using the
running childcare center example, you can see how a specific technique is
well suited for one phase and then easily flows into using another technique.
Start by having a meeting with 20 or so parents. Then, see how your
requirement gathering evolves:
1. Brainstorming: You lead a session to collect parents' needs, wants, and
  expectations, all of which are written on sticky notes and put on the wall.
2. Affinity diagram: You ask the parents to come up to the wall and start
  putting the sticky note ideas into groups. You'll probably see some
  negotiating about how to arrange and group the sticky notes, but eventually,
  people will settle on something they can live with.
3. Nominal group technique: Finally, you prioritize the sticky notes into
  your list of requirements.

Group decision-making techniques
Some of the preceding techniques can help you make decisions, such as the
Delphi technique and the nominal group technique. These decisions are based
on the group coming to a unanimous decision, or at least having a majority in
consensus. Sometimes, though, the project manager has to establish a
structure for making decisions to finalize the requirements. For those times,
many decision-making techniques are available. The PMBOK Guide
identifies four methods of reaching group decisions:
   Unanimity: Everyone agrees.
   Majority: More than one-half the people agree to a course of action.
   Plurality: The largest group of people supports a decision, even if they're
   not the majority.
   Dictatorship: One person makes the decision.
There really isn't one best way to make a decision. It would be nice if every
decision had unanimous approval, but that isn't realistic. Therefore, you have
to apply the technique that makes the most sense in any given situation. This
can sometimes require a trade-off on getting complete group buy-in and, for
the sake of time, making a decision and moving on.
Questionnaires and surveys
Questionnaires and surveys are a good way to gather information from large
groups of stakeholders. You can automate the process by asking people to
answer a set of questions online and then collating the results. This makes
completing and submitting the information fast and easy. If you give people
multiple-choice questions or ask them to rate information quantitatively, you
can easily total and tabulate your results.
For the childcare center example, you could use this technique to prioritize
playground equipment choices, hours of operation, food options, and the like.
Observations
Observation is useful when you want to see how end users interact in a
scenario or with a product. Observation can also help you understand
unconscious or unspoken requirements.
If you were looking at options for designing the floor plan for the example
childcare center, you might observe several similar sites and watch the traffic
flow for dropping off children, how the children migrate from activity to
activity, what the process is for picking up children, and so on. Then you
could design the site to best accommodate those processes.
Prototypes
Prototypes are used to create a model or a mock-up of an end product. They
might have limited or no functionality, but they give stakeholders an
opportunity to visualize the end product and make changes or additions to the
requirements early in the process. For the childcare center example, the
architect might create a model and discuss the various features and processes
that would be used in the center.
Prototyping is often used in new product development, agile software
development, and construction.
Benchmarking
Benchmarking involves identifying best practices in an industry or
organization and comparing the existing practices against best practices as a
means to improve performance. Test scores and customer satisfaction scores
are examples of measurements that can be benchmarked.
Context diagrams
Context diagrams show a business system or model and depict how people or
other systems interact with it. Oftentimes in context diagrams, people
providing inputs or receiving outputs are referred to as actors. The benefit of
a context diagram is that it shows a visual display of a process and the
interactions associated with the process.
Document Analysis
Document analysis consists of analyzing documentation that can help in
identifying requirements. Examples of documentation you might analyze to
elicit requirements include the following:
   Process flows
   Data flow diagrams
   Interface documentation
   Use cases
   Issue and defect logs
   Policies, procedures, forms, regulations, and information from previous
   similar projects

Collect Requirements: Outputs
As you collect your requirements, remember to document and organize them
so that it's easy to demonstrate when they are complete, as well as how they
impact and interact with other requirements. Additionally, you want to think
about how to manage and control your requirements.
Requirements documentation
Depending on the type and complexity of your project, your requirements
documentation can be relatively simple or very complex. One way to keep
requirements organized is to create a requirements register that documents all
the requirements for the project. You can do this in a table or a spreadsheet
for small projects. For large complex projects, software programs can help
you organize, track, and manage requirements. A simple requirements register
should at least include the following:
   Stakeholder name or position
   Requirement description
   Category or type of requirement
   Priority
   Acceptance criteria
Writing requirements
Writing good requirements can be challenging. Attributes of good
requirements include the following:
    Clear and unambiguous: You goal is one -- and only one -- way to
   interpret the requirement. Having a quantitative or measurable statement
   will help here.
   Concise requirements: There is only one requirement in each statement.
   Testable: You can prove a requirement has been met.
   Consistent: Different requirements can't conflict. For example, you can't
   have a requirement that personal information is encrypted to protect
   privacy yet another requirement that a person's e-mail address is available.
   Complete: All known requirements are documented.
   Accepted: Your stakeholders have signed off on the requirements.

Categorizing requirements
As you start to progressively elaborate your requirements, you want to
categorize them to maintain visibility and control. Commonly used categories
include
   Product requirements
   * Technical
   * Performance
   * Size, weight, and appearance
   * Maintainability
   * Environmental and interface
   * Safety and security
   * Operability
   Project requirements
   * Business requirements
   * Interface requirements
     * Training and documentation
     * Cost and schedule
 Clearly, the nature of the product will determine your requirement categories.
 The PMBOK Guide, Fifth Edition has additional examples that you should be
 familiar with as well.


         It is very important in your job, and for the exam, that your
      stakeholders agree to the requirements. You may want to get sign-off or
      some other written form of agreement for the requirements.
 Requirements traceability matrix
 Because requirements drive scope, and because scope determines the
 schedule, cost, and everything else about the project, you should be able to tie
 your requirements to various aspects of the project. A requirements
 traceability matrix can help you do that. For complex projects, you will need
 software that manages all the requirements and relationships for you. For
 simpler projects, though, you can create a database or spreadsheet. Here are
 some examples of what you'll be tracing and tracking:
    How your requirements trace to a deliverable
    How your requirements trace to an objective
    How detailed requirements relate to high-level requirements
    How technical requirements relate to business requirements
    Which verification and validation method will be used for a requirement
    Which stakeholder provided the requirement
 Having this information documented and easily accessible will simplify the
 process of analyzing the impact of changes and help you understand the
 relationships between requirements.


Define Scope
 Defining scope covers defining the project and product scope in more detail.
 Clearly defined scope enables project success. I'm sure you've been on a
project where the scope was not clearly defined, or where it kept changing, or
where stakeholders had different opinions about the project scope. Ill-defined
scope leads to conflict, rework, and stakeholder dissatisfaction. Therefore,
time spent to fully understand project and product scope is time well spent.


        Define Scope. The process of developing a detailed description of the
     project and product.

Define Scope: Inputs
You use the high-level information from the project charter, guidance from
the scope management plan, and the more detailed requirements
documentation to develop a project scope statement.


        Project scope statement. The description of the project scope, major
     deliverables, assumptions, and constraints.
The project scope statement helps stakeholder understand what is in and out
of scope and provides a documented basis for making decisions. For
organizations with robust project management processes, you will probably
find policies and procedures that give direction to defining the scope. You
will probably also find some templates as well.

Define Scope: Tools and Techniques
To move from a high-level understanding of the project, as documented in the
project charter and as detailed in the requirements documentation, you need
to work with people who understand the product, project, and the technical
details. Another way of saying this is that you need expert judgment, and that
might come in the form of team members, consultants, customers, or
professional organizations.
You might opt to gather these experts and have a facilitated workshop as
described in the earlier section, Collect Requirements: Inputs. A JAD session
will often assist in collecting the information needed to develop a robust
scope statement.
         In practice, gathering requirements and documenting the project
     scope happen at the same time. It is an iterative cycle that continues until
     the requirements are complete and information on the project scope is
     fully defined.
Product analysis
For many projects, the end result is one or more products that can be broken
down into component parts or deliverables. By analyzing the end product and
determining the component elements, you can get a better understanding of
the deliverables and appropriate acceptance criteria.
Depending on the type of project you're working on, you might hear this
process referred to as system engineering, product breakdown, requirements
analysis, or value engineering.
Alternatives generation
In project management, there is usually more than one way to go about
meeting objectives. You can take into consideration the benefits, costs, risks,
and feasibility of various options, be it as simple as deciding whether to
outsource work or do work in-house, or assessing whether to use an existing
product as a starting place, or reinventing something by starting with a blank
slate.
As your team goes through the process of analyzing the product and
generating alternatives, project scope becomes clearer, and you can begin to
develop the project scope statement.

Define Scope: Outputs
The project scope statement can be as detailed as needed to understand and
control the scope. At a minimum, it should include, either directly or by
reference to other documents, the following:
   Product scope description: A narrative description of the product. It
   should contain more detail than the project charter.
   Acceptance criteria: A description of the conditions or criteria that must
   be met for the customer to accept the final product or product components.
   Deliverables: Include not only the product deliverables but also the
   project deliverables. This can include training, documentation, reports,
   research, and the like.
    Project exclusions: Clarifying what is not in scope. These exclusions
   should be implicitly stated to minimize misunderstandings and conflicts
   later in the project.


           One of the easiest ways to control your scope is to clearly define
   what is excluded. Many stakeholders will assume that if something is not
   excluded, it is included. Those of us who have fought this battle a few
   times have learned to insert this simple sentence into the exclusions:
   "Anything not specifically included, is excluded."
    Project constraints: A limitation or restriction. Many times, a fixed
   budget or contractually agreed-upon milestone dates are constraints.
   Certain regulatory standards are also constraints.
    Project assumptions: Aspects of the project that are thought to be true
   but aren't proven should be documented. For example, you could assume
   that a cafeteria food service vendor will do any food preparation. This
   won't be certain until a contract for the extra work is completed, but at this
   point, you can assume this to be true for planning purposes.



        Assumptions. Factors in the planning process that are considered
     true, real, or certain without proof or demonstration.
Constraint. A limiting factor that affects the execution of a project, program,
portfolio, or process.
An example of a schedule constraint is any limitation or restraint in the
project schedule that affects when a schedule activity can be scheduled, such
as a fixed delivery date or milestone.


        Many project managers move their assumptions to an Assumption
     Log as they are progressively elaborated. You can refer to the log in the
     scope statement, or keep high-level assumptions in the scope statement
     and more detailed ones in the Assumption Log.
Figure 2-3 shows a sample project scope statement for my example Childcare
facility.
Figure 2-3: Childcare center project scope statement.



Create WBS
  The project scope statement provides an overview of the entire project scope.
  The requirements provide detailed information about the objectives, needs,
  and expectations. This information is necessary to successfully manage the
  project, but it doesn't organize the information in a way that allows the team
to easily plan, manage, and control the project. That's what a work
breakdown structure (WBS) is for. The WBS organizes the project scope. It
starts at a high level and progresses downward to decompose the deliverables
into finer levels of detail so that the team can identify all the deliverables
necessary to meet the project objectives.


        Create WBS. The process of subdividing project deliverables and
     project work into smaller, more manageable components.
Work breakdown structure. A hierarchical decomposition of the total work
to be carried out by the project team to accomplish the project objectives and
create the required deliverables.
The WBS organizes and defines the total scope of the project. Many
practitioners create WBSs that are deliverable-oriented -- meaning that the
WBS is based on the end products, not the work necessary to create the end
products. The work is represented in the activity list that is part of the
schedule. I discuss the schedule in the next chapter.

Create WBS: Inputs
The scope management plan, the scope statement, and the requirements
documentation are the key inputs for this process. You might be able to use
certain organizational process assets to help create your WBS. In particular, if
your organization does similar projects (for example, creating websites,
designing networks, product development, or even construction), there might
be a template available you can use to begin your WBS. Of course, your
particular project will need to modify the template to reflect the unique
aspects of your project, but templates and information from prior projects
provide a nice starting point.

Create WBS: Tools and Techniques
Decomposition and expert judgment are the only techniques used in
developing the WBS. Here is the PMBOK Guide definition of decomposition.


        Decomposition. A technique used for dividing and subdividing the
     project scope and project deliverables into smaller, more manageable
     parts.


        The PMP Examination Outline uses the term deconstruct. The
     PMBOK Guide uses the term decompose. They mean the same thing:
     taking a chunk of work and breaking it down into smaller chunks of
     work.
Expert judgment comes into play when project teams decompose the WBS by
starting with the highest level, which is the project. The next level down is
how you will organize the project. Many technology projects use the project
life cycle as the next level down. However, that's certainly not the only way
to organize the WBS, and perhaps not even the best way. Other options
include major deliverables or geography (given multiple locations). After this
level is established, it's just a matter of taking each high-level element and
decomposing it into finer levels of detail. This approach -- the most common
-- is a top-down approach.
The converse approach is a bottom-up approach, which starts with the lowest
level of deliverables and works up the chart to see where deliverables
naturally group themselves.
The lowest level of the WBS is called a work package, which is the level
where duration and cost can be estimated reliably.
Because the WBS represents all the work in the project, you must make sure
you aren't overlooking anything! Sometimes people forget to put in "project
management." If you need a WBS to reliably estimate cost and duration, you
will significantly underestimate if you leave out the project management
deliverables!


        I usually put project management as a box in the second level down.
     And, this is the only branch of the WBS where I might not constrain
     myself to identifying deliverables only. So much of our job is action-
     oriented that I might put an entry such as stakeholder management, or
     communication, or change management. These placeholders identify the
     type of work I do when I manage a project. Another option is to put the
     process groups under project management. You will see both these
     options a bit later in the chapter.
As I mention, the work package is the lowest level of the WBS, but reporting
progress at the work package level is probably too detailed. A large project
has hundreds of work packages. You can't report cost and schedule status for
each one and then expect the sponsor or steering committee to read your
report! Instead, you establish control accounts, which are where you can
reasonably report progress. A control account encompasses the work
packages beneath it and can have multiple work packages. Looking at it from
the other side, each work package can belong to only one control account.
Here are the definitions for work packages and control accounts.


        Work package. The work defined at the lowest level of the work
     breakdown structure for which cost and duration can be estimated and
     managed.
Control account. A management control point where scope, budget, actual
cost, and schedule are integrated and compared to earned value for
performance measurement.
You might not be able to define all the deliverables in the WBS at the start of
the project. Commonly, the WBS is established at a high level (three levels or
so) at the start of the project, and as more information is known, the levels are
further decomposed. This is an example of progressive elaboration known as
rolling wave planning.
Rolling wave planning provides more detail for work happening in the near
future, but leaves work further out in the future at a higher level. This doesn't
mean you don't have to account for the cost and schedule for future work;
you just hold it at a higher level of detail until you know what the lower level
of detail looks like.
Figure 2-4 shows part of a WBS for the childcare center. This WBS is
arranged by phases at level 2 along with project management. You can see
that the earlier work in the project is decomposed to a lower level than the
work later in the project (construction, operational readiness), demonstrating
rolling wave planning. I would consider Requirements and Plans to be control
accounts and the deliverables under them as work packages.
          Because the WBS is deliverable-oriented, it comprises nouns, not
       verbs. Many people have difficulty thinking in terms of deliverables
       instead of actions. With practice, it gets easier: Just think in terms of
       nouns.
  Deliverable      Verb               Comment
  Playground       Install playground "Install" implies action. On the WBS, you want
  equipment        equipment          only the deliverable.
  Curriculum                            Where you place the terms changes the
                   Plan curriculum
  plan                                  deliverable from a noun to a verb.

  To see the converse in action -- decomposing work into verbs -- see the next
  chapter.




Figure 2-4: WBS showing progressive elaboration.
        You can arrange your WBS with the project at the top level and
     deconstruct it downward, or you can approach the deconstruction shown
     in Figure 2-4 and deconstruct from left to right.
Not all branches of the WBS can be decomposed to the same level. Some
work might stay at three levels because that level is where the deliverables
are. Other branches might be decomposed five or six levels.
I've been asked numerous times how low to go on a WBS. The answer is,
"That depends." For a very large project, a work package might represent $1
million worth of work. For a small project, it might represent $25,000 worth
of work, or even less.


         When your WBS becomes fairly robust, you should develop a
     numeric coding structure to keep track of the levels. For instance, the
     first level is 1.0. At the second level, you would have 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and
     so on. The third level would have 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, and then 1.2.1.
     1.2.2, and so on. You can see a numeric coding structure in upcoming
     Figures 2-5 and 2-6. Many organizations that do large projects already
     have a coding structure as part of their organizational process assets.
To make it easier to remember, look at these steps:
1. Analyze the scope statement and requirements to understand the project
  work.
2. Determine how you will structure the WBS (by major deliverable, sub-
  project, phase, and so on).
3. Decompose the work until you have work packages or until you can't
  realistically decompose it into deliverables.
4. Identify control accounts for reporting purposes.
5. Establish a numeric coding structure.
6. Verify that your WBS is well organized and decomposed to an appropriate
  level.
Now you're ready for the outputs of this process.
Create WBS: Outputs
Here are a couple of samples of a WBS for the childcare center so you can
see different approaches. Figure 2-5 shows a WBS decomposed by major
deliverables.


        Either approach to the WBS will work. Maybe you would arrange it
    differently. There is no one correct way to arrange your WBS. The point
    is to make sure all the work is represented in the deliverables with
    nothing left out. It should be complete and logical, and help you manage
    and control your project. So set it up in a way that works for you and
    your team.


       Note, too, that the WBS samples in Figures 2-5 and 2-6 are presented
    in outline format. Many times, people start with sticky notes and develop
    a WBS that looks like an organizational chart, as shown in Figure 2-4.
    You can do that down to about three levels (or about 50 sticky notes)
    before it gets too unwieldy. Still, this approach is a good way to get a
    global picture of the project.
Figure 2-5: WBS based on major deliverables.


  Figure 2-6 shows a WBS arranged by phases.
Figure 2-6: WBS based on phases.


  WBS dictionary
  Your WBS is a key output of this process, but there are others. The WBS
  dictionary is an output that's used on larger projects to provide a detailed
  explanation for each component of the WBS.


          Work breakdown structure dictionary. A document that provides
       detailed deliverable, activity, and scheduling information about each
       component in the work breakdown structure.
  For each WBS component, the WBS dictionary includes a brief definition of
  the scope or statement of work, defined deliverable(s), a list of associated
  activities, and a list of milestones. Other information may include responsible
  organization, start and end dates, resources required, an estimate of cost,
  charge number, contract information, quality requirements, and technical
  references to facilitate performance of the work.
  You won't need a WBS dictionary for all projects, but a WBS dictionary is
  helpful as a communication tool for large projects to make sure that all the
  details of a work package are fully understood. Figure 2-7 shows a sample
  blank WBS dictionary form.




Figure 2-7: Sample WBS dictionary form.


  Scope baseline
  The scope baseline is composed of three elements: the scope statement, the
  WBS, and the WBS dictionary. This is the sum total of the project scope, and
 is part of the project management plan. Any changes to project or product
 scope will impact one or more of the elements in the scope baseline, and most
 likely many other project documents as well.


         Scope baseline. The approved version of a scope statement, work
      breakdown structure (WBS), and its associated WBS dictionary, that can
      be changed only through formal change control procedures and is used
      as a basis for comparison.
 The scope baseline should be tightly controlled after it's agreed upon.
 When creating your WBS, WBS dictionary, and scope baseline, you might
 need to go back and update or modify other project documents.

Key Terms
 I introduce you to many new terms in this chapter. You may be familiar with
 some of these from your job. Sometimes they are in use, but known by
 different names. For purposes of the exam, make sure you can identify the
 concept with the term presented here.
    Scope management plan
    Requirements management plan
    Nominal group technique
    Delphi technique
    Affinity diagram
    Multicriteria decision analysis
    Requirements traceability matrix
    Project scope statement
    Assumptions
    Constraint
    Work breakdown structure
    Work package
Control account
Work breakdown structure dictionary
Scope baseline
Chapter Summary
  Project scope management is concerned with project scope and product
  scope.
  A scope management plan and requirements management plan provide
  guidance for the remaining scope planning processes.
  Understanding the project and product scope starts with gathering
  stakeholder requirements.
  Requirements need to be documented in a clear, unambiguous, and
  concise way. They need to be testable, consistent, complete, and accepted
  by stakeholders.
  The project scope statement records the product scope description,
  product acceptance criteria, project deliverables, and project exclusions.
  The work breakdown structure (WBS) organizes and defines the total
  scope of the project.
   The WBS dictionary is an extension of the WBS that provides detail about
  the WBS components.
   The scope statement, WBS, and WBS dictionary make up the scope
  baseline.
                         Prep Test
1. A condition or capability that is required to be present in a
  product, service, or result to satisfy a contract or other formally
  imposed document is a
 A    Specification
 B    Requirement
 C    Stakeholder need
 D    Metric

2. Monday morning, your project sponsor stops by your cubicle
  and tells you that he needs you to create a new report that
  correlates each work package on your project to the company's
  strategic objectives. He needs it by the end of the week. The
  work to create the report is an example of
 A    Project scope
 B    Product scope
 C    Requirements traceability
 D    Stakeholder expectation

3. While collecting requirements for the new accounts payable
  system, you walk around to see how various people use the
  existing system. You notice a lot of workarounds, shortcuts, and
  duplication of effort. This technique of collecting requirements
  is
 A    Observation
 B    Focus groups
 C    Interviewing
 D    Facilitated workshops

4. If you want to gather information from a large number of people
  and have it easily quantified, what is the best tool to use?
 A    Prototyping
 B    Delphi technique
 C    Interviewing
 D    Surveys and questionnaires

5. You expect that you will have four full-time and two part-time
  programmers on your team from December through March.
  Therefore, you plan your work to account for these resources.
  You would document this as a(n) ______ in the ______ ______
  ______.
 A    Constraint, project scope statement
 B    Assumption, project scope statement
 C    Requirement, project requirements documentation
 D    Requirement, requirement traceability matrix

6. What information do you need to create a project scope
  statement?
 A    Project charter and requirements documentation
 B    Requirements documentation and project management plan
 C    Requirements management plan and project charter
 D    Project charter and WBS

7. You need to identify and organize all the deliverables for your
  project. What is the appropriate way to do that?
 A    Create a project scope statement.
 B    Hold a JAD session.
 C    Develop a WBS dictionary.
 D    Create a WBS.

8. The level used to report status is
 A    Control account
 B   Work package
 C   Level 3
 D   Determined based upon the size of the project

9. Which document records information about WBS elements?
 A   The schedule
 B   The scope baseline
 C   The WBS dictionary
 D   The WBS encyclopedia

10. The scope baseline comprises which three elements?
 A   WBS, scope statement, WBS dictionary
 B   WBS encyclopedia, charter, requirements documentation
 C   Scope management plan, WBS, WBS dictionary
 D   Scope statement, scope management plan, WBS
                          Answers
1. B. Requirement. This is the definition from the PMBOK Guide. See
  the section on Collect Requirements: Inputs.
2. A. Project scope. Reports are project scope, not product scope.
  They are work associated with the project, not the features and
  functions of the product. Review Project and Product Scope.
3. A. Observation. You are observing how people do their jobs. Your
  observations will help you build requirements for the new system.
  Check out the Observations section.
4. D. Surveys and questionnaires. Automated surveys can get
  information from a large number of people and rapidly quantify it.
  Check out the Questionnaires and surveys section.
5. B. Assumption, project scope statement. You're assuming that you
  will have those four full-time and two part-time people for planning
  purposes. However, until you know for sure, it is still an assumption.
  Assumptions are documented in the project scope statement
  initially. They might move to their own Assumption Log in time. See
  the definition for assumption in Define Scope: Outputs.
6. A. Project charter and requirements documentation. These are the
  inputs into the Define Scope process. Peruse Define Scope: Inputs.
7. D. Create a WBS. The WBS is used to identify and organize all the
  project deliverables. Look over Create WBS: Inputs.
8. A. Control account. The control account is the level used to report
  status for scope, schedule, and cost. Read the definition of control
  account in Create WBS: Tools and Techniques.
9. C. The WBS dictionary. The WBS dictionary documents detailed
  information about WBS elements. Review the definition in Create
  WBS: Outputs.
10. A. WBS, scope statement, WBS dictionary. These three elements
  make up the scope baseline. Read more in Create WBS: Outputs.
Chapter 3: Creating Your Schedule
Exam Objective
    Using the scope and resource plan, create a project schedule to
    manage the timely completion of the project.



 Your project schedule is one of the most important pieces of documentation
 for your project. It contains all kinds of information, identifying the
 following:
    Activities needed to get the work done
    Milestone events and dates
    The sequence in which the activities need to occur
    The resources you need to accomplish the work
    The duration and effort estimates
    When activities should start and finish
    Activities that can slip without impacting the due date
    The critical path
 Because a project schedule communicates so much information, many people
 mistakenly refer to it as project plan. In fact, the schedule is only one
 component of the project plan, but it is an important one. The project plan (or
 project management plan) is covered in Chapter 1 of this minibook.


         The PMP exam doesn't have questions that relate to any kind of
      scheduling tool (software). Instead, the exam focuses on the schedule
      data needed to develop an effective schedule. Therefore, you must be
      familiar with the theory and mechanics necessary to build a schedule.
                 Quick Assessment
1. The process of approximating the number of work periods needed
  to complete individual activities with estimated resources is ______
  ______ ______.
2. A significant point or event in the project is a(n) ______.
3. I can't complete editing the User Instructions until I finish writing
  them. This is an example of a(n) ______ ______ ______
  relationship.
4. (True/False). Lag and float are synonymous.
5. Effort is estimated in ______ ______, and duration is generally
  estimated in ______ ______.
6. If you have an activity with a good deal of uncertainty or risk, the
  preferred method of developing an estimate is ______ ______.
7. To calculate the late-start and late-finish dates for a schedule, you
  would complete a(n) ______ ______.
8. The document that establishes how you will develop, manage, and
  control your schedule is the ______ ______ ______.
9. A graphic representation of the flow of activities through the project
  is a(n) ______ ______.
10. The difference between the early start of an activity and the late
  start of an activity is ______ ______.
                          Answers
1. Estimate Activity Durations. This is the process name and definition
  per the PMBOK Guide Glossary. You can find this in the Estimating
  Activity Durations section.
2. Milestone. A milestone marks a significant event or achievement in
  a project. It can be the start or end of a phase, or the completion of
  a significant deliverable. Look over Define Activities: Inputs for
  further information on milestones.
3. Finish-to-finish. The completion of editing is dependent upon the
  completion of writing. See Sequence Activities: Tools and
  Techniques.
4. False. Lag is a directed delay. Float is the amount of time that a
  schedule activity can be delayed from its early start without
  delaying the project finish date or violating a schedule constraint.
  Lag is described in Sequence Activities: Tools and Techniques and
  float is described in Developing the Schedule.
5. Labor units, work periods. Effort is the amount of labor units it
  takes to complete an activity. Duration is the number of work
  periods it takes to complete an activity. Effort is usually shown in
  hours, and duration is usually shown in days or weeks. This is
  defined in Estimating Activity Durations.
6. Three-point estimating. By identifying optimistic, most likely, and
  pessimistic estimates, you are more likely to get an accurate
  expected duration estimate. For more information on three-point
  estimating, look over Estimate Activity Durations: Tools and
  Techniques.
7. Backward pass. A backward pass identifies the latest date when an
  activity can start and finish without impacting the finish date or a
  schedule constraint. You see more information on the backward
  pass in Developing the Schedule.
8. Schedule Management Plan. Before you start to create your
    schedule, take time to identify the processes and procedures that
    you will use to develop and manage your schedule. Check out the
    information in Planning Schedule Management to see the order of
    events in scheduling.
 9. Network diagram. The network diagram shows the flow of activities
   from start to finish. You find more information on the network
   diagram in Sequence Activities: Outputs.
 10. Total float. Total float is the difference between a late and an early
   start. It signifies the amount of time that an activity can slip without
   impacting the finish date of the project, or any other project
   constraint. You read about this in Developing the Schedule.

Planning Schedule Management
 Developing your project schedule is an iterative process. You will repeat the
 following scheduling processes numerous times before you end up with an
 acceptable schedule:
    Identify Activities
    Sequence Activities
    Estimate Activity Resources
    Estimate Activity Durations
    Develop Schedule
 In addition to the scheduling processes, you have to incorporate human
 resource availability, risk, and cost processes as well.
 Although the planning involved in creating a viable schedule is significant,
 the majority of your time will be spent maintaining and controlling it. To
 assist you with the development, management, and control, you can develop a
 schedule management plan.


        Schedule management plan. The component of the project
      management plan that establishes criteria and the activities for
     developing, monitoring, and controlling the project schedule.

Plan Schedule Management: Inputs
The project management plan provides the elements in the scope baseline.
The work breakdown structure (WBS) is particularly useful when creating
your schedule because it identifies all the deliverables that make up the
product scope. As the project management plan is progressively elaborated, it
will also contain the budget, information on risks, and the human resource
management plan. The charter (described in Book II, Chapter 2) includes the
high-level milestones for the project.
Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) that influence how an organization
develops and manages the schedule include the company culture, resource
skills, and available software. For example, Alpha Company does not have a
mature project management practice, instead relying on resources who work
on projects part time and as available. Alpha Company develops schedules in
a spreadsheet or in a table. The emphasis is on operational challenges rather
than project needs.
Contrast Alpha's approach with Theta Company, which has a robust project
management practice. Theta Company employees dedicate some or all of
their time to project work. The team members have a familiarity and
understanding of scheduling, can create and read a schedule that was
developed in scheduling software, and estimate their work and duration much
more accurately. Theta Company makes use of organizational process assets,
such as information from previous projects, lessons learned, prior estimates
and schedules, and information on risk events that materialized.

Plan Schedule Management: Tools and Techniques
The three techniques used to develop the schedule management plan integrate
well: expert judgment, analytical techniques, and meetings. Resources with
expertise in the discipline, estimating, and scheduling tools meet and discuss
the various options for developing a schedule. Topics at the meeting can
include
    Whether critical path methodology, critical chain methodology, agile
   methodology, or some combination of the three is the best approach for
   the project
   Which deliverables durations should be estimated using an analogous
   approach, a parametric approach, or three-point estimating; and also what
   the duration range and confidence levels should be for estimates
    Whether project management software should be used, as well as the level
   of detail the schedule should show

Plan Schedule Management: Outputs
The schedule management plan is the sole output from this process. The
schedule management plan can be high-level with only a few paragraphs. Or
the plan can be quite detailed, containing the following:
   Scheduling software
   Scheduling methodology
   Levels of accuracy required at different life cycle phases
   Control thresholds for preventive and corrective action
   Guidelines for establishing and using contingency reserve
   Measurement methods for recording progress
   Estimating methods
   Schedule report formats



         Even though most of us call the output of these processes a schedule,
     scheduling gurus refer to it as a schedule model. And they're right! The
     schedule is just a model of what could happen if all the assumptions in
     the schedule data (such as activities, sequences, durations, and
     resources) are correct. From the purist perspective, the project
     information is entered into a tool (scheduling software). That is
     combined with a scheduling methodology (such as critical path or
     critical chain) to develop the schedule model. The output can be in the
     form of a bar chart or network diagram with dates or any other
     presentation that meets the need.

Define Activities
After the initial planning for the schedule has been completed, you need to
determine all the work that needs to be done.
Define Activities. Identifying and documenting the specific actions to be
performed to produce the project deliverables.


         The terms activity and task can be used interchangeably in practice,
     literature, and the exam.

Define Activities: Inputs
The schedule management plan provides guidance on the level of detail you
will use to record the project activities. To define activities, start with the
scope baseline: in particular, the WBS. (I discuss both in the preceding
chapter.) The WBS contains the work packages that you will decompose to
determine activities. The scope statement -- which gives a detailed narrative
description of the project -- contains assumptions and constraints that need to
be considered.
You can use organizational process assets (OPAs), such as information from
previous projects or templates, to help you. The organization's information
system, including the preferred software for schedule development, is an EEF
that guides your approach to recording the activities.

Define Activities: Tools and Techniques
When you create your WBS, you decompose the work to create work
packages. (See the preceding chapter for more on work packages.) For
creating the schedule, though, you decompose work packages to create
schedule activities. For smaller projects, this may occur simultaneously. If
you were redoing your backyard, you might identify the deck as a deliverable
but then go right into the activities needed, such as set posts, cement posts,
build frame, set planks, and build railing. It is such a small project that
breaking it into two steps (identifying deliverables and the activities) doesn't
make sense. You can do them at the same time. Generally, though, on larger
projects, the WBS is agreed to first, and then the decomposition into activities
occurs.
Activities are the actions needed to create work packages. In other words,
activities are verbs. Your WBS should be noun-centric, but your activity list
should be verb-centric. Here is part of the table from the preceding chapter.
Look at it from the perspective of defining the activities.
WBS            Schedule
                                    Comment
Deliverable    Activities
               1.1 Determine
               equipment needs
               1.2 Conduct
               market research      The activities are all the actions needed to
1.0 Playground 1.3 Order            complete the deliverable.
equipment      equipment            The numbering scheme from the WBS is
               1.4 Equipment        elaborated with the schedule activities.
               delivered
               1.5 Install
               equipment

Using rolling wave planning is common when identifying all the activities
and developing the schedule. I talk about it in the previous chapter when I
discuss decomposing scope. For long projects, though, identifying all the
activities that will need to take place two years in the future isn't feasible.
Therefore, identify only those detailed activities that you need to accomplish
in a 90-to 120-day range and keep the information "in the future" at a higher
level. With this approach, you can see how the process of planning and
developing the schedule occurs throughout a project.
Usually, your team members identify the activities needed to complete the
work packages. They have the subject matter expertise necessary to identify
all the steps and all the work needed. In some organizations, you will be able
to use a schedule from a similar project to get a head start, but you will still
need to have your team members review it and modify it to meet the needs
for your particular project.

Define Activities: Outputs
The first output for this process is a list of activities. For a shorter project, you
should build a comprehensive list. Comparatively, for a longer project, your
list should have sufficient detail to build a realistic schedule.
For complex projects, it's appropriate to extend the description of the
activities by documenting activity attributes. Activity attributes can include
   Activity identifier or code (usually an extension from the WBS numbering
   scheme; see the preceding chapter)
   Activity description
   Predecessor and successor activities
   Logical relationships
   Leads and lags
   Imposed dates
   Constraints
   Assumptions
   Required resources and skill levels
   Geographic location of performance
   Type of effort
Note that at this point in time you don't have effort or duration information.
That comes later. You can always add that information to your activity
attributes as a form of progressive elaboration. A list of activity attributes
might be too detailed for your project. Generally, documenting activity
attributes is reserved for projects that meet the following criteria:
   Large projects with a lengthy duration
   Complex projects with many interdependencies and stakeholders
   Projects with much uncertainty or risk
   Projects that include technology that's unproven or experimental in nature
   When contractual arrangements are in place that necessitate clear and
   complete definition
Figure 3-1 shows an example of a form you can use to record activity
attributes.


        Tailor your project to meet your needs. If you don't need to record
     activity attributes, don't. If you need only specific information, create a
     form that suits your needs.
A final output of this process is a milestone list. This records all the
milestones and communicates if they are mandatory (as required by a
  contract) or optional.


            Milestone. A significant point or event in the project.




Figure 3-1: Activity attribute form.
Sequence Activities: Inputs
 After identifying all the activities that need to be accomplished, the next step
 is to put them in order. Sometimes you will order them in conjunction with
 identifying activities; sometimes you won't.
 All activities should have a predecessor (except the first one), and all
 activities should have a successor (except the last one). For those activities
 that take place throughout the project, such as risk management or
 stakeholder management, you can create an activity that starts at the
 beginning of the project and goes until completion.


         Sequence Activities. The process of identifying and documenting
      relationships among the project activities.


         At this point, you aren't establishing how long activities will take:
      only the sequence in which they will occur. To do this, you use all the
      outputs you generated in the previous processes:
    Schedule management plan
    Activity list
    Activity attribute (if you need these)
    Milestone list
 You may also reference the scope statement in case you have any
 assumptions or constraints that indicate the order of events. Any information
 from past projects can be useful as well.


         Relationships between activities are logical relationships. This
      doesn't mean there are such things as illogical relationships: It simply
      refers to the way activities are sequenced in relationship to one another.
      For example, one activity has to end before another can start, or two
      activities should happen simultaneously.
        Logical relationship. A dependency between two activities, or
     between an activity and a milestone.
The four possible types of relationships are
   Finish-to-start
   Finish-to-finish
   Start-to-start
   Start-to-finish
Read more about these relationship types in the upcoming section,
"Precedence diagramming method."

Sequence Activities: Tools and Techniques
Here are three main aspects to sequencing activities:
   Determining the logical relationships
   Determining the type of dependency
   Applying leads and lags
These tasks are often done simultaneously, but they each have their own
terminology, as I discuss in the following sections.
Precedence diagramming method
The precedence diagramming method (PDM) is the preferred method of
establishing logical relationships. In this method, each activity is represented
as a box, connected to other boxes (activities) with an arrow (see upcoming
Figure 3-2).


        Precedence diagramming method (PDM). A technique used for
     constructing a schedule model in which activities are represented by
     nodes and are graphically linked by one or more logical relationships to
     show the sequence in which the activities are to be performed.
Here are the four types of relationships used in PDM:
   Finish-to-start (FS): This is the most common type of relationship. The
   predecessor activity must finish before the successor can begin. For
   example:
   I have to finish gathering requirements before I start the design.
    Finish-to-finish (FF): The predecessor activity must finish before the
   successor activity can finish. A sample scenario is
   I have to finish writing the User Instructions before I can finish editing
   them.
   Start-to-start (SS): The predecessor activity must start before the
   successor activity can start. As an example:
   I need to start writing test questions before I can start writing test
   answers.
   Start-to-finish (SF): This is the least common relationship. You will not
   see this on the exam, but I include it here to be complete. The successor
   activity has to start before the predecessor can finish. Consider this
   scenario:
   A new accounting system has to be up and running before the previous
   system can be shut down.

Dependency determination
Many times, the relationships in the preceding list are mandatory, but other
times they are more discretionary. Some relationships are based on external
constraints. The nature of the dependency impacts the flexibility you have in
your schedule. Take a look at the different types of dependencies.
    Mandatory: These dependencies are required based on the nature of the
   work involved. For example, you can't test something not yet developed.
   Note that mandatory doesn't refer to a policy or regulation; instead, it's
   based solely on the physical and logical limitations of the relationship.
   Using my running example of a childcare center, a mandatory dependency
   would be the rough electrical work (wiring throughout the space) that has
   to be done before the finish electrical (hooking up lights, switches, and
   outlets).
   Discretionary: These relationships are determined by a best practice or
   resource availability. A best practice example is "I recommend gathering
   all the requirements before designing the solution, but you can do some
   design without having the requirements complete and finalized." Using
   my running childcare center example, a resource availability discretionary
   dependency might be planting trees and plants. If the landscaper has one
   resource that will do both, he can do either task first. The relationship is
   discretionary and based on his choice.
   External: An external dependency is based on something or someone
   outside the project. Requiring a permit, waiting on a vendor delivery,
   needing a deliverable from another project, or meeting a regulatory
   requirement are all examples of external dependencies. The building
   occupancy permit for the childcare center example is an external
   dependency.
You can see that mandatory and external dependencies are constraints on how
you schedule a project. Discretionary dependencies have the greatest
flexibility in your schedule. However, you can still find ways to adjust
mandatory dependencies by applying leads and lags.
Leads and lags
A lead is a modification to a relationship that allows you to accelerate the
timing between two activities. For example, if I have an FS relationship
between gathering requirements and designing the childcare center, I could
apply a lead to accelerate designing the center.


        Lead. The amount of time whereby a successor activity can be
     advanced with respect to a predecessor activity.
Here's an example of a lead: In a finish-to-start dependency with a ten-day
lead, the successor activity can start ten days before the predecessor activity
has finished. A negative lead is equivalent to a positive lag.
See Table 3-1 for a list of the scheduling abbreviations you'll need to know.
In the childcare center example, the lead would sound like this:
   Two weeks before I am done gathering the requirements, I will start
   designing the center.

This is represented as
   FS - 2w
where
     FS is the finish-to-start relationship.
     A lead is shown as a minus sign.
     2w signifies two weeks.

Table 3-1 Scheduling Abbreviations
Abbreviation What It Means

FS           Finish-to-start
FF           Finish-to-finish
SS           Start-to-start

SF           Start-to-finish
m            Month

w            Week
d            Day


      +      Add time (a lag)




      -      Subtract time (a lead)




Here's another example. I have to finish the rough carpentry by April 1, so I
need to have the blueprints signed off three weeks before. That results in FF -
3w, which shows a finish-to-finish relationship with a three-week lead.
The other type of modification to a relationship is a lag, which indicates a
delay in the relationship between two activities. As you can likely guess, a lag
is shown as a plus sign.


         Lag. The amount of time whereby the successor activity can be
      advanced with respect to a predecessor activity.
Here is an example of a lag: In a finish-to-start dependency with a ten-day
lag, the successor activity cannot start until ten days after the predecessor
activity has finished.
  Say I want to start an activity 10 days after I start the predecessor activity.
  Here's how that would look:
      SS + 10d

  where
      SS signifies the start-to-start relationship.
      The plus sign is a lag.
      10d is ten days.
  Here is another example of a lag. I will start writing offer letters five days
  after I finish interviewing. I'd write that as FS + 5d. The offer letters are
  dependent upon the completion of the interviews, with a five-day lag.

  Sequence Activities: Outputs
  A network diagram (also known as a project schedule network diagram) is a
  schematic display of the relationships of all the activities in the project. The
  network diagram is always drawn from left to right to reflect project work
  chronology.
  Figure 3-2 shows an example of a network diagram.




Figure 3-2: Sample network diagram.


  Notice the two-day lead between activities A and C and the two-day lag
  between activities B and D. There is an SS relationship between E and F and
  an FF relationship between G and H.


          Project schedule network diagram. A graphical representation of
       the logical relationships among the project schedule activities.
         "Project schedule network diagram" is the formal name of the
      schematic display. In practice, it's called a network diagram. Use
      information from this process to elaborate the activity attributes you
      started when defining activities.


Estimate Activity Resources: Inputs
 Completing the scheduled work requires a variety of resources. Some of the
 common categories include
    People
    Equipment
    Material
    Supplies
 Facility space is sometimes considered a resource. After all, if you need a
 particular site or room for specific activities and that site is in high demand,
 you probably want to consider it a resource and treat it as such.


         Estimate Activity Resources. Estimating the type and quantities of
      material, human resources, equipment, or supplies required to perform
      each activity.

 Estimate Activity Resources: Inputs
 To determine the resources needed for each activity -- and, therefore, each
 work package -- start with your schedule management plan, which will
 inform you of the levels of accuracy you need for resource estimates as well
 as the units of measure (gallons, yards, hours, and so forth). Next you will
 consult your activity list and activity attributes. You should also consider
 using a resource calendar, which can be as simple as looking at team member
 availability. Of course, a resource calendar can be quite complex. Information
 you might compile for a resource calendar includes
    Skill levels of human resources (such as Junior, Intermediate, and Expert)
    Geographic location, such as where the work will take place


             This is particularly important if a resource (such as a lab or
    training room) is in high demand.
    Percent of time the resources are available, such as hours per week
     Corporate calendars that show company holidays or other nonworking
    times
     Information on multiple shifts or constraints on the number of hours per
    day a resource can be used
 You should consult the activity cost estimates because the cost of resources
 can be a determining factor in how to resource your project. Risks can also
 contribute to decisions on resources. For example, if you need ten servers for
 a project, but they are functioning only as overflow or redundant servers for
 an inventory system, you can probably select a lower-quality and less-
 expensive server. However, if you need ten servers for a mission-critical
 project where lives are at stake and there is a high impact of failure, you
 should use the highest-quality servers you can buy.


         As you can see, the needs of the project and the various resources
      have a lot to do with the information necessary to determine resource
      requirements.
 Some of the EEFs you should consider are the skill sets available in the
 organization and also the level of commitment of those resources. Many
 organizations suffer from equipment bottlenecks or resource constraints on a
 few key resources. You need to plan for these potential obstacles to build an
 accurate schedule.
 OPAs that you can use include policies for staffing, outsourcing, renting or
 leasing equipment, and information from previous projects.


Estimate Activity Resources: Tools and
Techniques
Your team members will provide the expertise needed to determine the types
and amounts of resources you will need. For projects that include new or
emerging technology, or where your organization has a lack of experience,
you will want to brainstorm alternative approaches. This can include finding
new ways of doing something, determining the best mix of resources and skill
sets, procuring skills or deliverables versus developing them inhouse, and
similar types of alternative analysis.
In some cases, the information on the work package or activities is at too high
of a level to be able to estimate the resources accurately. In this case, you will
have to decompose it further to get a bottom-up estimate. Some industries,
such as construction, have published unit costs for trades, material,
equipment, and geography. The published rates are great for an initial
estimate. However, you will want to use your knowledge and expertise to
refine the estimate for your particular circumstances.


        This process is very closely linked to the Estimate Costs process,
     which you can read about in Book IV, Chapter 1. The cost of resources
     can drive how you perform the project.
You can use software to slice and dice resource information in a number of
different ways. You can create resource utilization histograms or a resource
breakdown structure. (See examples of these histograms in upcoming Figures
3-4 and 3-5.)

Estimate Activity Resources: Outputs

        Activity Resource Requirements. The types and quantities of
     resources required for each activity in a work package.
Activity resource requirements include the type, number, and skill level of the
needed resources. It's useful to include the assumptions that led to the
estimates and the basis of estimates. Table 3-2 shows an example.

Table 3-2 Activity Resource Requirements Example
Resource
           Assumptions
Need
Senior       Senior Engineers have 10-15 years of experience and have worked on similar projects. They
Engineer     have skills using CAD/CAM software.
Intermediate General Contractors at an intermediate level have 5-10 years of experience and have
General      worked on similar projects. They can interpret architectural drawings as developed by the
Contractor engineer and provide oversight to lower-level contractors.
Intermediate Carpenters at an intermediate level have 5-10 years of experience and have worked on
Carpenters similar projects. They can construct basic to complex sites with little oversight and rework.
             Laborers have 6 months to 2 years of experience working on construction sites. They're not
Laborers     licensed. They require instruction and oversight while working. They're skilled in the use of all
             tools required on-site but are not craftsmen.


In projects with a large number of resources, organizing resources by using a
resource breakdown structure can be helpful. A resource breakdown structure
is organized like a work breakdown structure, but it uses categories of
resources to organize information. Figure 3-3 shows an example of a resource
breakdown structure.


         Resource breakdown structure. A hierarchical representation of
      resources by category and type.
Figure 3-3: Resource breakdown structure.


  Another way to display resource requirements is a resource histogram.


          Resource histogram. A bar chart showing the amount of time that a
       resource is scheduled to work over a series of time periods. Resource
       availability may be depicted as a line for comparison purposes.
       Contrasting bars may show actual amounts of resources used as the
       project progresses.
  Here are two examples. Figure 3-4 shows a resource histogram that shows the
  skill set needed and the months they are needed. Figure 3-5 shows the months
  and the skills needed by month. Both show the same information but are
  formatted in different ways. There is no set way to present the information;
  decide what works best for you.




Figure 3-4: Resource histogram with skills by month.




Figure 3-5: Resource histogram monthly with skills.


  Information from this process can be used to elaborate the activity attributes
  you first developed when defining activities and to update resource calendars.


Estimating Activity Durations
  Developing accurate estimates -- for resources, durations, or costs -- is one
  of the most challenging and contentious parts of managing a project. The
  customer always wants the deliverables as soon as possible. Team members
  assume everything will go as planned. Project managers assume resources
  will be available as promised. All the above contribute to projects running
longer than they were originally scheduled to run. The sponsor and the
customer usually drive the project manager to unrealistic expectations, things
don't go as planned, and resources aren't always available as promised. No
wonder projects run late even though team members work overtime trying to
get caught up! To get out of this vicious cycle, it helps to understand the
nature of estimating:
1. You must fully define project and product scope to have any hope of
  estimating accurately, whether those estimates are for resources, durations,
  or costs.


            Oftentimes, we are held to an estimated delivery date when the
  scope isn't even finalized.
2. Understand the nature of estimating.
  The more you understand about the scope, available resources, the nature of
  the work, and the environment, the more accurate your estimates will be.
  Therefore, at the beginning of a project, you are likely to have a range of
  estimates that can end up being 35-50% more optimistic than in the final
  duration. This is even truer with projects that are developing new
  technology or using unproven processes. Often, you can't derive an
  accurate estimate until you're ready to obtain a baseline and take into
  account your risks, stakeholder management needs, funding availability,
  procurement needs, actual resources, and so forth. Then you can get an
  estimate that is +/-5% to 10% of the final result.
3. Take into account the difference between the effort needed to accomplish
  the work and the duration, which indicates how many work periods
  (activity duration) it will take.
  For example, say you have 80 hours of effort and two resources who are
  working full-time. You can assume that it will take 5 days, or 1 business
  week, to accomplish the work. If you have only 1 resource working at 50%,
  it will take 20 days, or 1 business month, to get the work done. Calculations
  like this get even more complicated if you consider that not all resources
  work at the same rate. Some people are more productive, and some people
  require more rework to get things right. In addition, for every 40 hours
  spent at work per week, folks are productive only about 34 hours.
If you consider all these elements, it's no wonder why projects come in late!
Still, that's not reason enough to give estimating less than your best shot.
Several estimating techniques are available that can help you develop
estimates, depending on the nature of the work. I start by looking at the
difference between effort and duration, and then I discuss what you need to
develop accurate estimates.


        Effort. The number of labor units required to complete a schedule
     activity or work breakdown structure component, often expressed in
     hours, days, or weeks.
Duration. The total number of work periods (not including holidays or other
nonworking periods) required to complete a schedule activity or work
breakdown structure component. Usually expressed as workdays or
workweeks. Sometimes incorrectly equated with elapsed time.


        Elapsed time refers to calendar time. Thus, a duration of 20 days
     would be the equivalent of 4 workweeks of elapsed time. Most
     scheduling software turns duration into elapsed time by assuming that
     your work calendar doesn't include weekends. You can change this by
     adjusting the calendar on your scheduling software. Or, you can enter the
     duration with a suffix that indicated elapsed days. For example, 20ED
     could mean 20 elapsed days. Check your software to determine exactly
     how it works.


        You need to know only effort and duration. You do not need to
     consider elapsed time.
Estimate Activity Durations. Estimating the number of work periods needed
to complete individual activities with estimated resources.

Estimate Activity Durations: Inputs
To determine effort and duration, you need to incorporate information from
the previous time-management processes:
   Schedule management plan
   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Activity resource requirements
   Resource breakdown structure
The scope statement includes assumptions and constraints that you should
take into consideration, such as availability or resources, available skills,
contractual information, and so forth.
Your resource calendars will provide availability and resource load
information for both internal resources and external resources (for example, if
you're using contract labor or rented equipment).
The risk register can provide information on WBS elements that have risks
associated with delivery dates, materials, technology, resource availability,
and any other type of risk that could impact duration estimates.
Organizations that have a degree of maturity in project management might
have EEFs such as estimating databases, productivity metrics, or published
estimating data. Some of the OPAs you're likely to use include historic
information from past projects and "lessons learned" information.

Estimate Activity Durations: Tools and Techniques
Sometimes, it seems like people pick estimates by snatching them out of the
air or by consulting their Magic 8 Ball. There is an art and a science to
estimating. The art comes from the expert judgment that team members and
estimators bring to the process. Their experience and wisdom from past
projects is very valuable in developing estimates, determining the best
method to use to develop an estimate, and being able to look at an estimate or
the assumptions behind the estimate to assess the validity.
In addition to the artful contribution of experts, team members, and
estimators, there are a number of methods that make up the science of
estimating.
Analogous estimating
Analogous estimating is the most common method of estimating. The
aforementioned experts normally conduct this form of estimating. In its most
basic form, analogous estimating compares past projects with the current
project, determines the areas of similarity and the areas of difference, and
then develops an estimate based on that.
A more robust application determines the duration drivers and analyzes the
relationship between past similar projects with the current project. This can
include size, complexity, risk, and number of resources, weight, or whatever
other aspects of the project influence duration.


        To use this method effectively, projects must be similar in fact, not
     just in appearance. A software upgrade may sound similar, but there are
     vast differences, so they are not really similar. The difference between
     moving from Office 2007 to Office 2010 is much different from moving
     from Office 2007 to Lotus Notes. The conversion time is very different!
Analogous estimates are most commonly used early in the project at a high
level. There is an expectation that there will be a range of estimates and that
the range will be progressively elaborated into more detail as information is
uncovered.
The benefits of using analogous estimates are that they are relatively quick to
develop, and they're not very costly to develop. However, because they're
usually done at a high level, they're not the most accurate method.
Say you need to develop training materials for the childcare center staff. The
training will take two days. You developed a similar training program a few
months ago, but that program was three days long. Therefore, you reduce
your estimate by 33%. However, this new training program is relatively
complex compared with the earlier one; it includes first aid, food prep, and
safety training. Therefore, you increase the duration by 10% for a complexity
factor. The first training class required four hands-on demonstrations, but this
one needs only three. Given this information, you can access the prior project
to find the durations and modify them based on current information. Table 3-
3 shows how.
Parametric estimating
Parametric estimating uses a mathematical model to determine durations.
Not all work can be estimated this way, but when you can, it's fast and easy.
You multiply the quantity of work by the number of hours it takes to
accomplish it. For example, if a painter can paint 100 square feet per hour
and you have 6,000 square feet to paint, you can assume 60 hours of effort.
And if you have three people painting (60 / 3), then it should take 20 hours,
or the equivalent of 2.5 days.
Three-point estimates
When a lot of uncertainty, risk, or unknowns surround an activity or a work
package, you can use three-point estimating to give you a range and an
expected duration. You collect three estimates based on the following
scenarios.
    Best case: The best case (optimistic) scenario means that you have all
   your required resources, nothing goes wrong, everything works the first
   time, and so on. This is represented as an o, for "optimistic." Or you might
   see it represented as to, for "time optimistic."
    Most likely: The most likely scenario takes into account the realities of
   project life, such as someone being called away for an extended period,
   work interruptions, things not going exactly as planned, and so forth. This
   is represented as an m, for "most likely." You might see it represented as
   tm, for "time most likely."
   Worst case: The worst case (pessimistic) estimate assumes unskilled
   resources, or not enough resources, much rework, and delays in work
   getting accomplished. This is represented as a p, or tp, for "time
   pessimistic."
The simplest way to develop the expected duration, or te ("time expected"), is
to sum the three estimates and divide by three. You might see this referred to
as a triangular distribution. However, this isn't the most accurate way
because it assumes an equal probability that the best case, most likely, and
worst case scenarios would occur -- and that's not realistic. In reality, the
most likely estimate has a greater chance of occurring than either the best
case or worst case scenario. Therefore, weight the most likely scenario and
take a weighted average. The most common way of calculating a weighted
average is
   te = (to + 4tm + tp) / 6



         The PMP exam might refer to this as a Beta distribution or PERT
     estimating. (PERT stands for Program Evaluation and Review
     Technique.) This was a technique developed in the late 1950s to derive a
     range of estimates and an expected estimate, given the uncertainty in a
     project.
Reserve analysis
Reserve analysis is used for work packages, control accounts, or any level of
the WBS. It looks at the complexity and riskiness of the duration estimate and
determines whether reserve is needed to account for the uncertainty, risk, or
complexity. Sometimes, you will see reserve referred to as contingency
reserve or buffer.
You might see reserve as a percentage of time based on the phase of the
project or as a set number of hours. It's a good practice to revisit the reserve
and see how much you have used compared with how far along you are in the
project. When reserve is used, the reason for it should be documented so you
can include the information in "lessons learned" and consider it for the next
project.


        Reserve is not padding. Pad is bad. If you see the word "pad" on the
     exam, you can be certain that it's in a negative context! Reserve is
     developed based on analysis and thoughtful deliberation. Padding is
     throwing extra time in the schedule because you didn't take time to do
     the work to develop a well thought-out estimate.
 For complex estimates, you may need to employ brainstorming, nominal
 group techniques, or other decision-making techniques to come to consensus
 on a duration estimate. For a refresher on group decision-making techniques,
 see Book II, Chapter 2.

 Estimate Activity Durations: Outputs
 Your duration estimates approximate the number of work periods you need to
 complete an activity. Often, you will see a range of estimates or the
 probability of achieving the estimate. For example, you might see something
 like
    I think the duration will be 4-6 weeks, but I am going to say 5 weeks for
    my estimate.
    There is an 80% likelihood that we will be complete within 5 weeks.

 After developing your estimates, you want to include this information in your
 activity attributes and also update your Assumption Log with any
 assumptions you made while estimating. (Read about Assumption Logs in the
 previous chapter.)

Developing the Schedule
 All the work up to now leads to developing a schedule for the project.
 However, you will most likely need to revisit the preceding processes
 numerous times before you get a schedule that's acceptable to all your
 stakeholders. You might need to go back to your network diagram to look for
 ways to compress the duration by overlapping activities by using leads and
 lags and modifying the dependency relationships. You can also inquire into
 getting more resources as a way to shorten the duration. In other words,
 developing the schedule is an iterative process that you might need to go
 through several times before you have a schedule that everyone can live with.


        Develop Schedule. Analyzing activity sequences, durations, resource
     requirements, and schedule constraints to create the project schedule
     model.
Develop Schedule: Inputs
To begin this process, you take outputs from the previous scheduling
processes:
   Schedule management plan
   Activity list
   Activity attributes
   Network diagram
   Activity resource requirements
   Resource calendars
   Activity duration estimates
   Resource breakdown structure
In addition, check your scope statement for any schedule constraints or
project assumptions. Project staff assignments should be consulted for the
actual staff assigned to schedule activities. Your risk register will have lots of
information associated with risks to resources, duration estimates, staff
availability, constraints, and so forth. The EEF you are most likely to use is
the organization's scheduling tool (software). OPAs include schedules from
previous similar projects and any scheduling methodology, templates, or
procedures.

Develop Schedule: Tools and Techniques
Using a scheduling tool (such as Microsoft Project, Primavera, or others) is a
necessity for any project with more than 50 activities. Most scheduling tools
can show you schedule models as a network diagram, bar chart, or table. The
technique of schedule network analysis is composed of applying either the
critical path methodology or the critical chain methodology. In both methods,
you are likely to use the following techniques:
   Resource optimization
   Modeling
   Schedule compression
   Leads and lags
I start by discussing critical path and critical chain methodologies and then
move into describing the preceding techniques.
Critical path
Critical path -- the most common form of teaching scheduling -- is also the
method that most software employs. The critical path method determines the
date ranges in which activities can occur by calculating the earliest and the
latest dates when activities can start and then the earliest and the latest dates
when activities can finish based on the network diagram and the duration.
Most critical path analyses are done prior to loading resource availability into
the schedule. After resources are loaded, the duration of the project can
change. The critical path method has several terms you need to be familiar
with.


        Critical path method (CPM). A method used to estimate the
     minimum project duration and determine the amount of scheduling
     flexibility on the logical network paths within the schedule model.
Early start date (ES). In the critical path method, the earliest possible point
in time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can start, based
on the schedule network logic, the data date, and any schedule constraints.
Early finish date (EF). In the critical path method, the earliest possible point
in time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can finish,
based on the schedule network logic, the data date, and any schedule
constraints.
Late finish date (LF). In the critical path method, the latest possible point in
time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can finish based
on the schedule network logic, the project completion date, and any schedule
constraints.
Late start date (LS). In the critical path method, the latest possible point in
time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can start based on
the schedule network logic, the project completion date, and any schedule
constraints.
Total float. The amount of time that a schedule activity can be delayed or
extended from its early start date without delaying the project finish date or
violating a schedule constraint.
Free float. The amount of time a schedule activity can be delayed without
delaying the early start date of any successor or violating a schedule
constraint.
Forward pass. A critical path method technique for calculating the early start
and early finish dates by working forward through the schedule model from
the project start date or a given point in time.
Backward pass. A critical path method technique for calculating the late start
and late finish dates by working backward through the schedule model from
the project end date.
Critical path. The sequence of activities that represents the longest path
through a project, which determines the shortest possible duration.
Here are the steps to analyze the schedule, using the critical path method:
1. Draw the network diagram.
2. Box the network diagram.
3. Enter durations into the diagram.
4. Conduct a forward pass.
5. Conduct a backward pass.
6. Calculate float.
7. Identify the critical path.
I talk about each of these in the following sections.
Draw the network diagram
The first step is to create a network diagram that shows the logical
relationship among activities. (I discuss the network diagram earlier in this
chapter.) I use the network diagram from Figure 3-2 as an example to explain
the remaining steps.
Box the network diagram
"Boxing the diagram" means setting up the network diagram with a box for
each activity and a place to enter the duration, the early and late start dates,
the early and late finish dates, and the float. You can use any structure you
want. The following table shows one common way of showing the
information for each activity.
  Early Start Duration Early Finish

                Activity

  Late Start    Float       Late Finish

  Figure 3-6 shows how the sample diagram would look after it's boxed.




Figure 3-6: Boxed network diagram.


  Enter durations
  The next step is to enter the durations into the boxed diagram, as shown in
  Figure 3-7.




Figure 3-7: Network diagram with durations entered.


  Conduct a forward pass
  Now you're ready to conduct a forward pass. The forward pass will tell you
  what the earliest dates are that activities can start and finish, based on the
  network logic. Here are the steps to conduct a forward pass:
1. Set the early start for the first activity ("Activity A") or activities to 1.


           Scheduling software assumes that an activity starts at 8 a.m. and is
  complete at 5 p.m. on its due date. Therefore, the next activity starts the
  next morning at 8 a.m.
2. Add the duration of the activity to the early start and then subtract 1.
  Now you have your early finish date.
  In this example, Activity A starts at Day 1. You add the duration of 5 to Day
  1, and then subtract 1, giving you an early finish date of Day 5.


           Always subtract 1 from the early start plus the duration because you
  start on Day 1, not Day 0.
3. Add 1 to the early finish to determine the early start of the immediate
  successor activities.
  For this example, the early start of Activity B is 6. However, the early start
  of Activity C is 4 because there is a two-day lead. The early start of C
  would have been 6, but you subtract 2 days from 6 because of the two-day
  lead, and that gives you an early start of 4. To continue along with C, you
  add the duration of 4 to the early start of 4, subtract 1, and get an early
  finish of 7.
  Going to Activity B, you add the early start of 6 and the duration of 3,
  subtract 1, and get an early finish of 8. There is a two-day lag between B
  and D, so Activity D starts two days after B finishes. This means that D will
  start on Day 11.
Continue in this fashion until you reach the end of the network. Figure 3-8
shows a network diagram with a forward pass completed.
Figure 3-8: Forward pass.


  Note these areas of interest in this diagram:
     Activity F has the same early start as Activity E because there is a start-to-
     start relationship. Activity F can start after Activity E starts.
      Activity G and Activity H have a finish-to-finish relationship. This means
     that Activity H can finish after Activity G finishes.
      Activity D and Activity E both have to finish before Activity G can start.
     Activity D has an early finish of 16, and Activity E has an early finish of
     14. When there is a path convergence in a forward pass, the highest
     number always carries forward.
  After you finish calculating your forward pass, you will see the earliest finish
  date. This is the soonest the project can finish, given the information
  available. For this example, the early finish date is 22 days.
  Conduct a backward pass
  The next step is to conduct a backward pass, which tells you the latest time
  activities can start and finish without violating a schedule constraint (such as
  a mandatory milestone) or without causing the project to be late.


           If you have a hard schedule constraint, such as a mandatory review
       date or a contractually required delivery date, you can enter that as the
       late finish date. This might cause a situation called negative float; I will
       talk about float shortly.
  For a backward pass, follow these steps:
  1. Take the early finish date of the last activity in the network and enter
    that number as the late finish date as well.
    Therefore, your early finish and late finish for the last activity will be the
    same. For this example, it's 22 days.
  2. Subtract the duration and add 1 to establish the late start for the last
    activity in the project.


             Because you start the project at Day 1, instead of Day 0, you need
    to add the 1 day back in to get accurate dates.
  3. Using the late start date, subtract 1 to derive the late finish date for
    any immediately preceding activities.
    My running example has two final activities: Activity I and Activity F. I use
    the highest number as the late finish date. Activity I finishes on Day 22, and
    Activity F finishes on Day 13. Therefore, the late finish for the project is
    Day 22. For Activity I, you subtract the duration of 4, add 1 and get a late
    start of 17. Day 17 is the latest date when Activity I can start and not cause
    the project to be late. For activity H the late start date minus 1 carries
    backward to become the late finish for Activity H. Figure 3-9 shows how
    the sample network looks after a backward pass.




Figure 3-9: Backward pass.


  Note these areas:
     Activity H does not have an early start, but it does have a late start
     because in this scenario, I'm not so much worried about when Activity H
     can start. Rather, I'm more concerned about when it finishes. In a real-life
   scenario, you would have more information about the nature of the activity
   in the activity attributes. That would give you insight into whether
   Activity H would need to start on Day 16, or whether it could start
   anytime.
    The late start of Activity D is 11, but the late finish of its predecessor
   (Activity B) is not 10, but 8, because there is a two-day lag. You treat that
   lag as if it were a mini-activity called "don't do any work here."
   Therefore, calculate the late start of B as 10, and you subtract 2 to get a
   late finish of 8 for Activity B.
    The relationship between Activity E and Activity F is start-to-start. It
   would seem that the late start of Activity F would drive the late start of
   Activity E. However, in this case, the late start of Activity G drives the
   late finish of Activity E, which in turn determines the late start. This
   demonstrates an important rule in the backward pass:


           When you have two possible options for a late start or finish, the
   lowest one is the one you select.
Determine float
After you calculate the early and late start and finish dates, you can determine
the float. Float is the difference between the late and early dates. For finish-
to-start relationships, the difference between early start and late start dates
will be the same as the difference between the early finish and late finish
dates. However, when you have a start-to-start or a finish-to-finish
relationship, you have to determine the difference between each and take the
lowest number as the amount of float. Figure 3-10 shows a sample diagram.


         If you have a finish-to-start relationship, and the difference between
     your late and early start is not the same as the difference between your
     late and early finish, there is an error in your math!
Figure 3-10: Network diagram showing float.


  Only Activities C, E, and F have total float. Activity F has the most, with nine
  days of float: It can finish up to nine days later than its early finish date and
  not cause the project to be late. As I mention earlier, to calculate the nine days
  of float, you subtract the early finish from the late finish, or the early start
  from the late start. Activities C and E both have two days of float. However,
  that float is shared between them. Any float that Activity C uses isn't
  available for Activity E. If Activity C starts on Day 5 instead of Day 4, then
  Activity E will start on Day 9 and have only one day of float.
  There is something special about Activities E and F: They have free float.
  They are the last activities on a path. Therefore, if they start late or finish late,
  within their float, no other activities are affected. Even though Activity C has
  total float, if it starts late, then both E and F start late. But if Activity F starts
  late, it doesn't cause any disruption in any other activity, as long as it finishes
  by Day 22.
  If Activity E starts late, then F starts late, but if E finishes late by less than
  two days, then no other activities are impacted. Therefore, you can see that
  those activities with free float are the most flexible in the network. You can
  delay them and reallocate resources to activities that have little or no float to
  ensure on-time performance, assuming that resources have the right skill sets.
  Identify the critical path
  Finally, identify the critical path, which is the path with the least amount of
  float. For this example, the critical path is A-B-D-G-H-I. Usually, the critical
  path is presented as the path with zero float. However, say that you're given a
  mandated end date, and you calculate your critical path, and you have
  negative float. That tells you that you cannot meet the end date, given the
current information -- meaning, you have to find ways to compress the
schedule or negotiate a new end date.
Conversely, if you have positive float, you have a little time to spare. In both
circumstances, the path with the least amount of float is your critical path.


        If you see a question that states you are in a negative float situation,
     that means you are late.
Another option for calculating the critical path
For the exam, you have to figure out the critical path manually, and the "+1
day/-1 day method" is a bit clunky to emulate when you're doing a manual
calculation.
To make it easier, use Day 0 as an early start for the first activity; that way,
you don't have to worry about adding or subtracting days based on the start or
end of the business day.


        Be careful, though, because the early start date and late start date will
     be different than if you use the +1/-1 method. The early and late finish
     dates will be the same, and the float will be the same.
Critical chain
The critical chain method comes from the world of manufacturing. In
manufacturing, the rate of production is determined by bottlenecks in the
process. If you can clear a bottleneck in production, you can get more product
through the production line. Therefore, all processes are designed around
exploiting that bottleneck -- and in projects, the bottlenecks are usually
resources. Thus, the critical chain methodology focuses on resolving resource
constraints.
To determine the critical chain, you start with the critical path and then load
resources. This usually causes a change to the critical path, based on resource
constraints. The resource-constrained critical path is the critical chain.
To account for the uncertainty associated with the critical chain, you add
buffers. Buffer at the end of the project -- project buffer -- is used to protect
the delivery date. Along the critical chain are paths that feed into the critical
chain. If any path is late, the critical chain is impacted. Therefore, buffers are
put into the schedule at these points: feeder buffers. For critical chain
scheduling, you manage the remaining buffer, as opposed to critical path
where you manage the float.
Some of the other details associated with the critical chain methodology
include
    All resources doing work on the critical chain are protected. This means
   that they are not pulled off their work to do other work, go to unrelated
   meetings, or are otherwise distracted from the work at hand.
   Resources that are in limited supply, or that are the bottlenecks, are
   exploited. In other words, work is scheduled around their availability to
   maximize their efficiency.
    All duration estimates are aggressive. Team members are asked to give
   the duration that they have about a 50/50 chance of attaining.
   Buffer is used to protect those activities that don't meet their estimated
   end date.
   Activities are scheduled at the late start and finish dates.
   This method can be used to increase the throughput of projects in a
   portfolio, especially when you have one or only a few resources that are
   working on many projects. The individual project dates may be sacrificed
   for the good of the portfolio.

Optimizing your resources
Resource optimization is done after the initial critical path is identified. At
that point, you load your resources into the scheduling tool. Often, you will
find that one or more resources are over-allocated. For example, you may
have a resource scheduled to work full time on more than one activity.
Another example is if you have a resource for a limited amount of time (say,
10 hours per week), but you have scheduled them for more than that.
Sometimes you can resolve these resource allocation issues by using float to
optimize the schedule without extending the due date. Other times, you will
find that the schedule is extended, and you have a new critical path based on
resource availability.
        Resource optimization techniques. A technique used to adjust the
     start and finish dates of activities that adjust planned resource use to be
     equal to or less than resource availability.
There are two ways to optimize your resources: level them or smooth them.
Resource leveling adjusts activity start and finish dates so that resources are
no longer over-allocated. Leveling frequently extends the due date. For
example, if Sarah is scheduled to work on Activity A and Activity B during
the week of March 1 through March 5, and both activities require five days of
full time commitment, resource leveling would extend the start date of
Activity B to begin on March 8 and end on March 12.
Another type of resource leveling is to reduce peaks and valleys in resource
utilization. Instead of working 40 hours one week and 10 the next, resource
leveling seeks to have a resource work 25 hours each week.
Resource smoothing adjusts activities within their float amounts but does not
change the critical path. In other words, some resources may remain over-
allocated.
Modeling techniques
So much uncertainty is associated with projects that it's nearly impossible to
determine actual durations, future risks, stakeholder issues, actual resource
availability, and so on. One way to account for the uncertainty is to think
through different scenarios that could impact the project and see what
happens to the schedule based on those scenarios.
What-if scenario analysis
For example, what if a critical resource is available only one-half of the time,
as opposed to full time? Or, what if a key component is delivered late? Or
design issues cause rework? These are common occurrences on projects.
Building several schedule scenarios helps you to identify the impact of these
scenarios upfront when you can still adjust the schedule to account for them,
and update the risk register to take actions to minimize their impact on the
schedule.
Simulation
Another modeling technique is simulation. Simulation involves calculating
the project schedule with different assumptions about activity durations. One
particular type of simulation is a Monte Carlo simulation. I discuss that
concept more when talking about analyzing risk in Book V, Chapter 1.
Schedule compression
Compressing a schedule involves looking for ways to shorten the overall
project duration without reducing the project scope. The two main types of
schedule compression are crashing and fast-tracking.
Crashing
Crashing looks for cost/schedule trade-offs. In other words, you look for
ways to shorten the schedule by applying more resources or by spending
more. The intent is to get the most schedule compression for the least amount
of money. Some common ways of accomplishing this include
   Bringing in more resources: Sometimes, more people working, or using
   additional equipment, can speed up progress.


           Be careful. Sometimes adding resources actually extends the
   duration because coordination, communication, and conflict actually take
   more time than they save!
   Working overtime: Many times, staff can work longer hours or work
   weekends. However, this is useful only for a couple of weeks. After that,
   people burn out and are less productive, so this is but a short-term fix. You
   also have to take into consideration any union or labor regulations.
   Paying to expedite deliverables: This solution can include overnight
   shipping and paying bonuses to contractors for early delivery.
You could certainly crash some activities for my running childcare center
example. For example, you could bring in an extra carpenter, electrician,
plumber, HVAC person, or painter and reduce the duration. You could also
ask those resources to work more hours (depending on any labor union
restrictions). Bringing in more resources might even reduce the time without
increasing cost because the extra resources will shorten the duration.
However, overtime is usually billed at time and a half, so that option may cost
more.
        You can't crash everything. For example, you can't pay to have two
     inspectors to do one occupancy permit inspection. And you can't pay
     them to expedite the process.


        Crashing usually increases spending, so weigh the benefit of earlier
     delivery against cost. Bottom line: You're looking for the most time for
     the least amount of cost!
Fast-tracking
Fast-tracking shortens the schedule by overlapping activities that are
normally done in parallel. One way of doing this is changing the network
logic by using leads and lags (read about these earlier in this chapter). For
example, you can change a finish-to-start relationship to a finish-to-start with
a lead. This causes the successor activity to start before the predecessor is
complete. You can also change it to a start-to-start or finish-to-finish with a
lag. Take a look at a few examples from my running childcare center
example:
    Suppose you set up your schedule with finish-to-start dependencies
   among blueprint activities, carpentry, electrical, plumbing, and HVAC.
   You can probably conduct the electrical, plumbing, and HVAC in parallel
   instead of sequentially.
   You can change a finish-to-start relationship in plumbing to a finish-to-
   start with a lead. For example, after the bathrooms have all the pipes, the
   fixtures can be installed. The finish work doesn't have to wait until the
   kitchen or the outside plumbing is roughed in.
   You can install the windows and doors after the rough carpentry is done
   by modifying the relationship to a finish-to-finish relationship with a lag.



        Fast-tracking can increase your risk on the project and might
     necessitate rework. Make sure you understand the real relationship
     between activities when you fast-track, or else you will end up with a
     schedule that doesn't make sense and can't be executed.
  Develop Schedule: Outputs
  The project schedule is one of the most important project artifacts that project
  managers create. There can be different versions of the schedule and different
  ways to display it. In this section, I walk through the different ways of
  displaying it, and then I describe some of the more common versions of the
  schedule.
  The project schedule can be presented as a table, network diagram, bar chart,
  or milestone chart:
     Tables provide activity detail, such as planned start and end dates, percent
     complete, resources, actual start and finish dates, and many other column
     options.
     Network diagrams with planned start and finish dates show relationships
     among activities.
      Bar charts show the planned duration of activities.
      Milestone charts show the planned dates for major accomplishments.
  Many times, you see a combination of a network diagram and a bar chart --
  often referred to as a Gantt chart. In fact, a Gantt chart is a bar chart. But
  because most of the software refers to a bar chart that shows dependencies as
  a Gantt chart, that has become the common way of referring to it. Figures 3-
  11 through 3-14 show various ways to display a schedule.




Figure 3-11: Schedule table.


  Most scheduling tools provide you many different views for the schedule.
  You can pretty much pick what fields and information you want displayed
  and the way you want to see it, and shazam!, there it is.
Now, take a look at different versions of the schedule. You'll probably
manage your project from a detailed schedule with the start and end dates of
each activity and the resources assigned to the activity. You might also
include the planned start and finish dates along with the actual start and finish
dates and the percent complete. This gives you good visibility into the
progress being made. However, you don't necessarily want to publish that
schedule for the customer, sponsor, or anyone other than the project team. In
fact, they probably don't really want to see it, either, because it's way too
detailed.
Figure 3-12: Network diagram with dates.
Figure 3-13: Bar chart.
Figure 3-14: Milestone chart.


  So, a schedule baseline is a good schedule to show your sponsor. The
  schedule baseline, which has the agreed-upon start and finish dates for the
  project, is usually shown at a milestone or summary level. The baseline is
 part of the project management plan and will be used to evaluate the project
 status.
 Additional schedule options can be based on aggressive dates or best case
 scenarios, or schedules resulting from what-if scenarios the team generated.
 In addition to the schedule, you've developed all kinds of schedule-related
 data. For example, you have the information to create resource histograms
 that show the usage of resources over time, assumptions associated with
 project performance and resource utilization, and the basis of your duration
 estimates.
 Based on all the work done to develop the schedule, you might find yourself
 updating the project calendar (project working days), elements of the project
 management plan, or project documents. Your resource requirements, risk
 register, Assumption Log, and cost estimates are prime targets for updating.

Key Terms
 There is a lot of scheduling vocabulary to remember! It is a pretty specialized
 language.
 Study hint: Put each term on an index card with its definition on the back.
 Memorize the definition with the term.
    Schedule management plan
    Activity attribute
    Milestone
    Logical relationship
    Precedence diagramming method
    Finish-to-start
    Finish-to-finish
    Start-to-start
    Start-to-finish
    Mandatory dependency
    Discretionary dependency
External dependency
Lead
Lag
Project schedule network diagram
Resource breakdown structure
Resource histogram
Effort
Duration
Analogous estimate
Parametric estimate
Bottom-up estimate
Three-point estimate
Critical path methodology
Early start date
Early finish date
Late start date
Late finish date
Total float
Free float
Forward pass
Backward pass
Critical path
Critical chain
Buffer
Resource optimization
Resource leveling
Resource smoothing
Crashing
Fast-tracking
Chapter Summary
 Here are the main points you need to remember for the scheduling:
    To build a schedule, you start by decomposing work packages into
    activities.
    Milestones mark a significant event in a project.
    Develop a network diagram to create a visual display of the activity
    relationships.
    You can have FS, FF, or SS -- or, occasionally, SF -- relationships.
    You can modify relationships with leads and lags.
    Some dependencies are mandatory, some are discretionary, and still others
    are external.
    Project resources include people, equipment, material, and supplies.
    Duration estimates can comprise labor units and/or work periods.
    Analogous estimating compares the current project with past similar
    projects.
    Parametric estimating uses a mathematical relationship to derive duration
    estimates.
    Bottom-up estimates decompose work to the work package level to
    determine the duration.
    Three-point estimates are used when there is a large degree of uncertainty
    associated with the estimate.
     Critical path methodology creates a schedule that shows the range of dates
    that activities can start and finish without causing the project to be late or
    without breaking a schedule constraint. It is focused on managing float.
    Critical chain methodology starts with the critical path but considers
    resource constraints. It works to exploit the most critical resources and
    focuses on the remaining buffer.
    You can compress a schedule by crashing or fast-tracking.
The project schedule can be presented in a table, network diagram, bar
chart, or milestone chart.



    There is no substitute for practice. I encourage you to make a couple
 of network diagrams, load in some fictional durations, and practice your
 forward and backward passes. That will give you more confidence on
 the exam.
                           Prep Test
                         Multiple Choice
1. The difference in decomposing the work to develop the WBS
  and decomposing the WBS to determine the activities is
 A Decomposing work to develop the WBS is a team effort, but the
 WBS to determine activities is done individually.
 B The WBS is decomposed into deliverables using nouns; activities
 are decomposed into actions using verbs.
 C The WBS can be developed using progressive elaboration, but
 activities can use only rolling wave planning.
 D The WBS goes down to three levels, and the activities are
 decomposed below that.

2. I can't begin laying the deck planks until the deck framework is
  done. This is an example of which kind of dependency?
 A    Discretionary
 B    Finish-to-finish
 C    Mandatory
 D    Start-to-start

3. Ellen is responsible for writing Chapters 6, 8, and 10. She can
  do them in any order. This is an example of
 A    A discretionary dependency
 B    An assumption
 C    An external dependency
 D    A resource constraint

4. As soon as Bill begins publicizing the concert, the tickets can
  go on sale. This is an example of what kind of relationship?
 A    Start-to-finish
 B    Finish-to-finish
 C    Finish-to-start
 D    Start-to-start

5. The phase gate is scheduled for one week after the integration
  test is complete. This is an example of
 A    Finish-to-finish with a lead
 B    Finish-to-start with a lead
 C    Finish-to-finish with a lag
 D    Finish-to-start with a lag

6. We need to finish the walk-through four days before we are
  done with the quality review. This is an example of
 A    Finish-to-finish with a lead
 B    Finish-to-start with a lead
 C    Finish-to-finish with a lag
 D    Finish-to-start with a lag

7. You want to categorize your people, equipment, materials, and
  supplies by type and skill level so you can get an overview of all
  the types of resources you need for the project. What is a good
  way to document this?
 A    A resource traceability matrix
 B    A resource calendar
 C    A project resource diagram
 D    A resource breakdown structure

8. You've been assigned a project that is in the concept phase.
  You have a high-level understanding of the requirements, and
  the WBS is decomposed only to level 2. You have done this type
  of project before. The sponsor wants an initial timeline: nothing
 detailed, just milestone dates. What technique should you use to
 provide the duration estimate?
 A   Analogous estimating
 B   Parametric estimating
 C   Three-point estimating
 D   Monte Carlo simulation

9. Which type of duration estimating technique is best if you have
  a quantitative data to work with, such as square footage?
 A   Analogous estimating
 B   Parametric estimating
 C   Three-point estimating
 D   Monte Carlo simulation

10. You developed three duration estimates based on everything
  going right, everything going wrong, and what's likely to occur.
  Your optimistic estimate is 6 weeks; your pessimistic estimate is
  16 weeks; and you think it's likely to take 8 weeks. What is your
  expected duration, using a PERT technique?
 A   8 weeks
 B   8.7 weeks
 C   9 weeks
 D   10 weeks

11. If you need to reduce schedule duration and you want to
  overlap activities, you would
 A   Crash the schedule.
 B   Add more resources.
 C   Fast-track.
 D   Work overtime.

                           Scenario 1
Use the following network diagram with durations to answer the next
two questions.




1. For the figure, what is the critical path?
  A   A-C-E-F-G
  B   B-D-E-F-G
  C   B-D-E-F-H
  D   A-C-E-F-H

2. For the figure, what duration would the critical path be if the
  relationship between B and D were SS?
  A   29 days
  B   28 days
  C   27 days
  D   32 days
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. B. The WBS is decomposed into deliverables using nouns;
  activities are decomposed into actions using verbs. Because the
  WBS is deliverable-oriented, nouns are used to identify the
  deliverables. Verbs describe the actions needed to create the
  deliverables. See Define Activities: Tools and Techniques.
2. C. Mandatory. The planks need to rest on the framework.
  Therefore, the nature of the word dictates that the framework
  comes before the planks. Check out Sequence Activities: Tools and
  Techniques.
3. A. A discretionary dependency. Because any chapter can come
  first, it is up to Ellen's discretion to set the order. Review the
  information in Sequence Activities: Tools and Techniques.
4. D. Start-to-start. The start of the ticket sales is dependent upon the
  start of the publicity. Review Sequence Activities: Tools and
  Techniques.
5. D. Finish-to-start with a lag. The phase gate is dependent upon the
  end of the integration test, and there is a one-week delay between
  the two. See Leads and lags.
6. A. Finish-to-finish with a lead. The end of the walk-through is
  based on the end of the quality review, and it needs to happen four
  days prior to the end of the quality review. See Leads and lags.
7. D. A resource breakdown structure. The resource breakdown
  structure identifies categories of resources and then decomposes
  them into types, skill levels, or other subcategories as appropriate.
  Take a look at Estimate Activity Resources: Tools and Techniques.
8. A. Analogous estimating. Analogous estimating is used for projects
  during the early phases when there aren't a lot of details. Go back
  over Analogous estimating.
9. B. Parametric estimating. Parametric estimating is used when you
  have a quantitative basis for estimating. Look at the information in
  Parametric estimating.
10. C. 9 weeks. (6 + (4 * 8) + 16) / 6 = 9 weeks. See Three-point
  estimates.
11. C. Fast-track. Fast-tracking is doing activities in parallel that would
  normally be done sequentially. Look at Schedule compression.

                            Scenario 1
1. C. B-D-E-F-H. This path is the longest duration through the
  network. Review Identify the critical path.
2. A. 29 days. The critical path with the difference in the network
  diagram is now A-C-E-F-H and is 29 days. Look at Identify the
  critical path.
Book IV

 Planning Cost, Quality, Human
Resources, and Communication
        Read the article on planning knowledge and skills at
www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book IV: Planning Cost, Quality, Human Resources, and
 Communication

Book IV: Chapter 1: Estimating the Price Tag
   Plan Cost Management

   Estimate Costs

   Estimate Costs: Outputs

   Determine Budget

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Chapter 2: Planning for Quality
   Basic Quality Concepts

   Basic Statistics

   Plan Quality Management

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Chapter 3: Identifying Your Team Members
   Plan Human Resource Management

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IV: Chapter 4: 90 Percent of Your Job Is Communication
   Communication Building Blocks
Plan Communications Management

Key Terms

Chapter Summary
Chapter 1: Estimating the Price Tag
Exam Objective
    Using cost-estimating techniques, develop a budget based on the
    project scope in order to manage project cost.



 Project cost is one of the most sensitive areas of your project. Your sponsor
 and customer are very concerned with cost estimates, total budget, and the
 flow of funding. They will want to find ways to minimize costs while
 maximizing quality and reducing the schedule, yet not giving up scope.
 Remember, customers generally want more scope, faster and for less cost.
 Your job is to resist the pressure to give overly optimistic estimates. You need
 to make sure that your team has the time to define the scope in enough detail
 that you can develop accurate cost estimates. In addition, you need to make
 sure you have sufficient time to plan and estimate your costs, and that you
 understand the uncertainty associated with the cost estimates and budget. This
 includes estimating the funding needed to account for uncertainty, undefined
 scope, project changes, and unplanned in-scope work. None of this is easy,
 but all of it is important. More than any other objective, in the short term, the
 success of the project is judged by your ability to deliver on budget as well as
 in the time allotted.
 If you've already read Book III, Chapter 3, many of the techniques used to
 estimate costs will seem familiar to you: They're the same ones used to
 estimate effort and duration for the schedule.
                Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). At the time of completing the charter, most projects
  will have cost estimate ranges of +/-10%.
2. A(n) ______ ______ is a quantitative assessment of the likely
  amount or outcome.
3. Which cost-estimating technique requires the most detail?
4. The approved version of the time-phased project budget, excluding
  management reserves, is the ______ ______.
5. The project budget is composed of the ______ ______ and the
  ______ ______.
6. Where do you record the information on how you will plan,
  structure, and control project costs?
7. (True/False). A project that is using new technology will have a
  narrower range of estimates.
8. A weighted average estimate, also known as a PERT estimate, is
  represented by the equation ______.
9. The method of estimating that uses a scalable, mathematical
  model is ______ estimating.
10. The sum of all the budgets is the ______ ______ ______.
                          Answers
1. False. There is not usually enough information about the project
  and product scope to develop an estimate that is accurate to within
  +/-10%. Read more in Estimate Costs: Tools and Techniques.
2. Cost estimate. Estimates are quantitative assessments of likely
  costs. They are not guesses, nor are they facts. See the definition
  in Estimate Costs: Inputs.
3. Bottom-up estimating. Bottom-up estimating estimates the cost of
  individual work packages or activities. You will find this information
  in Bottom-up estimating.
4. Cost baseline. The cost baseline can only be changed through
  formal change control procedures. This information is in the section
  Determine Budget: Outputs.
5. Cost baseline and management reserve. The cost baseline
  includes projected expenditures; the budget includes a
  management. Look over the information in Determine Budget:
  Outputs.
6. Cost management plan. The cost management plan contains
  information that defines how you will plan, manage, and control all
  aspects of the costs and budget for the project. You may see this
  referred to as the budget plan. You can find more information on
  this in Plan Cost Management.
7. False. Projects with new or unproven technology have wider
  ranges of estimates. See Estimate Costs: Inputs.
8. (O + 4M + P) / 6. This equation is explained in the section Three-
  point estimating.
9. Parametric. Parametric estimating uses a statistical relationship to
  derive cost estimates. See more about this in Parametric
  estimating.
10. Budget at completion. The budget at completion is also the
    cumulative planned value for the project. You can find this definition
    in Determine Budget.


Plan Cost Management
 Because the cost of a project is often the first thing that management is
 interested in, the budget for a project is one of the most important documents
 in the project management plan. The cost management plan describes units of
 measure, levels of accuracy, and variance thresholds, among other things, for
 the budget.


         Cost management plan. A component of the project or program
      management plan that describes how costs will be planned, structured,
      and controlled.

 Plan Cost Management: Inputs
 When developing a cost management plan, you should reference the project
 charter and the project management plan. The project charter contains the
 summary level budget. The project management plan contains the scope and
 schedule baselines.
 Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) and organizational process assets
 (OPAs) play a big role in this process. The EEFs that are most influential
 include
    Market conditions: The ability to obtain resources at a reasonable rate
     Published rate information: For example, rate guides for certain
    industries
     Currency exchange rates for international projects



         There are sure to be processes and procedures associated with
      developing project estimates and budgets. Other organizational process
      assets that you can use include lessons learned and information from
      prior similar project budgets.
Plan Cost Management: Tools and Techniques
Expertise from cost estimators, finance staff, and people with knowledge of
the specific discipline and industry are often called on to analyze decisions,
such as
   Whether to make or buy components
   Whether to buy or lease equipment
   Which financial metrics to use to make decisions -- such as net present
   value (NPV), breakeven point, payback period, or discounted cash flow


           The financial metrics are reviewed in Book II, Chapter 1.

Plan Cost Management: Outputs
The cost management plan includes a description of how costs will be
estimated, budgeted, and controlled. It defines the methods and techniques
used throughout the project. Some common content includes
   Planning information
   * How costs will be recorded: This could be hours, euros, yen, dollars, or
     some other metric.
    * The detail level of cost reporting: This defines whether you will report
      in 100s of dollars, or 1000s of dollars, or some other increment.
    * Determining which costs will be tracked on the project: Many
      organizations don't track the costs of internal resources, such as people,
      equipment use, supplies and so forth. On the other hand, if the project is
      being done under contract, labor will be tracked and billed at a specified
      rate -- and perhaps an overhead rate will be assessed to account for
      indirect costs, such as overhead, executive salaries, and the like.
      Another example is determining whether capital equipment will be
      charged to the project or depreciated as part of the organization's
      operations.
    * Systems used to track and report costs and also establish the links
      between cost and other artifacts and systems: For example, this defines
      whether costs are reported using the work breakdown structure (WBS)
      numbering structure or the company's accounting codes. I discuss the
  WBS numbering structure in Book III, Chapter 2.
Executing information
* How and when cost information is collected: Your organization may
  have an automated system that allows the project manager (PM) to enter
  the costs for resources and assign those costs to a specific WBS item, or
  you may have to manually review monthly invoices to determine
  project costs. Some organizations track costs weekly, others monthly.
  Whichever situation you find yourself in, you should document the
  expectations in the cost management plan.
* How you will measure scope and budget performance: This is most
  commonly used in EV management, but defining measurement methods
  upfront helps reduce surprises for any project. For example, you can
  define whether you will collect costs weekly and compare them against
  progress, or when a deliverable is complete, or whether to use interim
  deliverable milestones to track costs.
* When to record project costs for procured items: Should costs be
  recorded when the order is placed? Delivered? Used? Invoiced? Paid?
  Most organizations have accounting policies in place that define when
  to record costs for operations, but you will need to determine when to
  record them for project tracking up front to ensure reporting
  consistency.
Monitoring and controlling information
* Information and metrics to be collected and reported
* Reporting format
* Control thresholds
* Forecasting techniques


     The PMBOK Guide references the information in this section as a
 "cost management plan." However, the exam specification that the exam
 is built from calls this a "budget plan." Be prepared to see questions
 referencing either term on the exam.
Estimate Costs
 Estimating how much everything will cost on a project can be very
 challenging. Unless you have a fixed price quote for work or materials, your
 costs are likely to evolve and change. When a project is initiated (see Book II,
 Chapter 2 on project initiation), you won't have much detail, so your cost
 estimates will not be very accurate. However, as you develop more detailed
 information, you will get more accurate cost estimates.


         Developing, refining, and updating cost estimates is an iterative and
      ongoing process throughout the project. You need to include information
      from many other processes:
    Create WBS
    Develop Schedule
    Plan Human Resources
    Identify Risks
 For smaller projects, the processes of estimating costs and determining the
 budget are completed at the same time. However, for larger projects, these are
 separate and more detailed processes.


         Estimate. A quantitative assessment of the likely amount or outcome.
      Usually applied to project costs, resources, effort and durations and is
      usually preceded by a modifier (i.e., preliminary, conceptual, feasibility,
      order-of-magnitude, definitive). It should always include some
      indication of accuracy (for example, +/- n percent).
 Estimate Costs. The process of developing an approximation of the
 monetary resources needed to complete project activities.

 Estimate Costs: Inputs
 You use the cost management plan to determine the level of accuracy and
 units of measure to use for estimating costs. Estimating the cost of the project
 starts with well-defined scope. For that, you need the scope baseline. Your
scope statement tells you any constraints, such as a predetermined budget, set
delivery dates, or limited resources. The WBS defines all the deliverables, but
the WBS dictionary has the technical details and resources associated with
those deliverables. This can include necessary licenses, permits, safety issues,
and so on. More information on the scope baseline, WBS, and WBS
dictionary is in Book III, Chapter 2.
The project schedule contains the information from the Estimate Activity
Resources and Estimate Activity Durations processes. The project schedule
-- along with the human resource plan, which contains staffing information,
such as hourly rates (see Chapter 3 of this minibook for more on the human
resource plan) -- are two important components in estimating costs
accurately.
The risk register provides two types of costs:
   Costs associated with specific risks: Can include the cost to mitigate a
   risk, purchase a bond or insurance, or provide some other appropriate risk
   response.
   Costs associated with contingency: Used to ensure the project doesn't
   overrun the budget by setting aside funds to account for uncertainty and
   unidentified risks.
See more information about risk in Book V, Chapter 1.
You'll find information on staffing rates in the human resources management
plan.


        Market conditions can have a significant impact on a project's costs,
     such as
   Availability of resources: Scarce human resources or materials will drive
   up costs.
   Interest rates: The cost of borrowing money and the availability of
   money will influence project choices and estimates.
In some industries, databases or publications offer market rates for resources.
For example, construction costs are fairly stable, and you can find a lot of
information on costs for material, labor, equipment, and so forth.
          Information on past projects is really useful when estimating costs.
       However, take care that the information is current and relevant. Cost
       information for a project you completed five years ago is most likely no
       longer relevant.

Estimate Costs: Tools and Techniques
Part of the estimating process is looking at alternative project approaches.
Sometimes, bringing in a full-time employee to fill a slot on the team is the
best option; other times, going with contract labor is a better option. With
equipment, you can compare the cost options of purchasing, leasing, or
renting. You might want to look at the lifecycle cost of the product versus the
project cost.
One of the axioms in estimating is that as you progress through the planning
process, your estimates will get more accurate and have a narrower range.
This is just common sense. As the scope is better defined, the costs can be
better defined.


          The PMBOK Guide doesn't state definitively the degree of accuracy
       that you should have for cost estimates based on where you are in the
       project lifecycle. The PMBOK Guide and the PMP have to apply to all
       industries. However, Table 1-1 shows some standard project-estimating
       accuracy ranges (Harold Kerzner, Project Management: A Systems
       Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and Controlling, Eleventh Edition
       [Wiley]).

Table 1-1 Standard Project-Estimating Accuracy Ranges
Type                       Range     Use

Rough Order of Magnitude   -25% to
                                     In the concept phase.Top down.Little information.
(ROM)                      +75%
                           -10% to   In the planning phase.Decomposed from top down.Some
Budgetary
                           +25%      information.

                           -5% to
Definitive                           In production.Bottom-up.Detailed information.
                           +10%
  Several variables can affect your range of estimates and the confidence level
  in the estimates (see Figures 1-1 and 1-2):
      Technology
      Experience
      Risk




Figure 1-1: Estimates with higher accuracy.




Figure 1-2: Estimates with lower accuracy.


  Just like estimating durations, expert judgment in the form of team members
  and estimators is invaluable. These people can select the best method of
  estimating, and they bring their experience in how to save money and
  knowing which shortcuts end up costing more in the end.
  You will obviously use some type of software to record your estimates. The
  simplest way is to use some kind of spreadsheet (such as Microsoft Excel)
  although many organizations use proprietary or off-the-shelf estimating
  software. Estimating software can run simulations, develop graphs and charts,
  and greatly simplify the estimating and budgeting processes.


           You might be accountable for different types of costs on your project:
  Direct     Directly attributable to your project. Includes labor, material, travel costs,
  Costs      and so on.
Indirect   Not directly attributable to your project. Includes overhead, management
Costs      salaries, the legal department, and so on.

Analogous estimating
Analogous estimating uses expert judgment and historical information to
develop cost estimates. This type of estimating is used in the earlier phases of
a project to get an overall project cost although it can be used at any time in
the project lifecycle and at any level of detail in the WBS. You start with a
similar project and identify the variables that drive the cost. In cost estimates,
some of the variables that are likely to drive cost are:
   Size
   Weight
   Complexity
For my running example of a childcare center, say that you're trying to get a
high-level cost estimate for remodeling the space. You can look for
information from a remodel that your organization recently did to compare
that against the current project. If your company doesn't have that history,
your contractor will surely be able to pull from his expertise and recent
experience. The scenario might sound something like this:
   We recently took 5,000 square feet of new space that hadn't been built out
   at all and put in a childcare center. That project ended up costing
   $550,000. But, for this project, we have to demo the existing space, so
   that will add about 10%. However, this project is only 4,000 square feet,
   so that's 20% less space.

So, first you add the 10% for demo. That brings the cost to $605,000. Then
you multiply that by 80% to get an analogous estimate of $484,000.
This is a relatively quick and simple way to estimate. As you fill in more
details about the scope, the estimate will need to be re-examined, and a more
accurate method will be appropriate.
Parametric estimating
Parametric estimating uses a statistical relationship based on past data to
calculate an estimate. For the childcare center scenario, say that the general
contractor rates this type of job at about $120 per square foot, and you have
4,000 square feet. That gives you an estimate of $480,000.
Parametric estimating is easy if you have a simple model, such as cost per
square foot. It can get more complex, though, with the more variables you
add. However, if you set up this kind of estimation model on a spreadsheet,
it's relatively simple to change the parameters if your assumptions (say, the
number of machines) or basis of estimates (cost per machine) changes. To use
this method, the cost-estimating relationships (CERs) need to be scalable. In
other words, if you are using cost per square foot, then the cost per square
foot needs to remain the same whether the square footage is 10 or 10,000.
Bottom-up estimating
Bottom-up estimating is the most accurate form of estimating. However, you
can employ this type of estimating only toward the end of the planning
process when you have detailed information about the scope. This method
1. Determines the cost for each resource needed to create the deliverable
2. Sums all deliverables
3. Includes the contingency reserve
  Read about contingency reserve in the later section, Determine Budget:
  Outputs.
4. Aggregates the total into a bottom-up estimate
Although bottom-up estimating is the most accurate type of estimate, it's also
quite time consuming, and you can't do it until you have a significant level of
detail for the deliverables.
Three-point estimating
When you have a lot of uncertainty, risk, or unknowns around a work
package, you can use three-point estimating to give you a range and an
expected cost. You collect three estimates based on the best case, most likely,
and worst case scenarios.
   Best case (optimistic): Cost estimates play out while accurate, no-risk
   events occur, and the work takes only as long as estimated. This is
   represented as an o for "optimistic." Or you might see it notated as co for
   "cost optimistic."
   Most likely: Takes into account the realities of project life, such as
   needing extra parts or people, rework, things not going exactly as planned,
   and so forth. This is represented as an m for "most likely." You might see
   this presented as cm for "cost most likely."
   Worst case (pessimistic): Assumes expensive resources, much rework,
   and delays in work getting accomplished. This is represented as a p for
   "pessimistic" or cp for "cost pessimistic."

The simplest way to develop the expected cost, or ce (cost expected), is to
sum the three estimates and divide by three. You might see this referred to as
a triangular distribution. However, that's not the most accurate way because
you assume an equal probability that the best case, most likely, and worst
case scenarios would occur -- and that's not realistic. In reality, the most
likely estimate has a greater chance of occurring than either the best case or
the worst case scenarios. Therefore, you weight the most likely scenario to
develop a weighted average. The most common way of calculating a
weighted average is
   ce = (co + 4cm + cp) / 6

Notice that the numerator has six factors you are adding; therefore, the
denominator to achieve the average is 6.


        The PMP exam might refer to this as a Beta Distribution or PERT
     (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) estimating.
Suppose you're estimating costs to travel to a project site. You do some
research on plane tickets; based on the time of year and how far in advance
you purchase the tickets, you come up with some estimates. If you travel
during normal business days (no holidays) and you purchase the ticket three
weeks in advance, you can get a cost as low as $300 per round trip. This is
the best case scenario. More likely, though, you won't book until two weeks
prior to the trip, which will bump the cost to $450. However, in the past,
you've had but 48 hours advance notice -- and if this occurs during a
holiday, you're looking at a cost of $1,200 per round trip. Using the weighted
average, you determine your expected cost to be
   (300 + 4(450) + 1200) / 6 = $550
Table 1-2 summarizes the benefits and shortfalls of various methods of
developing cost estimates.

Table 1-2 Comparing Cost Estimating Methods
Type        Benefits                                             Shortfalls

                                                              Not as accurate as a bottom-up
          Used if a limited amount of detailed information is
                                                              estimate.Can be used only when the
Analogous available.Useful when the estimate must be
                                                              projects are similar in fact not just in
          delivered within certain time constraints.
                                                              appearance.
           Useful if components are scalable.Useful if        Parameters must be quantifiable.Not as
Parametric historical information on which the model is based accurate as a bottom-up estimate.Computer
           is accurate.Quick.                                 program needed.
                                                                 Time consuming.Interaction costs may be
            Most accurate.Buy-in from the person doing the
Bottom-up                                                        overlooked.Contingency costs by task may
            work.Used when the project is well defined.
                                                                 inflate estimates.
                                                                 Time consuming.Many people have a hard
Three-      Used if there is a lot of uncertainty on the
                                                                 time coming up with one estimate, much
point       project.Provides a justification for cost reserve.
                                                                 less three.


Reserve analysis for cost estimates
If your project is very complex or uses new and unproven technology, you
need more reserves than if you had a simple project you've done many times
before. You need to determine the appropriate amount, either in dollars or as a
percent of the budget, to set aside for reserve. As you reduce the uncertainty,
you can reduce the reserve.
Cost of quality
Cost of quality takes into consideration costs necessary to comply with
quality requirements. These include prevention costs (such as training and
more planning) and appraisal costs (such as test equipment and testing). Cost
of quality also includes the costs associated with noncompliance, such as
scrap, rework, warranty work, and so forth. Find more information about the
cost of quality in the next chapter of this minibook.
Vendor bid analysis
A vendor bid analysis technique is used if you're outsourcing or procuring
part of your project. You analyze the vendor bid, contract type, and incentive
fees (if used) and then include that information in your cost estimates.
Additional techniques
 Estimating software, spreadsheets, and simulation software can be useful to
 organize and review multiple cost estimates. To arrive at a viable range of
 outcomes it may be useful to engage a group of experts, in which case you
 are likely to need decision-making techniques such as the Delphi technique
 (described in Book V, Chapter 1).


Estimate Costs: Outputs
 Activity cost estimates can be at a high level or a much more detailed level
 toward the end of the planning phase. Costs may be rolled into resource
 categories for accounting and reporting purposes. Common categories include
    Labor
    Equipment
    Material
    Supplies
    Travel
    Permits and licenses
    Facilities
    Contingency reserve
    Overhead
 Along with the cost estimates, you should record your assumptions and the
 basis of estimates. Suppose that you're documenting supporting details for
 cost estimates for the eating area furniture for the childcare center. You'd
 document the following assumptions:
    No more than 30 children will be in the eating area at one time.
    All children can use the same size tables and chairs.
    Tables can seat 6 children comfortably.
 Then you do your research on prices and find the following:
    Tables cost $250 each.
    Chairs cost $65 each.
 The information on the number of children and the configuration are the
 assumptions, and the costs for the tables and chairs are the basis of estimates.
 Both pieces of information should be documented. If you make changes to
 the assumptions or the basis of estimates, costs will change.
 You might want to indicate in your assumptions and basis of estimates the
 fixed costs and the variable costs. Fixed costs don't change based on volume.
 For example, office rent is the same whether you have 2 people using the
 office or 20, or whether they use it 40 or 100 hours per week. Comparatively,
 variable costs adjust based on volume. For example, whether you need 5 or
 20 gallons of paint will affect the cost estimate for paint.


          Based on developing your cost estimates, you might need to update
      your risk register and/or Assumption Log, or rebalance your scope to
      your estimated funding needs. The assumption log is discussed in Book
      III, Chapter 2. The risk register is introduced in Book V, Chapter 1.

Determine Budget
 Your budget is the authorized funding for your project. In addition to the
 definition of this process, be familiar with the definition of budget and budget
 at completion.


         Determine Budget. Aggregating the estimated costs of individual
      activities or work packages to establish an authorized cost baseline.
 Budget. The approved estimate for the project or any work breakdown
 structure component or any schedule activity.
 Budget at completion (BAC). The sum of all the budgets established for the
 work to be performed.
 To formulate the budget, you spread cost estimates across the schedule. This
 gives you a time-phased spending curve, often called an S-curve. It starts with
 looking at how scope, schedule, and cost relate.

 Determine Budget: Inputs
You need numerous project documents and artifacts to create a reliable
budget. You will want to apply the organization's budgeting policies and tools
to keep the information organized. The following sections discuss the
artifacts and documents by organizing them into scope, schedule, and cost
categories.
Scope information
The scope baseline provides the obvious, which is the WBS and WBS
dictionary that defines the detailed work for the project. However, the scope
statement can have some very useful information. Remember that the scope
statement documents project constraints. Many times, funding limitations are
based on fiscal year budgets. For example, the project might have an overall
cost estimate of 2.5 million, but only 1 million is available the first year, 1
million the second year, and the balance in the third year. Work done for the
government often has funding limitations that restrict the expenditures of
funds. You need to compare this information with information from the
schedule and the cost estimates to develop an accurate budget.
Schedule information
Schedule artifacts include the project schedule, which has information on the
planned start and finish dates for elements of the project scope. At the most
detailed, you can see start and finish dates for activities. You can also see the
dates for work packages and even control accounts. This can help you
aggregate costs by work period.
You should also look at the resource calendars to see when people are
available and when they are assigned to work. If you have to spread out work
to accommodate funding limitations, you need to determine whether
resources are available as needed.
Cost information
The cost management plan, cost estimates, and the basis of estimates are
applied to the work packages and the schedule to develop the funding needs
over time. You should look at agreements and contracts to determine when
payment for goods and services are due. Review the risk register to determine
how to aggregate risk response costs and to incorporate contingency reserves
over time.

Determine Budget: Tools and Techniques
When building a budget, you need expert judgment in the form of team
members and perhaps even finance folks, depending on the size and
complexity of the budget. The main technique is cost aggregation. This will
be coupled with reserve analysis and funding limit reconciliation. In some
industries, you can use historical relationships to validate the budget curve.
The following sections look at each of these a bit closer.
Cost aggregation
Cost aggregation is simply summing the costs for each work package to the
control account up to the project level. You can aggregate this information by
time period to see the scheduled spending per time period. Table 1-3 shows
activities and costs for the playground installation for the childcare center.
The second row from the bottom shows the weekly cost, and the bottom row
shows the aggregation of costs so you can see a running total of planned
expenditures.




Reserve analysis for determining the budget
Reserve analysis, as used in developing a budget, takes into consideration
both contingency reserve and management reserve. This can be a tricky
distinction, and not everyone agrees on the exact definition. The PMBOK
Guide defines reserve and contingency reserve, but not management reserve.
After the following definitions, I show some examples to elaborate the
concepts.
        Contingency reserve. Budget within the cost baseline or the
     performance measurement baseline that is allocated for identified risks
     that are accepted and for which contingent or mitigating responses are
     developed.
Reserve. A provision in the project management plan to mitigate cost and/or
schedule risk. Often used with a modifier (for example, management reserve,
contingency reserve) to provide further detail on what types of risk are meant
to be mitigated.
Contingency reserve concerns risk identified in the risk register. It is used to
reduce risk on the project by providing funds for specific deliverables, phases
of the lifecycle, or the project as a whole. Contingency reserve is used to
ensure that the project doesn't overrun the available funding. Contingency
funds are included in the cost baseline and the funding requirements.
Using the childcare center example, assume that you set aside 10% of the
budget for risk management. A week before the playground equipment is
supposed to be installed, the playground equipment contractor calls to
announce a delay in getting the slide delivered. The project manager could
use contingency reserve to either find another supplier (even if the cost was a
bit more), or perhaps expedite shipping and delivery, or maybe pay overtime
to get it installed as fast as possible after delivery.
Management reserve is for unplanned, in-scope work. For example, say the
plumbing contractor at the childcare center put in 20 feet of PVC pipe, and
then the carpenter put up the drywall and painted everything only to discover
a hairline crack in the pipe that was leaking and needed replaced. The
plumber needs to take out the drywall, replace the pipe, and pay to have the
drywall replaced and possibly repainted. This is in-scope work, but it was
definitely not planned. Management reserve would be used to pay for that.
Management reserve is not part of the baseline, but it is part of the funding
requirements.
Another aspect of reserve analysis is deciding how to allocate it. Because
installing a playground is a relatively low-risk endeavor, without many
unknowns, you would probably put in only 5-10% contingency for
unexpected costs. You might want to apply it evenly throughout the project,
or assign 10% in the concept phase, 20% in the planning phase, 60% in the
construction phase, and the remaining 10% at walk-through.
Funding limit reconciliation
When you first lay your cost estimates over time and aggregate the funds by
time period, you should compare the results with any funding limitations
identified in the scope statement or elsewhere. I discuss the scope statement
in Book III, Chapter 2. This might require you to reschedule the work to meet
the funding limitations. Usually, it necessitates extending the schedule to
account for limited funding although sometimes funding must be spent by a
certain date lest it be lost - and this might call for schedule acceleration.
Historical relationships
A good way to check the validity of your budget is to compare it with any
historic data or industry data that show cost relationships. For example,
organizations that do similar projects and use a defined lifecycle can tell you
what percent of the budget should be spent in each lifecycle phase. You can
compare the historic information with your project lifecycle to make sure that
they're aligned. Note: You should be able to explain significant differences. If
you need a refresher on lifecycles, see Book I, Chapter 3.

Determine Budget: Outputs
After you balance the scope, schedule, budget, risk, and funding limitations,
you have a viable cost baseline, your project budget, and your funding
requirements. You use that cost baseline to measure, monitor, and control
your overall cost performance on the project.


        When using EV (earned value) management, the cost performance
     baseline is referred to as the performance measurement baseline.


        Cost Baseline. The approved version of the time-phased project,
     excluding any management reserves, which can be changed only
     through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for
     comparison to actual results.
Performance measurement baseline (PMB). An approved integrated scope-
  schedule-cost plan for the project work against which project execution is
  compared to measure and manage performance. The PMB includes
  contingency reserve but excludes management reserve.
  Figure 1-3 shows a cost baseline for the playground installation. The cost
  curve is based on the cost aggregation example in Table 1-3.
  The difference between the cost baseline and the project budget is
  management reserves. You will measure performance against the baseline;
  however, you will need the management reserve as part of the project budget
  to address unforeseen risks.




Figure 1-3: Cost baseline.


  The project funding requirements outline the amount of total funding needed
  for the project. You might see them overlaid on the cost baseline for each
  time period (as shown in Figure 1-4). Although project expenditures usually
  occur relatively smoothly, funding often occurs in chunks. Figure 1-4 shows
  the cost baseline with funding occurring in a stair-step fashion.
Figure 1-4: Cost baseline and funding requirements.


  Another way of showing the funding needs is to show the build-up from work
  packages to control accounts to the cost baseline, then the project budget and,
  finally, the total funding requirements. Total funding requirements include the
  cost baseline + management reserve.
  You can see in Figure 1-5 that the work in the WBS plus contingency
  reserves makes up the cost baseline. The addition of the management reserve
  determines the project budget.
Figure 1-5: Project budget.


  After the cost baseline and funding requirements are established, you might
  need to update your schedule, risk register, and other project documents.


Key Terms
  Most of the terms in this chapter relate to estimating techniques and
  estimating accuracy. Quite a few terms relate to the cost baseline, too.
      Cost management plan
      Rough Order of Magnitude
      Budgetary estimate
Definitive estimate
Direct costs
Indirect costs
Analogous estimate
Parametric estimate
Bottom-up estimate
Three-point estimate
Budget
Budget at completion
Reserve
Contingency reserve
Management reserve
Cost baseline
Performance measurement baseline
Chapter Summary
 Cost estimating and budgeting are two important processes in the planning
 process group. You need both of these processes to develop an effective cost
 baseline against which you will measure performance.
    Your cost estimates will get more accurate as you define your scope in
    more detail. In the beginning, you might have a rough order of magnitude
    estimate. Later, it evolves into a budgetary estimate. You will end up with
    a definitive estimate.
    Analogous estimating compares the current project with past, similar
    projects to develop a cost estimate.
    Parametric estimating uses a mathematical relationship to derive cost
    estimates.
    Bottom-up estimates decompose work to the work package level to
    determine the cost.
    Three-point estimates are used when there is a large degree of uncertainty
    associated with the estimate.
    Record your cost estimates in cost categories along with assumptions and
    a basis of estimates.
     A project budget allocates the cost estimates over time. The budget
    includes the cost baseline plus the management reserve.
     You need to balance your funding requirements with any funding
    limitations. Total funding requirements include the baseline, contingency,
    and management reserves.
                          Prep Test
                      Multiple Choice
1. Which document sets out the format and establishes the
  activities and criteria for planning, structuring, and controlling
  the project's cost?
  A   Activity cost estimates
  B   Basis of estimates
  C   Cost management plan
  D   Spend plan

2. The type of estimate done in the beginning of a project with a
  range of -25% to +75% is
  A   Rough Order of Magnitude
  B   Budgetary
  C   Engineering
  D   Definitive

3. Which type of estimate uses expert judgment and historical
  information?
  A   Parametric
  B   Analogous
  C   Three-point
  D   Bottom-up

4. Which type of estimate uses a statistical relationship between
  historical data and variables, such as weight, size, and
  duration?
  A   Analogous
  B   Three-point
 C    Parametric
 D    Bottom-up

5. If you have a lot of uncertainty and risk associated with a
  particular work package, what type of estimate should you
  develop?
 A    Analogous
 B    Three-point
 C    Parametric
 D    Bottom-up

6. The most accurate form of estimating is
 A    Parametric
 B    Analogous
 C    Three-point
 D    Bottom-up

7. Funds that cover unplanned in-scope work are called
 A    Contingency reserve
 B    Risk reserve
 C    Management reserve
 D    Risk response reserve

8. The authorized time-phased budget is
 A    The project baseline
 B    The cost baseline
 C    The project management plan
 D    The performance baseline

                           Scenario 1
You are installing 400 new computers and need to come up with a
high-level estimate. You did a similar project last year. You look back
at your records and find the following:
 Each computer cost $675.
 Labor rates were $85 per hour.
 Each computer took 1 hour to install.
Based on a vendor quotation, you estimate that the computers will
cost $655 each. Labor rates are up by 10%. You estimate the time to
install will be about the same. Using the analogous estimating
technique, what is your cost estimate?
 A   $299,400
 B   $262,000
 C   $296,000
 D   $325,600

                            Scenario 2
Your organization is purchasing some new off-the-shelf software. You
hired a consultant to do the integration with three existing applications.
The consultant has given you the following information:
 If the interfaces are relatively simple and the code is clean, it should
take 50 hours.
 However, in his experience, something always goes wrong, so he
thinks it will probably take 60 hours.
 And, if he runs into unforeseen problems, the interfaces don't work,
and he has to write extensive coding workarounds, it will take closer
to 130 hours.
The consultant charges $100 per hour. What is the expected cost?
 A   $6,900
 B   $8,100
 C   $8,200
 D   $7,000
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Cost management plan. The cost management plan describes
  the structure and criteria that will be used for cost planning,
  estimating, budgeting and reporting. See Plan Cost Management:
  Outputs.
2. A. Rough Order of Magnitude. This measurement band can differ
  by industry, but it is a standard generic rough order of magnitude
  range. Spend some time with Estimate Costs: Tools and
  Techniques.
3. B. Analogous. Analogous estimating uses expert judgment and
  information from past projects. Go back to Analogous estimating.
4. C. Parametric. Parametric estimating uses mathematical models to
  develop cost estimates. Review Parametric estimating.
5. B. Three-point. A three-point estimate accounts for risk and
  uncertainty. Look into Three-point estimating.
6. D. Bottom-up. A bottom-up estimate is the most accurate estimate.
  It also takes the most time to prepare. Check out the information in
  Bottom-up estimating.
7. C. Management reserve. Management reserve is used for project
  changes to scope and cost. It covers work that is in-scope, but
  unplanned. See the content under Reserve analysis for determining
  the budget.
8. B. The cost baseline. This is the authorized budget for the project,
  allocated over time. Check out Determine Budget: Outputs.

                           Scenario 1
A. $299,400. 400 computers x 655 = $262,000. 1 hour per computer
  install = 400 hours. The (old) rate of 85 x 1.1 = 93.5 hourly rate.
  400 x 93.50 = $37,400. $262,000 + $37,400 = $299,400. Go over
  Parametric estimating.

                          Scenario 2
D. $7,000. The three-point estimate with a weighted average will give
  you the expected cost. (50 + 4(60) + 130) / 6 = 70 hours. 70 x $100
  = $7,000. Go to Three-point estimating.
Chapter 2: Planning for Quality
Exam Objective
    Review the project scope to determine the quality requirements and
    standards needed to meet stakeholder expectations.



 When talking about quality in project management, keep several things in
 mind. First, project quality is different from product quality. Project quality
 has to do with how you manage the project: For example, do you follow a
 methodology? Are your plans integrated and complete? Do you meet your
 schedule deliverables dates? Are you on budget? In contrast, product quality
 is dependent upon the nature of the product. After all, product quality
 requirements for producing a concert or an event are very different from
 building a childcare center.
 Another thing to keep in mind is that the majority of the quality concepts
 used in project management come from a manufacturing environment.
 Therefore, many quality-management tenets are based on work done by J.
 Edwards Deming, Walter Shewhart, Philip Crosby, Joseph Juran, and other
 well-known quality pioneers. The PMP exam won't expect you to know
 which expert developed specific tools and axioms, nor will it expect you to
 know the details of any proprietary methodology, such as TQM, CMMI, or
 Six Sigma. However, you are expected to have a basic understanding of
 quality principles, including how they relate to project management.
 In addition to the basic quality principles, you also have to know some simple
 statistics. Don't worry; you aren't going to have to conduct a chi-square test
 or do any regression analysis. However, you need to understand normal
 distributions and standard deviations.
 In this chapter, I discuss basic quality concepts and definitions, then move
 into some simple statistics, and conclude by going over the information from
 the Plan Quality Management process in the PMBOK Guide.
                 Quick Assessment
1. When investing in quality, you want to make sure that you're
  getting more out of the investment than you're putting into it. One
  technique that you can employ to ensure this is a(n) ______
  ______ ______.
2. A(n) ______ ______ is used to determine whether a process is
  stable or has predictable performance.
3. (True/False). The mode is the point where 50% of the results are
  greater, and 50% of the results are less.
4. A(n) ______ is a very specific operational definition that describes
  a project or product attribute.
5. (True/False). Quality should be planned in, not inspected in.
6. ______ is a category assigned to products or services having the
  same functional use but different technical characteristics.
7. What is the PERT equation?
8. Assuming a normal distribution, a cumulative distribution of the
  mean +1 represents what percent of the outcomes?
9. If you want to determine whether a product conforms to the
  intended result, which method of sampling would you use?
10. Which document provides instructions for optimizing a process
  and establishes targets for improvement?
                          Answers
1. Cost-benefit analysis. A cost-benefit analysis compares the
  investment in quality for a product or process with the expected
  benefit. For more on cost-benefit analysis, see the Plan Quality:
  Tools and Techniques section.
2. Control chart. A control chart plots the performance of a process.
  Results that fall within +/-3 standard deviations from the mean are
  said to be "in control." You can find more information on this in the
  Seven basic quality tools section.
3. False. The mean is the point where 50% of the results are greater,
  and 50% of the results are less. The mode is the most frequent
  point. Look over the information in the Basic Statistics section.
4. Metric. Metrics are very specific definitions used to measure project
  or product attributes. See more about this in the Plan Quality
  Management: Outputs section.
5. True. One of the axioms in project management is that quality
  should be planned in, not inspected in. Find this in the Basic Quality
  Concepts section.
6. Grade. Grade is different than quality. Read more about the
  distinction in the Basic Quality Concepts section.
7. The PERT equation is (O + 4M + P) / 6. You can find this in the
  Basic Statistics section.
8. 84%. This represents 50% (mean) plus one standard deviation
  (34%). Find out more about cumulative distributions in the Basic
  Statistics section.
9. Attribute sampling. Attribute sampling determines whether a result
  conforms. Variable sampling determines the degree of
  conformance. You can review this information in the section
  Statistical sampling.
10. Process improvement plan. Read more about the process
    improvement plan in the Plan Quality Management: Outputs
    section.


Basic Quality Concepts
 Modern quality management focuses on customer satisfaction, which is
 generally defined as conformance to requirements and fitness for use. In other
 words, the product, process, and project meet the requirements, and the end
 result is used and useful. Certainly, when talking about product satisfaction,
 the focus is on the customer; however, project satisfaction needs to take into
 consideration the project team, the sponsor, vendors, regulatory entities, and
 other project-specific stakeholders. Therefore, when I address "project quality
 management," I prefer to focus on stakeholder satisfaction. It's important that
 all stakeholders are satisfied, not just the customer. In this sense, quality
 management is very integrated with collecting requirements and planning
 stakeholder management.
 Another fundamental tenet is that quality should be planned, designed, and
 built in, rather than inspected in. A project is generally less expensive if you
 go into it preventing mistakes from happening rather than correcting those
 mistakes later on in the project's lifecycle.
 Part of quality management is continuous improvement. This goes for
 product and project quality. The underlying basis for quality improvement is
 the plan-do-check-act cycle that Walter Shewhart developed and J. Edwards
 Deming refined and publicized in the 1950s. Figure 2-1 summarizes the plan-
 do-check-act cycle.
Figure 2-1: Plan-do-check-act cycle.


  Much of the capability to significantly improve a product or process is
  dependent upon an investment in quality. This type of investment is usually
  done outside the project. Typically, management is responsible for the
  investment and providing the resources and organizational support for quality
  management. Examples include bringing proprietary methods (such as
  Capability Maturity Model Integration; CMMI) into the organization, or
  investing more in appraisal and analysis versus defect repair.


           One of the aspects of quality you need to be familiar with is the
        distinction between quality and grade.


           Quality. The degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills
        requirements.
  Grade. A category or rank used to distinguish items that have the same
  functional use (say, a hammer) but do not share the same requirements for
  quality (say, different hammers may need to withstand different amounts of
  force).
  For my running example of a childcare center, you can compare quality and
  grade by the selection process used to choose a secure entrance for the
  facility. One vendor, Secure Source, proposes using a security system with
  cameras, retinal scans, infrared beams at the windows, a double-door entry
  system, and panic buttons that are directly wired to Secure Source.
  Another vendor, Breach Proof, proposes using a double door with a badge
  swipe machine for entry. This would be bolstered with a computer application
  called Guardian that records entry and exit times by person as well as
  authorized drop-off and pick-up persons.
  You do some research on both companies and find the following reviews for
  Secure Source:
      "We used Secure Source, and I got caught in between the double doors
      with my daughter. They couldn't get us out for 2 hours."
   "The retinal scanners keep going off line, and we have to shut down and
   reboot the system to get them to reset."
   "When we called the hotline to test the responsiveness, we were put on
   hold!"

Then you do some research on Breach Proof and see the following reviews:
   "When I called, they picked up right away. The people were very helpful,
   and their response time was excellent."
   "The Guardian system is wonderful! It is so easy to use. It not only keeps
   the facility secure, it helps me plan my staffing!"

These examples demonstrate that while Secure Source is high grade (it has
lots of features and functions), it is low quality (doesn't meet the criteria of
"fit for use"). On the other hand, the Breach Proof proposal is lower grade,
but it is fit for use. In other words, it is higher quality because it meets the
needs, doesn't break down, and is used -- and useful.
Another distinction you need to know is the difference between accuracy and
precision.


        Accuracy. Within the quality management system, accuracy is an
     assessment of correctness.
Precision. Within the quality management system, precision is an assessment
of exactness.
Here's a scenario for the childcare center example. The foreman is working
with two new apprentices. He needs to frame some windows. He tells the
apprentices he needs 24 boards that are four feet long, and each apprentice
should cut 12 boards.
The foreman comes back and checks the results. One apprentice, Ryan, has
his boards lined up; even without measuring, the foreman can tell that they
are different lengths. He tells Ryan that he needs to work on his precision so
that all the boards are the same length.
Next, the foreman looks at Seth's work. At first, he is very pleased. All the
boards are lined up against the wall, and they are all the same length. He
 thinks this is very good. However, after the foreman measures the boards, he
 finds they are all 46.75" -- not the 48" he asked for. So, although the
 measurements are precise, they're not accurate.


         If you remember the preceding two scenarios, you'll do fine
      answering questions about grade, quality, accuracy, and precision on the
      exam.
 You might come across a few other concepts on the exam:
     Total Quality Management (TQM): The practice of TQM focuses on
    organizations always looking for ways to improve the quality of their
    products and processes.
     Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI): Like TQM, this practice also
    looks to improve the quality of products and processes, but it focuses on
    continuous incremental improvements. You may also hear this referred to
    as Kaizen, the Japanese word for improvement.


Basic Statistics
 For the PMP exam, you need to know some terminology, measurements, and
 concepts in distribution. First, look at some definitions.


         Probability distribution. A mathematical or graphical representation
      that represents the likelihood of different outcomes from a chance event.
 Normal distribution. The frequently encountered bell-shaped distribution;
 the mean, median, and mode are the same value. Also known as a bell curve
 or a Gaussian distribution.
 Cumulative distribution. A way to graph any distribution to show the
 probability that a given value and less (or more) will be achieved.
 Mean. Also called the expected value, mean is the average of all data points.
 Mean may be computed as a simple average or a weighted average, based on
 a specific type of probability distribution, or by using a simulation.
 Median. The point in the distribution where 50% of the results are above the
  value, and 50% of the results are below the value.
  Mode. The most frequent data point.
  Triangular distribution. A continuous distribution that is calculated by using
  three discrete variables or data points: optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely.
  They are not weighted in calculating the mean.


  PERT distribution. A continuous distribution is calculated by using three
  discrete variables: optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely, of which most
  likely is weighted in calculating the mean.




           For the exam, all questions are based on a normal distribution. Figure
        2-2 shows a normal distribution curve.




Figure 2-2: Normal distribution curve.


  In a normal distribution, the mean, median, and mode are all the same. In
  Figure 2-2, that is the highest point of the curve. For a normal distribution,
  you're looking at two aspects: the mean and the standard deviation. Standard
  deviation represents the distance a given point is from the mean. It is also
  called sigma, or s. Here is a more technical definition:
  Standard deviation. A measure of the range of outcomes, the average
  difference from the mean, calculated as the square root of the variance. The
  symbol for standard deviation is .
  The basic equation for computing standard deviation is



  For the purposes of the PMP exam, you can use a shortcut. It works only for
  normal distributions, but because that's all the PMP exam uses, you should be
  okay. The shortcut is
      (pessimistic - optimistic) / 6

  Basically, the mean shows the height of the curve, and the standard deviation
  determines the width of the curve. A narrow curve has a relatively low
  standard deviation. See Figure 2-3 for an example of a narrow distribution. A
  flatter distribution has a relatively greater standard deviation.




Figure 2-3: Normal distribution curve with small standard deviation.


  See Figure 2-4 for a wide distribution.




Figure 2-4: Normal distribution curve with a large standard deviation.
Generally, measurements are assessed by the number of standard deviations
they are from the mean. In a normal distribution
   68.3% of the data points fall within 1 standard deviation.
   95.5% of the data points fall within 2 standard deviations.
   99.7% of the data points fall within 3 standard deviations.
Thus, for a normal distribution, almost all values lie within 3 standard
deviations of the mean.


         You need this information for quality, cost-estimating, duration-
     estimation, and risk questions on the PMP exam. Here's a quick example
     about project quality where you're reviewing the quality of the duration
     estimates.
A team member estimates that Task A will most likely be finished in 30 days.
The best case scenario is that it could be finished in 24 days, and the worst
case scenario is that it would take 36 days. You would like estimates for
expected completion. Based on this information, you want to know the
answer to this question:
What is the probability that you will finish the task in 28-32 days?
To answer this question, take the following steps:
1. Calculate the mean (expected value) by using the PERT distribution
  equation.
  (24 + 4(30) + 36) / 6 = 30
2. Calculate the standard deviation by using the short formula.
  (36 - 24) / 6 = 2
3. Add and subtract the standard deviation value to and from the mean.
  +/-1 is 28-32 days, which represents 68%.
  So, you can reliably estimate a 68% chance that the activity will be finished
  within 28-32 days.
Here is one more piece of information you need to know: cumulative
distribution. Remember that cumulative distribution is a way to show the
probability that a given value and less (or more) will be achieved. In a
cumulative distribution, you will see the following:
   0.15% of the data points fall between 0 and -3 from the mean.
   2.25% of the data points fall between 0 and -2 from the mean.
   16% of the data points fall between 0 and -1 from the mean.
   84% of the data points fall between 0 and +1 from the mean.
   97.75% of the data points fall between 0 and +2 from the mean.
   99.85% of the data points fall between 0 and +3 from the mean.
Using the same question (What is the probability that you will finish the task
in 28-32 days?), calculate the probability of finishing in 32 days or less.
This question, though, is asking about the cumulative probability of all the
values of 32 days or less. In Step 1 of the preceding list, the mean (the point
in a normal distribution that 50% of the results are above or below) was 30
days. The standard deviation was 2. Take these steps to solve the problem:
1. 30 days (the mean) +1 (2 days) = 32 days.
2. Looking at the preceding information, you can see that 84% of the results
  fall between 0 and +1 from the mean.
Therefore, you can reliably estimate an 84% chance that the task will be
finished in 32 days or less.


        Because 68% of all results are +/-1 from the mean, if you are trying
     to determine the percent that is just +1 or just -1, you divide 68% by
     2 to get 34%. To get the cumulative distribution, you start with the mean
     of 50% and add 34% to show the cumulative value for +1:
   50% + (68% / 2) = 84%

You can subtract 34% to get the cumulative value for -1:
   50% - (68% / 2) = 16%

You follow the same method for 2 using 95.5% divided by 2, and for 3
using 99.7% divided by 2.
 Phew! With the math part done, it's time to move on to planning for quality.


Plan Quality Management
 Planning for quality means identifying the quality standards you need for
 both the product and the project. You should plan for project and product
 quality throughout the project-planning phase.


         Plan Quality Management. The process of identifying quality
      requirements and/or standards for the project and product, and
      documenting how the project will demonstrate compliance.


         PMI takes the position that delivering more quality than is required is
      inappropriate. PMI views quality as "meeting the requirements."
      Delivering better quality or grade is considered "gold plating" and is
      frowned upon because gold plating uses time and resources usually at
      additional cost to add features and functions that are not necessary. Keep
      that in mind when planning for quality management.

 Plan Quality Management: Inputs
 A lot of the product quality planning happens concurrently while developing
 the project management plan. For example, as you plan for scope and
 requirements management and gather requirements, you're looking at
 performance, reliability, and maintainability requirements (and so forth).
 These are all related to product quality. As you create the scope statement, the
 work breakdown structure (WBS), and the WBS dictionary, you will find
 additional information about product quality. In fact, product scope and
 product quality are so tightly linked that on smaller, less-complex projects,
 they aren't really differentiated.
 Many other inputs are used to plan for project quality. For example, you use
 the schedule and cost baselines to determine the quality of the project
 performance. The risk register can identify events that can negatively impact
 project or product quality. The stakeholder register documents stakeholders
 with an interest or impact on quality management.
Many products have standards and regulations that need to be followed for
compliance or marketability reasons. Building codes are an example of
regulations that affect the quality-planning process. Computer hardware
configurations -- such as USB ports, pin configurations, and the like -- are
examples of standards that affect the marketability of a product and that need
to be considered when planning for product quality.
Your company policies often define processes that must be followed to ensure
project and product quality. A key piece of information you can reference is
the organization's quality policy (assuming that one exists), which you can
use as a foundation to develop a project-quality policy.

Plan Quality: Tools and Techniques
When planning for project and product quality, you want to be able to assess
the cost of conforming to the quality requirements with the consequences of
nonconformance. For example, if you're building a staging area to hold
equipment, material, and supplies, you need to meet building codes, but doing
more than that is probably overkill. However, if you're building a corporate
boardroom, you definitely want higher quality standards. The cost of
upgrading the requirements for the staging area would outweigh the benefits,
but the benefit of higher-quality requirements for the corporate boardroom
would outweigh the costs (within reason). Therefore, when you look at the
cost of quality, you always want to keep in mind the cost-benefit analysis of
the investment in quality.


        Cost-benefit analysis. A financial analysis tool used to determine the
     benefits provided by a project against its costs.
Cost of quality
The two aspects to the cost of quality are
   Cost of conformance: The cost of not allowing defects to occur. In other
   words, what are all the costs associated with having an acceptable end
   result?
   Cost of nonconformance: The cost of failure.
        Cost of quality. A method of determining the costs incurred to ensure
     quality. Prevention and appraisal costs (cost of conformance) include
     costs for quality planning, quality control (QC), and quality assurance to
     ensure compliance to requirements (that is, training, QC systems, and so
     on). Failure costs (cost of nonconformance) include costs to rework
     products, components, or processes that are noncompliant, costs of
     warranty work and waste, and loss of reputation.
Cost of conformance
Costs of conformance are generally broken into two categories: prevention
costs and appraisal costs.
Prevention costs are associated with not allowing defects to occur. Some
common prevention costs are
   Training: Can include training on equipment, training in a quality
   methodology, or any kind of skill or knowledge needed to perform a role
   effectively.
    Robust processes and documentation: Having documented processes
   that reduce the variability of outcomes helps ensure quality outcomes.
   This can include policies, procedures, work instructions, checklists,
   technical manuals, and so forth.
    Appropriate tools and equipment: Having the right tools. You can't
   expect a valid schedule for a complex project if you're working in a word
   processing program.
In addition, you need to have the time to do the job right the first time.
Appraisal costs are associated with measuring results. This includes costs
such as
    Testing: This can include software testing, a process walk-through, trying
   to break the product, and so on.
   Inspections: Inspections include measuring, observing, and reviewing
   data.
   Test equipment calibration: If you have test equipment (such as scales
   and thermometers), you need to make sure the test equipment is accurate
   and reliable.
   Independent validation: Getting an outside opinion or consultation is a
   form of appraisal cost. In fact, in many industries, this is considered a best
   practice.
    Quality assurance: Quality assurance comprises making sure that quality
   processes are being followed and are effective. It can include a quality
   audit.
    Quality control: Quality control is taking measurements and comparing
   them with the quality requirements to ensure the quality requirements are
   being met.
Cost of nonconformance
The costs of nonconformance are basically the cost of failure: internal and
external failure costs.
Internal failure is a problem that the project team finds. Internal costs consist
of
    Scrap material: This type of cost can include new parts as well as costs
   incurred to repair broken parts and keeping extra inventory on hand.
    Rework: The work to repair broken or malfunctioning products.
    Root cause analysis: Costs associated with discovering where and why
   the defect occurred as well as correcting the process that allowed it to
   occur.
External failure costs can get much higher. An external failure is not found by
the project team. The defect is usually found by the customer. Although
external failure costs are not typically absorbed by the project, they do affect
the organization -- sometimes, quite a bit. External failure costs include all
the costs of internal failure plus the following:
    Warranty: This includes the shipping to and from the customer, or
   replacement of the part of product. It has incremental costs of help desks
   or customer support phone lines. In some cases, this entails sending
   technicians to the customer site to repair or replace the malfunctioning
   product.
   Lawsuits: In some circumstances, product failure will result in a lawsuit.
   At the very least, this entails the cost of legal representation. Of course,
   product recalls and class action suits can get extremely expensive.
   Loss of business and goodwill: If you release products that are prone to
   breaking or that aren't effective, it won't be long before you lose
   customers. And as we all know, word of mouth can allow bad experiences
   with your company to spread fast!



        Evaluate the costs of conformance with the costs of nonconformance
     by using a cost-benefit analysis.
Benchmarking
When planning your quality parameters, you might want to look at best in
class or best outcomes from other projects, and use those as a target. This is
benchmarking. The childcare center example could benchmark customer
satisfaction ratings for the site.
Design of experiments
This technique is used to optimize a product or a process. It entails working
with multiple variables to find the best possible combination. For the
childcare center example, the kitchen crew might try to optimize a menu with
a healthy treat for snack time by adjusting ingredient ratios, cooking time,
and cooking temperature to find the best interaction of these variables.
Statistical sampling
To determine whether a group of deliverables meets the quality requirements,
you don't have to test every single one. In many circumstances, you can test a
sample of them and determine the viability of the entire group based on the
outcome of the sample. Say the Project Management Office Director wanted
to determine how well all the project managers are following the change
control policies. If 15 project managers were managing 42 projects, the
director could randomly select five change control logs from different project
managers for different projects and infer the performance of the rest of the
projects based on the results of those five change control logs.
When sampling, you can employ
    Attribute sampling: Indicates whether the result conforms. For example,
   the light is on or off.
   Variable sampling: Indicates the degree to which the result complies as
   rated on a continuous scale. For example, if the desired measurement is
   200, a sample at 196 is 98% of the desired measurement.



        During the planning process, you identify the items to be sampled,
     the number sampled, and the criteria for sampling.
Seven basic quality tools
There are seven quality tools, known as the "7QC tools" in quality
management circles. I discuss each tool in greater detail in the chapter on
controlling quality in Book VIII. For now, I give you a brief description of
each tool.
Cause and effect diagram: Used to identify the root causes or contributors
to a problem, error, or defect. The problem statement is the effect and the
possible contributing factors are the causes. For example, a failure in a
system integration test could be due to
   Improper coding
   Unskilled coder
   Inappropriate environment
   Inappropriate test script
   Insufficient bandwidth
The preceding are just a few examples. And each cause can be further
explored for a more elaborate cause-and-effect diagram, also known as a
"fishbone" diagram (because when drawn, it looks like a fish) or an
"Ishikawa" diagram (named for the person who developed it). See Book VIII,
Chapter 2 for more on cause-and-effect diagrams.


        Flowcharts. A flowchart can help you see the relationship between
     the process steps. You can use this information to optimize the process
     and to see where problems and defects can occur. Flowcharts are useful
     in process improvement projects or to document any process.
Checksheets. Used to ensure that a series of steps are followed consistently.
Checksheets (also known as "tally sheets") can be used to organize data
around a quality problem. For example, you can tally the number of times
that a specific cause is the source of a defect, and then use that when creating
a histogram or Pareto chart to prioritize quality problems.
Pareto diagrams. A vertical bar chart that creates a graphic display of events
(such as causes of defects or types of defects) in descending order. The
objective is to rank problems based on the frequency of occurrence to
determine the order in which to resolve them. See Book VIII, Chapter 2 for
more on Pareto diagrams.
Histograms. A vertical bar chart (like the Pareto diagram), but a histogram is
arranged to show the shape of distribution of an event: for example, the shape
of distribution of calls coming into a call center. It can show the spread of
results (dispersion) and the median (or mean or mode). See Book VIII,
Chapter 2 for more on histograms.
Control charts. Used to determine whether a process is stable and
predictable. The planned value of a process is the centerline. For many
processes, the upper and lower control limits are +/-3 standard deviations
from the plan, or the mean, depending on the circumstances. The upper and
lower specification limits are the limits specified in the quality requirements.
If a measurement is getting close to the control limit, you should take action
to get it back toward the midline. Here are the definitions from the PMBOK
Guide:
   Control chart. A graphic display of process data over time and against
   established control limits, and that has a centerline that assists in detecting
   a trend of plotted values toward either control limit.
   Control limits. The area composed of three standard deviations on either
   side of the centerline, or mean of a normal distribution of data plotted on
   a control chart that reflects the expected variation in the data.
   Specification limits. The area, on either side of the centerline, or mean, of
   data plotted on a control chart that meets the customer's requirements for
   a product or service. This area may be greater than or less than the area
   defined by the control limits.

Although control charts were developed to track manufacturing and repetitive
processes, they can be used to track defects, cost and schedule variance, or
any other predictable event on a project. For example, it is predictable that
you will have cost and schedule variances on your project. However, you
want to make sure they are within an allowable limit. You can track the
variances using a control chart to spot trends and to monitor the quality of
cost and schedule performance.


        When planning for quality, establish the items that you will measure
     via a control chart and also set the upper and lower control limits as well
     as upper and lower specification limits.
Scatter diagrams. An X,Y matrix that plots the relationship between two
variables to determine whether a relationship exists: for example, the number
of hours worked in a week and the number of errors made. A positive
correlation would show that the more hours were worked, the more errors per
hour occurred.
Each of these seven basic quality tools can be used in the Control Quality
process. During the planning process, the team meets and determines which
tools to use, the parameters and measurements that should be used, and under
which circumstances they will be used.
Additional quality planning tools
While identifying the quality requirements, you can use other project
management tools, such as the following:
   Brainstorming
   Force field analysis
   Nominal group technique
In addition, you can use a number of proprietary techniques (particularly if
they're used by your organization), including CMMI, Six Sigma, TQM, and
so forth.

Plan Quality Management: Outputs
The output of all this work is a quality management plan, which is a
component of the overall project management plan, describing how you plan
to conduct the various quality processes on your project. In particular, it
 should address
    Roles associated with quality management
    Responsibilities associated with the roles
    Quality assurance approach
    Techniques and measurements used for quality control
    Plans for quality improvement activities
 When planning for quality control, you need to establish very detailed
 descriptions of what you will be measuring and what the acceptable
 measurements are: in other words, metrics. A metric is a measurement or
 definition that describes in very specific terms what something is and how it
 will be measured.
 You can create checklists for processes to ensure that the proper steps are
 carried out in the proper order. Another use for checklists is to help audit the
 process or for a quality control person to use to monitor results.
 When working on a process-improvement project, or if part of your project
 charter includes instructions to improve the processes used for a project, you
 will include a process-improvement plan as well. Contents for the process-
 improvement plan include
    Process description
    Process metrics
    Targets for improvement
    Improvement approach
    Flowchart of the current process (sometimes called the "as-is process")


Key Terms
 Several new terms in this chapter for the quality processes (Plan Quality
 Management, Perform Quality Assurance, and Control Quality) are important
 for you to know. Later in this book, you will see these terms used in the
 remaining two quality processes.
    Quality
Grade
Accuracy
Precision
Probability distribution
Normal distribution
Cumulative distribution
Mean
Median
Mode
Triangular distribution
PERT distribution
Standard deviation
Cost-benefit analysis
Cost of quality
Cause-and-effect diagram
Flowcharts
Checksheets
Pareto diagrams
Histograms
Control chart
Control limit
Specification limit
Scatter diagrams
Design of experiments
Statistical sampling
Metric
Chapter Summary
 The Plan Quality Management process introduces the fundamental concepts
 in quality. Many of them appear to focus on product quality, but they also
 apply to project quality.
    Quality should be planned in, not inspected in.
    Quality and grade are not the same.
    Accuracy and precision are not the same.
    On a normal distribution curve, 68% of the results will fall within +/-1
    standard deviation. 95.5% will fall within 2 standard deviations, and
    99.7% will fall within 3 standard deviations.
    Conduct a cost-benefit analysis to determine the best approach for the cost
    of quality. The cost of quality includes costs of conformance (prevention
    and appraisal) and costs of nonconformance (internal failure and external
    failure).
    During quality planning, you determine the techniques you will use to
    measure quality and the appropriate metrics.
                           Prep Test
                      Multiple Choice
1. A car with many features is said to be high ______. If those
  features don't work very well, it is said to be low ______.
 A    Quality, grade
 B    Quality, standards
 C    Grade, quality
 D    Fidelity, grade

2. The point where 50% of the results are above the center point
  and 50% of the results are below the center point is the
 A    Mode
 B    Median
 C    Mean
 D    Standard deviation

3. When analyzing the duration estimates for a project deliverable,
  you review prior projects to get some historical information.
  Based on that information, you determine the mean duration is
  18 days and that the standard deviation is 2. If you estimate the
  duration at 20 days, how likely are you to meet that date or
  deliver early?
 A    50%
 B    95%
 C    84%
 D    34%

4. You have a budget of $1,550,000. Your sponsor told you to trim
  the budget. You look at your estimates, reserve, assumptions,
 and basis of estimates. You tell him that if you reduce your
 budget to $1,450,000, you have a 50/50 chance of making it. Your
 standard deviation is $100,000. He says that isn't good enough,
 and you need to drop the budget to $1,350,000. How likely are
 you to achieve that budget without reducing scope?
 A   16%
 B   34%
 C   84%
 D   2.5%

5. Your organization has an initiative to attain Level 3 CMMI this
  year. You have a new team member who is very smart, but she's
  not been through training on CMMI, and you need to make sure
  everyone is up to speed. From a quality perspective, training the
  new employee is
 A   Prevention cost
 B   Appraisal cost
 C   Internal failure cost
 D   External failure cost

6. Identifying industry best practices to measure your results
  against is an example of
 A   Networking
 B   Brainstorming
 C   Appraisal costs
 D   Benchmarking

7. Part of your project is training 500 people how to use a new
  process. You know that you have to produce 500 training
  manuals. You want to make sure that they're all correct, but you
  don't want to inspect each one. What's a good technique to
  use?
 A   Design of experiments
 B   Benchmarking
 C   Statistical sampling
 D   Flowcharting

8. To set up a system to make sure the same steps are followed
  each time a process is conducted, you should create a
 A   Quality management plan
 B   Process improvement plan
 C   Checklist
 D   Metric matrix

                            Scenario 1
You're developing components for a lightweight piece of equipment.
Each component has to weigh between 5.2 pounds and 5.6 pounds.
You weigh each piece to ensure that all comply with the requirements.
Also, once per month, you have someone come in to calibrate the
scale.

1. You check the weights and see that all the components are
  between 5.37 and 5.39 pounds. This indicates that the
  components' weight is very
 A   Precise
 B   Accurate
 C   Tight
 D   Predictable

2. One month, you discover that the scale is off by 8 ounces. This
  means that the measurements from the previous month are at
  risk of not being
 A   Precise
 B   Accurate
 C   Validated
 D    Standard

3. The cost of having the scale calibrated is
 A    Preventive
 B    Appraisal
 C    Internal failure
 D    External failure
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Grade, quality. Lots of features indicates high grade. Features
  that don't work too well are low quality. Go over the information in
  Basic Quality Concepts.
2. C. Mean. The mean is the average where half the measurements
  are greater, and half are less. Take a look at Basic Statistics.
3. C. 84%. Using a cumulative distribution, the mean plus 1 standard
  deviation is 84%. Check out Basic Statistics.
4. A. 16%. Using a cumulative distribution, the mean minus 1
  standard deviation is 16%. Go over Basic Statistics.
5. A. Prevention cost. Training is a prevention cost. Review Cost of
  quality.
6. D. Benchmarking. Benchmarking can include setting targets using
  best practices, best in class, or results from inhouse projects. Look
  into Benchmarking.
7. C. Statistical sampling. This allows you to check a select number of
  training materials and infer the quality of all the training materials.
  Look at Statistical sampling.
8. C. Checklist. A checklist facilitates following the same steps each
  time you do a process. Read Plan Quality Management: Outputs.

                           Scenario 1
1. A. Precise. There is little scatter or variation in the measurements;
  therefore, they are precise. Review Basic Quality Concepts.
2. B. Accurate. Measurements done by a scale that was not
  calibrated correctly are not accurate. Return to Basic Quality
  Concepts.
3. B. Appraisal. Equipment, measurement, and maintenance of the
  equipment are appraisal costs. Look at the information in Cost of
  quality.
Chapter 3: Identifying Your Team Members
Exam Objective
    Develop roles, responsibilities, and an organizational structure as
    part of the human resource management plan to help manage project
    staff.



 When planning a project, we spend much of the time trying to figure out what
 the project is and what it isn't. Then we bury our heads in the schedule and
 the budget trying to figure out how to make it all work. The key, though, to
 making it all work is the project team. If you have team members with the
 right skills, committed to the project objectives, and who work well together,
 you're already on the path to success.
 In this chapter, I look at the different kinds of project roles and
 responsibilities, how to effectively organize and structure your team, and how
 to plan for project staffing.
                Quick Assessment
1. Which process is associated with identifying and documenting
  project roles, responsibilities, and required skills; reporting
  relationships; and creating a staffing management plan?
2. The group of people responsible for the leadership activities and
  initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and
  closing the project phases is the ______ ______ ______.
3. Which tool illustrates the connection between the work packages
  and project team members?
4. Where would you document your strategy for acquiring and
  releasing team members?
5. The PMBOK Guide talks about a particular type of responsibility
  assignment matrix called a RACI chart. What does the C in RACI
  stand for?
6. The ______ provides the financial resource for the project and
  approves the project charter.
7. Which organizational structure gives the project manager the most
  authority?
8. The ______ ______ ______ is a hierarchically organized depiction
  of the project organization arranged to relate the work packages to
  the performing organizational units.
9 ______ defines the work the person in a particular role is expected
  to perform.
10. (True/False). Project managers have managerial authority over
  team members in a matrix organization.
                          Answers
1. Develop Human Resource Plan is the process of identifying and
  documenting project roles, responsibilities, and required skills;
  reporting relationships; and creating a staffing management plan.
  For more on this, see Plan Human Resource Management.
2. Project management team. This team comprises the people
  responsible for initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and
  controlling, and closing the project phases. You can find information
  about this in the Plan Human Resource Management section.
3. A responsibility assignment matrix demonstrates the relationship
  between work packages and project team members. This is
  explained in the section Matrix charts.
4. A staffing management plan is where you document your strategy
  for acquiring and releasing project team members. You will find
  more detail in Plan Human Resource Management: Outputs.
5. The C in RACI chart stands for Consult. Check out the information
  in Matrix charts.
6. The sponsor provides the financial resources for the project and
  approves the project charter. This is described in the Plan Human
  Resource Management section.
7. The projectized organizational structure gives the project manager
  the most authority. Read about this in the Plan Human Resource
  Management: Inputs section.
8. The organizational breakdown structure shows the organizational
  structure and how it relates to the work packages in the WBS. This
  is described in Hierarchy charts.
9. Responsibility defines the work the person in a particular role is
  expected to perform. Go to the Text formats section for more
  information.
10. False. The functional manager has managerial authority in a
    matrix organization. You can find information about this in the Plan
    Human Resource Management: Inputs section.


Plan Human Resource Management
 Much of human resource planning centers around identifying roles and
 responsibilities of team members and the organizational structure for the
 team.


           Plan Human Resource Management. The process of identifying
        and documenting project roles, responsibilities, required skills, reporting
        relationships, and creating a staffing management plan.
 I start by identifying three important roles and describe how they support the
 project.


            Sponsor. The person or group that provides the financial resources,
        in cash or in kind, for the project.
 Project manager. The person assigned by the performing organization to
 lead the team that is responsible for achieving the project objectives.
 Project management team. The members of the project team who are
 directly involved in project management activities. On some smaller projects,
 the project management team may include virtually all the project team
 members.
 Project team. A set of individuals who support the project manager in
 performing the work of the project to achieve its objectives.
 Table 3-1 lists key roles and responsibilities per role.

Table 3-1 Key Project Team Roles
 Role             Responsibilities

                 Provides the initial high-level requirements and information about the project
                 Provides financial resources
                 Approves the project charter
                   Determines the priority among project constraints
                   Approves major changes to the project
Sponsor            Approves the baselines
                   Monitors project progress
                   Champions the project at the executive level
                   Resolves conflicts outside the project manager's authority
                   Provides mentoring and coaching to the PM as appropriate
                   Manages corporate politics that could impact the project
                   Reviews all variances outside the acceptable variance threshold
                   Accountable for meeting all project objectives
                   Develops plans to achieve project objectives
                   Manages the project team to produce results
                   Establishes systems to manage change
Project manager    Keeps the project on schedule and within budget
                   Manages risk
                   Collects project data and reporting progress
                   Establishes an environment that supports team members in performing their roles
                   Manages stakeholder expectations

                Provides leadership for particular aspects of the project
Project
                Provides insight to the project manager
management team
                Assists in managing the project through the project lifecycle
                   Assists in planning activities
                   Provides information to create the work breakdown structure (WBS), schedule, cost
                   estimates, and quality requirements
Project team       Conducts activities as assigned
                   Assists in identifying and responding to risk
                   Applies knowledge and skills to project activities
                   Participates in team meetings


Certain fundamental tenets are involved in managing a project, including
     Project managers often don't have position authority over team
    members, such as in a functional or matrix organization. In these
    situations, project managers must use their influence and negotiation skills
    to accomplish work.
     Project managers must operate with the utmost integrity,
    demonstrate ethical and professional behavior at all times, and
    require their team members to do the same.
     Things change. Promised resources won't always be available, skill sets
    don't always match what you need, and some projects might have higher
    priority. Project managers have to be flexible and adaptable while not
    losing sight of the end goal.
Plan Human Resource Management: Inputs
The first step in planning how to optimize your team is reviewing the
resource requirements developed as a result of the Estimate Activity
Resources process. These are compared with available internal resources and
marketplace conditions to make a determination whether internal resources
should be used or external resources will be needed.


        You'll want to consult the project management plan for information
     on the project lifecycle so that you can identify the skill sets you're
     likely to need in each phase and how work will be conducted. As you
     figure out how to organize your team, take into consideration the
     environment in which you work. Are you in a functional, matrix, or
     project environment? This information will tell you how much authority
     you are likely to have and how much influence you will have when it
     comes to setting up your team organizational structure. You may want to
     review the information on organizational structures in Book I, Chapter 3.
     Here are the definitions of each type of organizational structure.


        Functional organization. A hierarchical organization where each
     employee has one clear superior, and staff are grouped by areas of
     specialization and managed by a person with expertise in that area.
Matrix organization. Any organizational structure in which the project
manager shares responsibility with the functional managers for assigning
priorities and for directing the work of persons assigned to the project.
Projectized organization. Any organizational structure in which the project
manager has full authority to assign priorities, apply resources, and direct the
work of persons assigned to the project.
You also want to look at project organizational structures from prior projects
and any existing roles and responsibility descriptions.


        Assume that you are working in a matrix environment unless the
     question is phrased otherwise.
  Plan Human Resource Management: Tools and
  Techniques
  I recommend networking and talking with team members and other project
  managers to get their expertise as input for effective organizational structures.
  Also, keep in mind organizational theories on motivation. You will want to
  assess what motivates individual team members. After all, some team
  members will be motivated by having a position of responsibility on the team,
  and others might be so overworked that they will be demotivated by taking on
  extra work.
  You can document team roles, responsibilities, and structure in different
  ways. Three of the most common are hierarchy charts, matrix charts, and text
  formats. I describe each in a bit more detail and show you some samples.


            Assume that you have a large project team consisting at least 50 or
        more people. You won't see questions that assume a 6-member team, so
        if you're used to managing projects with small teams, you have to adjust
        your thinking.
  Hierarchy charts
  Hierarchy charts are like organizational charts. You usually see them with the
  project manager at the top, with a subordinate project management team
  layer, and beneath that the project team layer. See Figure 3-1.




Figure 3-1: A hierarchy chart.


  Another type of hierarchy chart is an organizational breakdown structure
  (OBS). This shows the organization of the team and is used to intersect with
  the WBS. The layer under the project manager is the control account
  manager. The control account manager manages team members who work on
  specific work packages in the WBS.


           Organizational breakdown structure (OBS). A hierarchical
        representation of the project organization that illustrates the relationship
        between project activities and the organizational units that will perform
        those activities.
  Figure 3-2 shows an OBS.




Figure 3-2: Organizational breakdown structure.


  A third type of hierarchy chart is a resource breakdown structure, as shown in
  Figure 3-3.


           Resource breakdown structure (RBS). A hierarchical
        representation of resources by category and type.
  An RBS is used in resource-leveling schedules and to develop a resource-
  limited schedule, and that can be used to identify and analyze human
  resources as well as material and equipment.
Figure 3-3: Resource breakdown structure.


  Matrix charts
  Matrix charts show how team members are used on each deliverable. A
  responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) is the most common form of a
  matrix chart.


          Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM). A grid that shows the
       project resource assigned to each work package.
  Table 3-2 shows a RAM.




  The matrix chart in Table 3-2 is similar to that shown in the PMBOK Guide.
  It, too, uses a RACI format:
      R: Responsible
      A: Accountable
      C: Consult
      I: Inform



          You don't have to use the same format. Some people use an ARIS
       chart, where ARIS stands for Accountable-Responsible-Inform-Sign-off.
       Use whatever works for you on your projects.
  Text formats
  Text formats describe roles and responsibilities, authority, and competencies.
  Role. The position on the team. It describes the type of work that needs to be
  done, such as writer, programmer, or electrician. A role usually coincides
with a job title.
Authority. The right to make and approve decisions. The person in the role
of the contract administrator is usually the only person who has the authority
to enter into or change a contract.
Responsibility. The work the person in a particular role is expected to
perform. The person with the role of an editor is responsible for reviewing all
written content, ensuring that it conforms to the editorial guidelines and is
easily understandable.
Competency. Describes the skill or skill level of an individual. A Junior
Plumber has the competencies to lay pipe and connect pipe following a set of
blueprints. A Senior Plumber can actually design the plumbing to comply
with standards and regulations.


        The thought and effort put into organizing your team and thinking
     through the roles and responsibilities will be reflected in the human
     resource management plan.

Plan Human Resource Management: Outputs
The human resource management plan is part of the overall project
management plan. It has three components:
   Roles and responsibilities
   Project organization charts
   Staffing management plan



         Human resource management plan. A component of the project
     management plan that describes how the roles and responsibilities,
     reporting relationships, and staff management will be addressed and
     structured.
Staffing management plan. The component of the human resource plan that
describes when and how project team members will be acquired and how
long they will be needed.
You can distribute roles and responsibilities (which I define in the earlier
section on text formats) to team members along with a RAM so that all team
members can see specifically how they contribute to the project as well as
how their roles interface and collaborate with other roles on the team.


       The project organization chart should show the hierarchical
    relationship and reporting structure of team members on the project.
The staffing management plan covers issues associated with staffing the
project. It can include sections on
   Staff acquisition: How team members will be brought onto the team. For
   example, you might use different methods for bringing on team members,
   depending upon whether they're employees or contractors. Part of staff
   acquisition is determining how to orient new team members. Also,
   consider whether staff will be co-located in one location or remotely.
   Resource calendars: The number of labor units a team member or a
   group of team members will be working. The calendar can show hours in a
   week, days in a month, or whatever time scale is appropriate to the project.
   You can create a resource histogram that shows whether specific
   resources, or groups of resources, are over-allocated during any time
   period.
    Staff-release plan: How team members will be released when their work
   is complete. The plan should address how to maintain the knowledge that
   the team member developed.
    Training needs: Are any specific licenses, skills, certificates, or other
   training needed for the project? If so, you should develop a plan that
   demonstrates how to accomplish this.
    Recognition and rewards: How you motivate and recognize outstanding
   achievements and reward team members throughout the project.
   Recognition and rewards can be good for team morale. You should
   recognize outstanding achievements and reward team members throughout
   the project. Take time during planning to set the criteria and timing for
   formal rewards and recognition. In addition, consider the factors that
   motivate team members. Here is a list of common motivators that you
    should keep in mind.
     * Being appreciated: Whether you deliver the thank-you in person, or
       with a written note and a Cc to their boss and their personnel file,
       people are motivated when they know their work is appreciated.
     * Recognition: Taking time in the team meeting to recognize excellent
       work is a nice way to recognize team members. It is even better if their
       boss or the sponsor is present.
     * Rewards, awards, and prizes: Such incentives can be as simple as
       company logo-wear or a gift certificate to more substantial monetary
       awards.
     Safety and compliance: Are there safety or other compliance regulations
    that need to be met and documented as part of the project? If so, document
    the strategy for conforming to the regulations.


Key Terms
 The definitions of the key roles in the project are important. The terms and
 concepts in this chapter are used in the executing processes later in the book,
 too.
    Sponsor
    Project manager
    Project management team
    Project team
    Organizational breakdown structure
    Resource breakdown structure
    Responsibility assignment matrix
    RACI chart
    Role
    Authority
    Responsibility
    Competency
Human resource management plan
Staffing management plan
Chapter Summary
 This chapter examines planning the human resource aspects of managing the
 project. When I discuss executing the project work, I cover acquiring,
 developing, and managing the project team in more detail.
    The project sponsor provides funding for the project, sets high-level
   requirements, champions the project in the organization, and approves the
   charter and any major changes to the project. He also resolves escalated
   conflicts, provides mentoring, and reviews all variances outside the
   threshold.
   The project manager is accountable for meeting the project objectives;
   developing plans; managing the team; managing change; controlling the
   scope, schedule, and cost; managing risk; reporting progress; managing
   stakeholder expectations; and developing a supportive environment.
    The project management team assists in managing the project throughout
   the lifecycle.
    Project team members assist in planning, executing the work, providing
   status information, identifying and helping manage risk, and participating
   in team meetings.
   You can use hierarchy charts, matrix charts, and text formats to help plan
   your human resource needs. Hierarchy charts show the team organization
   structure. Matrix charts show how the deliverables and the team members
   relate. Text formats describe roles, responsibilities, authority, and
   competency.
   The human resource management plan contains the project organization
   chart, roles and responsibilities, and the staffing management plan.
                         Prep Test
                     Multiple Choice
1. Which role on the project team is responsible for determining
  the priority among project constraints, approving major changes
  to the project, approving the baselines, and prioritizing project
  constraints?
 A   The project manager
 B   The project sponsor
 C   The project management team
 D   The project team

2. The project manager is accountable for all the following except
 A   Developing plans to achieve project objectives
 B   Managing the project team to product results
 C   Establishing systems to manage change
 D   Championing the project to senior management

3. If you want to create a chart that shows how various functions
  participate with work packages, you should create
 A   An organizational breakdown structure
 B   A responsibility assignment matrix
 C   An organizational chart
 D   A RACI diagram

4. Which tool shows the project resources by category and type?
 A   A responsibility assignment matrix
 B   A resource histogram
 C   A resource breakdown structure
 D    An organizational breakdown structure

5. If you want to create a matrix that shows the intersection of the
  organizational breakdown structure and the work breakdown
  structure, you would create
 A    A responsibility assignment matrix
 B    A resource histogram
 C    A resource breakdown structure
 D    A roles and responsibilities chart

6. In a RACI chart, the A stands for
 A    Authority
 B    Acceptance
 C    Accountable
 D    Action

7. As you describe the roles and responsibilities of team
  members, you document the level of authority that each role
  has. In this context, "authority" means
 A    The person will be doing the actual work.
 B    The person will sign off on the completed deliverable.
 C    The person has overall accountability for the outcome.
 D    The person has the right to make and approve decisions.

8. You're documenting a structure for allocating bonuses based
  on performance. The bonus structure is part of
 A    The performance management plan
 B    The human resource development plan
 C    The rewards and recognition strategy
 D    Team performance assessment

9. All the following are components of the human resource
  management plan except
  A   The staffing management plan
  B   The team performance plan
  C   Roles and responsibilities
  D   Project organization charts


                            Scenario 1
Sara is a new member on your team. She will help with the
scheduling. She has four years of experience using scheduling
software, but she hasn't used the brand that your company uses. You
need to send her to a two-week training course. The training plan
should be updated to accommodate this change.

1. The training plan is part of the
  A   The staffing management plan
  B   The project management plan
  C   The roles and responsibilities
  D   The resource management plan

2. You would document Sara's role and reporting relationship in
  A   The staffing management plan
  B   The project management plan
  C   The human resource management plan
  D   The resource management plan
                         Answers
                     Multiple Choice
1. B. The project sponsor. This role is responsible for prioritizing
  constraints and approving all aspects of the project management
  plan. See Plan Human Resource Management.
2. D. Championing the project to senior management. The
  liaison/champion role the project sponsor plays is important to
  project success. Go over Plan Human Resource Management.
3. A. An organizational breakdown structure. This shows how
  functions relate to and work on work packages. Check out
  Hierarchy charts.
4. C. A resource breakdown structure. This shows resources by
  category and type. Look into Hierarchy charts.
5. A. A responsibility assignment matrix. The responsibility
  assignment matrix shows the intersection of the OBS and the WBS.
  Go over Matrix charts.
6. C. Accountable. The A stands for Accountable. Review information
  in Matrix charts.
7. D. The person has the right to make and approve decisions.
  Authority means the person has the right to make and approve
  decisions. Look at Text formats.
8. C. The rewards and recognition strategy. The bonus structure is
  part of the rewards and recognition strategy that's part of the
  staffing management plan. Dig into Plan Human Resource
  Management: Outputs.
9. B. The team performance plan. The team performance plan isn't
  part of the human resources plan; all other elements are. Go back
  over Plan Human Resource Management: Outputs.
                            Scenario 1
1. A. The staffing management plan. The staffing management plan
  includes information on training. Peruse Plan Human Resource
  Management: Outputs.
2. C. The human resource management plan. The human resource
  plan defines the roles, responsibilities, and reporting relationships.
  Check out Plan Human Resource Management: Outputs.
Chapter 4: 90 Percent of Your Job
       Is Communication
Exam Objective
    Use stakeholder requirements and the project organizational
    structure to create a communication plan that will help manage the
    flow of project information.



 The title of this chapter might seem provocative to you, but if you think about
 it, you spend the vast majority of your time communicating. Here are some
 ways how project managers communicate:
    Active listening
    Team meetings
    Conversations
    Status reports
    Memos
    Brainstorming
    Problem solving
    Presentations
 I would go so far as to say that you're always communicating, even when you
 think you aren't. Think about all the nonverbal cues you send: posture, facial
 expression, tone of voice, a raised eyebrow, avoiding eye contact. All these
 methods of communication make up a significant portion of the message
 you're conveying.
 The information in this chapter is partly technical in that it deals with
 techniques, outputs, and so forth. However, some of the information covers
 the interpersonal aspects of communication, such as listening, cultural
 sensitivity, and communication styles. Both sides of the equation are
 important because lack of communication and poor communication are
significant factors in whether your project succeeds or fails.
                 Quick Assessment
1. If one of your team members says his deliverables are coming
  along fine while he looks down and shakes his head, what types of
  communication are you receiving?
2. Progress reports, status reports, and white papers are examples of
  what type of communication?
3. If you have five people on your team, you have ______
  communication channels.
4. Who is responsible for making sure that a message is received in
  its entirety?
5. If you need to make sure your team members all get the latest
  update, are you more likely to use push or pull technology?
6. Which of the following will provide the most complete message: a
  note jotted on a sticky pad, a hallway conversation, or a phone call?
7 To identify people with whom you will communicate, you should
  review your ______ ______.
8. Where would you find templates for agendas, reports, and other
  project documents?
9. (True/False). Finding multiple ways to explain complex concepts
  only confuses things further.
10. Providing the right information, in a timely fashion, in a format that
  works for people is ______ communication.
                          Answers
1. Verbal and nonverbal. The response of "Fine" is verbal
  communication, but looking down and shaking one's head is
  nonverbal. For more on this, see Words, tone, and body language.
2. Formal written. All these are formal communication, and they are
  all in a written format. Look over Formal and informal, written and
  verbal.
3. 10. (5 (5 - 1)) / 2 = 10. See the information in the Communication
  requirements analysis section.
4. Receiver. The receiver is responsible for making sure that the
  entire message was received. I discuss this in Communication
  models.
5. Push. You are more likely to use push technology because you are
  sending it to the team. You will find this information in
  Communication methods.
6. Hallway conversation. In a face-to-face conversation, you have
  benefit of body language, tone of voice, and words to convey a full
  message. Review the information in the Words, tone, and body
  language section.
7. Stakeholder register. Your stakeholder register has a list of all the
  project stakeholders and their expectations. This will help you
  identify who needs what type of communication and the appropriate
  frequency. Review Plan Communications Management: Inputs.
8. The communications management plan. The communications
  management plan contains all the information on how
  communication will be managed and delivered for the project. See
  Plan Communications Management: Outputs.
9. False. Finding various ways to communicate complex concepts
  increases comprehension. Look at the information under
  Communication skills.
  10. Effective. You want to make sure your communication is effective
    and people get the relevant information in a timely manner. You will
    find information on effective and efficient information under Plan
    Communications Management.


Communication Building Blocks
 Before looking at the process of planning communication, I want to cover
 basic communication concepts to not only lay the groundwork for
 communication planning, but also make sure that you know this information
 for the exam.

 Formal and informal, written and verbal
 Communication occurs throughout a project in all kinds of ways. Much
 communication is informal, including hallway conversations, cubicle
 conversations, and networking. These are all examples of informal verbal
 communication.
 Formal verbal communication occurs with presentations or briefings to the
 steering committee, customer, or sponsor. Your kick-off meeting and team
 status meetings are additional examples of formal verbal communication.
 However, verbal communication isn't the only way we communicate. A lot of
 communication on a project is written. This can be formal, such as contracts,
 status reports, defect lists, project plans, and project documents. Written
 communication can also be informal, such as a brief note to a team member,
 an inquiry via e-mail, or a follow-up reminder that something is due soon.
 Table 4-1 compares these methods.

 Table 4-1 Formal, Informal, Written, and Verbal
 Communication
         Formal                                                     Informal

 Verbal PresentationsProject reviewsBriefings                       ConversationsAd hoc
                                                                    discussionsBrainstorming

 Written Progress reportsReportsProject charterProject management   NotesE-mailInstant
         planProject documents                                      messagingTexting


 These methods of communicating will be affected by whether you're
communicating vertically through the organization with sponsors or
subordinates, or horizontally with your peers. You should also consider
whether the communication is internal or external and whether it is official
(that is, the company's position on an issue) or unofficial (communication not
sanctioned or approved by the organization). All these variables affect the
means and methods you use to communicate.

Words, tone, and body language
Most people think the most important aspect of communication is what you
say. Surprisingly, more information is conveyed by how you say it. And even
more is conveyed by your nonverbal communication.
To demonstrate the concept: John sees Morgan in the hall and happily tells
her that he expanded his client's current engagement another six months.
Morgan replies enthusiastically, "Way to go!" She gives him a smile and a pat
on the back. Turning the corner, John runs into Stephan, who's having a lot of
trouble with his client. John shares the news with Stephan, who replies, "Way
to go," rolls his eyes, and throws his hands in the air. Undeterred, John
bounds up the stairs and sees Leonard hurrying down the stairs to a meeting.
John tells him the news as Leonard hurries by. Leonard calls over his
shoulder, "Way to go."
In this scenario, John communicated the same message the same way each
time. Each person he interacted with replied, "Way to go." However, each
communicated something different. Morgan seemed genuinely excited.
Stephan was dejected and self-focused. Leonard merely acknowledged that
John had spoken.
If you're talking on the phone or meeting virtually on the web, you don't
have the benefit of nonverbal cues, such as a smile, rolling eyes, or a
distracted look. Therefore, you could miss part of the communicator's intent.
Communication can erode further when you send e-mail, text someone, or
leave a note. When you have only words, you lack both nonverbal messages
and important verbal cues, such as tone of voice indicating support, sarcasm,
or boredom.


       Think about how verbal and nonverbal communication will influence
     your communication planning. Use e-mail for routine simple
     communications, and insist on face-to-face meetings for problem solving
     and conversations about complex or complicated topics.


        You may see para language on the exam to refer to vocal quality,
     loudness, tempo, facial expressions, and gestures. Occasionally, para
     lingual is used although the term is not in the dictionary.

Communication skills
More information on communication and communication skills is available
than can be covered in this book. Still, here is a simple list of some of the
interpersonal communication skills you will need to manage projects
effectively.
   When someone else is speaking:
   * Give her your full attention.
    * Reflect on what the person is saying.
    * Be open-minded.
    * Listen without thinking about how you will respond.
    * Ask questions for clarification.
    * Don't judge the other person.
    * Summarize what you heard and check for understanding.
   When you are speaking:
   * Speak clearly.
    * Make eye contact.
    * Check for body language that indicates whether your audience
      understands.
    * Find various ways to explain complex concepts.
    * Be concise; don't ramble.
    * Check for clarification.
    * Accept feedback.
    * Try to understand your audience's perspective.
         The PMP exam assumes that you're managing a fairly large project
      with multiple stakeholders. For questions that deal with communication
      assume that you have 100 or more stakeholders.


Plan Communications Management
 When planning communication strategies for your project, make sure that
 your communication is both
     Effective: Provide the right information, in a timely fashion, in a format
    that works for people.
     Efficient: Provide the necessary information to the right people. Using e-
    mail Reply to All with a rambling monolog is not efficient. Send only the
    relevant information, and only to the people who need it.



         Taking time to plan how to communicate effectively and efficiently
      will pay off in the end because your stakeholders will be informed of
      what is happening in your project and won't come asking you for status
      and other information.


         Plan Communications Management. The process of developing an
      appropriate approach and plan for project communications based on
      stakeholder's information needs and requirements, and available
      organizational assets.

 Plan Communications Management: Inputs
 To determine who needs what information and how to give it to them, the
 first step is identifying your audience. You do that with the stakeholder
 register. The stakeholder register lists all the people who are affected by, or
 can affect, your project. I talk about the stakeholder register in Book II,
 Chapter 3.
 Use the project management plan to identify the life cycle to determine the
 types of communication and the stakeholders for each phase in the life cycle.
Scrutinize your company's templates for reporting formats, presentation
templates, and other assets that can help you get the right information to
people. Often, using information from prior projects can be helpful. For
example, maybe another project manager put together a great kick-off
meeting presentation that you could customize to your needs.


        You will be limited by your organization's infrastructure, such as its
     systems, presentation equipment, and communication capabilities.

Plan Communications Management: Tools and
Techniques
Getting the word out effectively means analyzing your audience and your
environment. Additionally, you want to select the most effective method of
communication. I look at these and a communication model in this section.
Communication requirements analysis
As you review the stakeholder management register, compare it against your
organization's infrastructure and assets to help determine the best
communication approach. You might also want to look at your project and the
company organization charts. Analyze what information is internal and what
information needs to go outside the organization. Also consider whether
stakeholders are in one location or many locations.


         The more people you communicate with, the more opportunity there
     is for miscommunication. A mathematical model shows the relationship
     between the number of people and the number of communication
     channels (or paths):
   (N (n - 1)) / 2

where n is the number of people.
See how this plays out. If you have five people (as shown in Figure 4-1),
here's how to calculate the number of communication channels you have:
   (5 (5 - 1)) / 2 = 10
Figure 4-1: Five communication channels.


  Now see what happens when you add three more people. You might think
  you have three more channels, or even six more channels. However, you
  actually have 18 more communication channels! (See Figure 4-2.)




Figure 4-2: Eight communication channels.


  The equation is now
      (8 (8 - 1)) / 2 = 28

  Think about it this way: There are 28 ways for people to interpret the
  information -- and that means 28 ways for your message to get
  misinterpreted. Add another four people to the team, and that number
  increases to 66! This is another reason why communication has to be
  effective and efficient!
        Communicate only essential information that contributes to success,
     or where lack of communication would be detrimental.
Technology
The technology you have available is one of those enterprise environmental
factors (EEFs) you have to take into consideration, especially if you have a
team with internal team members and external contractors. Also, consider
whether people are centrally located or geographically dispersed. Here are
some technology factors that will shape your communication plan.
    Urgency: Determine whether stakeholders need information immediately
   or can wait. If you are working on a construction project in a hazardous
   environment, such as an area prone to hurricanes or tornadoes, you need
   the ability to communicate immediately with the construction site and the
   workers who could be impacted.
    Technology availability: Assess whether your organization has the
   technology and systems in place to support your communication strategy.
   Look at whether you will need significant changes or modifications to the
   current infrastructure. A project that requires some of the staff to work
   remotely for several days would require the staff to have laptops. If they
   are normally in the office full time and have only desktop computers,
   consider the matter upfront.
   Ease of use: You can set up a really cool website to communicate with
   your team. It might have document storage, messaging capability, version
   control, and all sorts of neat functionality, but if it's not intuitive to the
   audience and easy to use, no one is going to use it. When it comes to
   communication, remember: Keep it simple!
   Expected staffing: Check that everyone has the same platform or the
   same access to information. This is particularly relevant when working
   with contractors, who might work on a very different technology platform.
   For example, say you hire a marketing firm for part of your project; that
   firm uses Apple computers, but your firm uses PCs. Staffing your project
   with members from the marketing firm impacts project communication.
   You also have to determine what information to share with them versus
   what is proprietary.
      Duration: For projects that are three years or longer, you can count on at
     least some of your communications technology changing. You might not
     know how it will change, but it would be wise to keep that in mind. With
     smartphones and tablet computers rapidly evolving with new applications,
     predicting how people will communicate in the future is difficult!
      Project environment: The environment can be as simple as part of the
     team being virtual, or it can include more complex factors such as team
     members located in different time zones, countries, or even extreme
     geographic locations, such as in the Arctic Circle or the Mojave Desert.

  Communication models
  The PMP exam uses a standard sender-receiver communication model. Look
  over Figure 4-3 as I walk you through the different components of the model.




Figure 4-3: Communication model.


      Sender: Who conveys a message and is responsible for making the
     content clear and complete. The sender is also responsible for confirming
     that the receiver understands the message correctly.
      Encoding: Translating ideas into language, usually written or verbal
     language.
     Message: The output of encoding.
      Medium: The means of conveying the message. Sometimes the medium
     is referred to as the channel.
      Noise: Anything that interferes with the transmission of the message,
     including static, distractions, preconceptions and stereotypes, cultural
     norms, malfunctioning transmitting equipment, or anything that
     deteriorates or causes a barrier to successful transmission.
   Decoding: Translating the message into meaningful thoughts and ideas.
   Receiver: The recipient of the message, responsible for decoding the
   message and providing feedback. The receiver is responsible for making
   sure that the entire message is received and understood by encoding a
   message back to the sender conveying that.
   Acknowledge: Confirming receipt of the information. Acknowledging
   receipt does not imply agreement, but only receipt.
   Feedback/response: After the communication has been received and
   understood, the receiver may send a message with thoughts and ideas
   about the message.

Communication methods
Communication methods include push, pull, and interactive communication:
    Push: Communication sent to receivers, comprising a sender, medium,
   and message. It does not necessarily reach the receiver for decoding. This
   includes memos, e-mails, reports, voice mail, and so forth.
   Pull: Information sought by the receiver. In other words, the receiver
   actively searches for the information. This can include a team member
   going to an intranet to find communication policies or templates, running
   Internet searches, and using online repositories.
   Interactive: Sender and receiver exchanging information. This occurs in
   conversation, phone calls, meetings, and the like. This is the most effective
   form of communication.
The most common form of interactive communication is meetings. What
project would be complete without meetings? We have meetings to plan,
communicate status, problem-solve, make decisions, collect lessons learned,
and for a variety of other reasons.
With today's distributed workforce, meetings can be held in person, over the
phone, or via connecting computer technology. Most meetings have an
agenda, notes, and/or meeting minutes that are distributed to meeting
attendees. The ability to effectively facilitate communication and manage
meetings is a valuable skill for project managers. I'm sure you've been to too
many meetings where there was not agenda, or the agenda wasn't followed,
or someone took the meeting in an entirely different direction than was
planned.


       Staying on track is essential for productive meetings.

Plan Communications Management: Outputs
The communications management plan is a component of the project
management plan. It documents the results of stakeholder information needs,
available technology, and methods of communication.


       Communications Management Plan. A component of the project,
    program, or portfolio management plan that describes how, when, and
    by whom information about the project will be administered and
    disseminated.
A simple version of the communications management plan is shown in Figure
4-4.
Figure 4-4: Sample communications management plan.


  A more complete plan would include additional elements, including
     Resources and budgets associated with communications
     Glossary and abbreviation list
     Communication flowcharts
    Communication constraints
    Templates for agendas, reports, minutes, and so forth



        As necessary, update the stakeholder register and schedule with the
      communication strategy.

Key Terms
 Most of the terms in this chapter are general communication terms and are
 not project management-specific. Many chapters rely heavily on glossary
 terms; however, this chapter is general, and most of these terms are not in the
 glossary.
    Sender
    Receiver
    Encoding
    Decoding
    Medium
    Message
    Noise
    Push communication
    Pull communication
    Interactive communication
    Communications management plan
Chapter Summary
 A lot of the information in this chapter deals with communication principles.
 You will need a cursory knowledge of general communication principles, as
 presented here, to do well on the exam. The primary project-specific
 information is how you summarize all the communication needs in a
 communications management plan.
    Communication can be formal or informal, and written or verbal. There is
    a time and a place for each kind of communication.
    Communication can be vertical or horizontal in the organization. It can
    also be internal or external, and official or non-official.
    Communication takes place in not only what we say but in how we say it
    (our tone). Communication also takes place in nonverbal ways, such as
    facial expressions and body language.
    Effective communication requires good listening and speaking skills.
    The more communication channels you have, the more complex
    communication becomes. The equation for this is (N (n - 1)) / 2.
    The standard communication model includes a sender and receiver,
    encoding and decoding, and the message and medium. The message can
    be affected by noise.
     You can push out communication or pull it in. You can also have
    interactive communication.
     The communications management plan documents who will receive
    information, what they will receive, how it will be delivered, and who is
    responsible for retrieving the information.
                         Prep Test
1. Briefing your sponsor and the executive team on the status of
  your project is what type of communication?
 A   Formal, written
 B   Informal, written
 C   Formal, verbal
 D   Informal, verbal

2. If you have a routine request, you can convey it via ______.
  However, for complex topics, it is best to ______.
 A   A one-on-one meeting, document it in a memo
 B   A briefing, write an e-mail
 C   A phone call, write a memo
 D   An e-mail, meet face to face

3. Reviewing the company organizational charts, the team's
  geographic dispersion and the internal and external audiences
  are all part of
 A   A project organizational structure
 B   Stakeholder analysis
 C   A communications management plan
 D   Analyzing communication requirements

4. Your core project team has just expanded from four people to
  six. How many more communication channels do you have?
 A   9
 B   6
 C   15
 D   4
5. A team with nine people has how many communication
  channels?
 A    18
 B    81
 C    72
 D    36

6. The person responsible for confirming that the receiver
  understood the message correctly is
 A    The encoder
 B    The sender
 C    The decoder
 D    The receiver

7. ______ is translating ideas into language.
 A    Encoding
 B    Decoding
 C    Interpreting
 D    Sending

8. In a communication model, preconceptions and stereotyping
  are considered
 A    Inappropriate
 B    Irrelevant
 C    Normal
 D    Noise

9. Setting up a team website so that team members can retrieve
  information as needed is used for which type of
  communication?
 A    Pull
 B   Push
 C   Interactive
 D   Dynamic

10. Where would you find a glossary of terms for the project?
 A   In the document library
 B   In the configuration management plan
 C   In the communications management plan
 D   In the training plan
                          Answers
1. C. Formal, verbal. The briefing is verbal, and the sponsor and
  executive team necessitate formal communication. Look at the
  information in Formal and informal, written and verbal.
2. D. An e-mail, meet face to face. E-mail is good for routine
  information, but meeting face to face is best for complex topics.
  Check into Formal and informal, written and verbal.
3. D. Analyzing communication requirements. See the information in
  Communication requirements analysis.
4. A. 9. With four people, you have six channels. With six people, you
  have 15 channels. The difference is 9. See the information in
  Communication requirements analysis.
5. D. 36. (9 (9 - 1) / 2) = 36. See the information in Communication
  requirements analysis.
6. B. The sender. The sender is responsible for sending the message
  and for confirming that it was understood correctly. Look at
  Communication models.
7. A. Encoding. Encoding is interpreting ideas into language. Review
  Communication models.
8. D. Noise. Preconceptions and stereotyping are noise that interferes
  with communication. Go over Communication models.
9. A. Pull. Pull communication is setting information up so that people
  can retrieve it as needed. Look at Communication methods.
10. C. In the communications management plan. The
  communications management plan can contain a glossary of terms
  and abbreviations. Go over Plan Communications Management:
  Outputs.
Book V

 Planning for Risks, Procurement,
  and Stakeholder Management




       Check out the article on the importance of stakeholder
management at www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book V: Planning for Risks, Procurement, and
 Stakeholder Management

Book V: Chapter 1: Identifying What Could Go Wrong
   Projects Breed Uncertainty

   Plan Risk Management

   Identify Risks

   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

   Plan Risk Responses

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book V: Chapter 2: Getting Help -- Procuring Project Scope
   Procurement Basics

   Plan Procurement Management

   Plan Procurement Management: Inputs

   Plan Procurements: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book V: Chapter 3: Who Are All These People? Planning
 Stakeholder Management
   Plan Stakeholder Management

   Key Terms
Chapter Summary
Chapter 1: Identifying What Could
            Go Wrong
Exam Objective
    Create a risk management plan that provides guidance for
    identifying, analyzing, prioritizing, and developing response
    strategies to manage uncertainty throughout the project.

 Risk is centered on the concept of uncertainty. When uncertainty can lead to
 negative effects on your project, that's a threat. Comparatively, when
 uncertainty can lead to positive effects on your project, that's an opportunity.
 And face it: Projects will never have the same degree of certainty that day-to-
 day operations have. Therefore, spend some time thinking about how to
 proactively address uncertainty. After all, that's what project risk
 management is all about -- planning how to get in front of the uncertainty
 and reduce it. As for the uncertainty that you can't reduce, you can at least
 think about and develop an approach for handling it.
 Five distinct processes are associated with risk in the planning process group:
    Planning for risk management: Defining how you approach the risk
    management process, including the techniques, methods, and degree of
    rigor that you will apply.
     Identifying risks: Taking a methodical approach to finding all the events
    that could cause your project to not meet one or more objectives.
     Qualitative analysis: After risks are identified, determining the
    probability and impact of the event. This step helps you prioritize your
    time so that you can address the risks that pose the greatest threat to your
    project.
     Quantitative analysis: Using quantitative tools that help you conduct the
    analysis. Some risks need to have a greater degree of analysis to determine
    their impact. In addition, this process helps you figure out how likely you
    are to meet specific schedule and budget objectives.
     Planning responses: Develop proactive responses. It isn't enough to
    identify and analyze risks; you need to determine what to do about them.
 Risk management can be fairly technical. Some of the topics in this chapter
 will be among the most challenging on the exam, but given some time and
 effort, you will be up for the challenge!
                 Quick Assessment
1. The willingness to accept varying degrees of risk is called ______
  ______.
2. If you were to develop a structure to categorize and organize risks
  in a framework, you would be developing a(n) ______ ______
  ______.
3. The ______ ______ contains the outcomes of all the risk
  management processes as they are conducted.
4. Risks that are considered low impact and low probability are
  considered low priority. These should be kept on a(n) ______
  ______.
5. To graphically depict various scenarios and the average outcome
  of each scenario given the likelihood and the associated values,
  you would create a(n) ______ ______.
6. If an organization wants to ensure that an opportunity is realized,
  what response strategy should it use?
7. Which document describes the risk roles and responsibilities and
  the risk methodology you will use on a project?
8. SWOT analysis stands for ______, ______, ______, and ______.
9. When calculating expected monetary value, you multiply the
  ______ of each scenario times the ______ ______ associated with
  each outcome.
10. The ______ ______ uses a group of anonymous experts to
  identify risks to a project.
                           Answers
1. Risk tolerance. Organizations that are comfortable with a lot of risk
  are said to be "risk tolerant." Those that aren't are "risk averse." For
  more information on this topic, see Projects Breed Uncertainty.
2. Risk breakdown structure. A risk breakdown structure (RBS) is
  similar to a work breakdown structure (WBS), but it organizes and
  decomposes risk categories instead of deliverables. The RBS is
  discussed in Plan Risk Management: Outputs.
3. Risk register. The risk register is started when you begin to identify
  risks. It is expanded to include the risk rating, response, triggers,
  and other relevant information. You can find information on the risk
  register in Identify Risks: Outputs.
4. Watch list. Low-priority risks should be watched to see whether the
  probability or impact changes, but you don't need to come up with a
  defined response for them. I discuss the watch list in Perform
  Qualitative Risk Analysis: Outputs.
5. Decision tree. A decision tree creates a graphic illustration of the
  information developed in an EMV equation. Look over the
  information in the "Decision tree" section.
6. Exploit. To take advantage of an opportunity and ensure that it
  occurs, you exploit that opportunity. See the discussion in Plan Risk
  Responses: Tools and Techniques.
7. Risk management plan. The risk management plan defines how
  you will address risk on a project. It includes roles, responsibilities,
  and the methodology. To read more about what is included in a risk
  management plan, go to the section Plan Risk Management:
  Outputs.
8. Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. This is used to
  assess strengths and weaknesses in the organization and
  opportunities and threats in the environment. You can read about
  this in Risk identification analysis.
9. Probability, monetary value. This gives you the expected monetary
  value of each outcome. You can read more about this in Expected
  Monetary Value (EMV).
10. Delphi technique. The anonymity encourages more honest and
  creative feedback when identifying risks. This is discussed in more
  detail in the section Gathering information.
Projects Breed Uncertainty
 Projects are fraught with uncertainty. Many times, there is no historic
 information to help develop duration and cost estimates, so you're uncertain
 about the project schedule and budget. You often don't know exactly who
 will be on your team, or whether they'll be available when you need them,
 and whether they have appropriate skill sets. In many cases, projects are
 initiated to solve a problem, but there is no clear solution. Sometimes the
 problem itself isn't clearly defined. Therefore, project scope is uncertain.
 Risk management attempts to reduce that uncertainty to an acceptable level.
 In risk management, you try to reduce or eliminate the probability and
 impacts of threats while increasing the probability and impact of
 opportunities. Risk carries with it its own vocabulary. Here are some key
 terms you need to know.


         Risk. An uncertain event or condition that if it occurs, has a positive
      or negative effect on one or more project objectives.
 Threat. A risk that will have a negative impact on one or more project
 objectives.
 Opportunity. A risk that will have a positive impact on one or more project
 objectives.
 Risk tolerance. The degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization
 or individual will withstand.
 Risk appetite. The degree of uncertainty an entity is willing to take on, in
 anticipation of a reward.


         Project objectives are identified in the project charter. For purposes of
      the exam, the objectives usually center on the scope, schedule, quality,
      and budget objectives.
        Risks can be known or unknown. A known risk is one that you can
     identify, analyze, and develop a response for. Consider the following
     example of a known risk, using my running example of a childcare
     center:
   A piece of playground equipment is on back order and may not be
   available before the childcare center is scheduled to open. You can
   develop several responses to that risk. You can find another supplier,
   change the piece of equipment, open without it, see whether you can pay
   to expedite the process, or any other of a myriad of options.

Now, consider this example of an unknown risk:
   The three electricians went out to lunch and ate meat that was
   undercooked and contaminated with E. coli. They were all unable to work
   for three days, leading to a schedule delay.

There really is no way you can plan for this kind of event. Schedule and cost
reserves are usually set aside for unknown risks.
Project risk management is the least mature practice in project management.
Many projects have no real risk management plan, and their approach to
managing risk is limited to identifying five or so things that could go wrong
and discussing them every so often. Granted, a lot of risk management occurs
that's not documented. Overall, though, there is much room for improvement.


        You should assume that you have a large project and ample time to
     plan for risk management. If you're not used to an environment like this,
     you might need to spend significant time studying this chapter.
Plan Risk Management
 Planning for the unknown is challenging, to say the least, and probably one of
 the reasons why people don't spend as much time on risk management as
 they should. However, just because it's hard doesn't mean that it isn't
 worthwhile.


         Plan Risk Management. Defining how to conduct risk management
      activities for a project.
 Here are some basic tenets to keep in mind about planning for risk:
     The amount of risk management planning should be commensurate with
    the amount of uncertainty and the degree of criticality of the project.
    Projects that are similar to prior projects and that are not complex need
    less risk management than complex projects with new and emerging
    technology and that have a high impact on the success of the organization.
     Risk management should begin very early on in the project and continue
    until the project is closed.
     To elevate the importance of risk management on a project, sufficient
    time, resources, and budget need to be allocated to the risk management
    process.

 Plan Risk Management: Inputs
 Risk management planning needs to be consistent with the project's approach
 for scope, schedule, cost, and quality. Therefore, you should consider at least
 the following information from the project management plan: scope
 management plan, schedule management plan, cost management plan, and
 quality management plan as you determine how to address risk. Look at how
 these various plans affect your risk management planning.
 If you have a project with a very tight delivery time frame, and yet you have
 no schedule management plan (or one that is simple or not well defined), you
 need to account for the lack of attention to schedule management in your risk
 planning. However, if you have a robust schedule management plan that
 includes contingency reserves, a detailed approach to analyzing the progress
on critical and near-critical paths, sufficient scheduling software, and people
skilled in developing schedules, your risk management plan won't need to
focus as heavily on the schedule aspect as you plan for risk.
The scope statement contains information about the types of deliverables and
the associated acceptance criteria. A well-thought-out scope statement means
less uncertainty -- and, therefore, less risk associated with the scope and
quality of the product and the project.
In organizations that practice risk management, plenty of tools and
documentation are available that can help you. For example, there might be
templates for probability and impact matrices and risk registers. Or,
definitions for high, medium, and low risks may already exist, so you won't
need to develop them on your own.


         As you plan how to handle risk, keep in mind your organization's risk
     tolerance. Government or regulated agencies are bound to be risk averse
     and cannot take risks with the public's welfare or interests. Conversely,
     remember the Dot-Com boom in the 1990s? Those companies were
     indeed risk-seekers. They could see only the upside, taking tremendous
     risks -- and, for a while, reaping tremendous rewards. However, many
     of those organizations paid the price for their risk taking by going out of
     business.

Plan Risk Management: Tools and Techniques
Analyzing stakeholder risk tolerances and the high-level project risk exposure
will help determine the appropriate approach for risk management. A project
with high risk exposure, or with stakeholders who are risk averse, will require
more risk management than a project with low risk exposure or stakeholders
with a high risk tolerance.
You will meet with your team, risk experts, and technical experts to
determine the best approach for risk management. If your organization
doesn't have risk management templates or definitions for probability and
impact, you and your team will develop these as part of risk management
planning. If your organization does have these key definitions and tools,
you'll spend this time customizing them for your project.
Plan Risk Management: Outputs
Your risk management plan is a subsidiary plan of the overall project
management plan. It describes how risk identification, analysis, and response
planning will be conducted. It should be tailored to the needs of the project.


        Risk management plan. A component of the project, program, or
     portfolio management plan that describes how risk management
     activities will be structured and performed.
Information in the risk management plan varies by application area and
project size. The risk management plan is different from the risk register that
contains the list of project risks, the results of risk analysis, and the risk
responses.
The risk management plan and the risk register are sometimes confused. I
discuss the risk management plan later and the risk register in the section
Identify Risks: Outputs.
The PMBOK Guide provides a list of some of the elements that should be
included in the risk management plan, such as
   Methodology: Define the approach, tools, and data that you use to
   manage risk.
   Roles and responsibilities: Describe the role that various stakeholders
   have for managing risk. This can include a risk manager for very large
   projects, or the responsibility that each team member has with regard to
   risk management.
   Budgeting: Estimate the funds needed for risk identification, analysis,
   and response. Also, define the approach for allocating, using, and
   recording contingency funds.
    Timing: Identify the risk management activities that need to be added to
   the schedule and cite how often they will occur. Define the approach for
   allocating, using, and recording contingency for the project schedule.
   Risk categories: Identify the major categories of risk on the project and
   decompose them into subcategories. The PMBOK Guide has an example
   of an RBS using technical, external, organizational, and project
management as the main categories. These are then further decomposed to
the level that makes sense for the project. Some branches may have two
levels, and others may go down further. You can also categorize risks by
objectives, such as scope, schedule, cost, quality, or stakeholder risks.
These would then be further decomposed. These are not the only
approaches to developing an RBS, though. You should develop one to
meet the needs of your project.
 Definitions of probability and impact: To analyze risks effectively, use a
common method of rating the probability of an occurrence and the impact
if it does occur.
Probability and impact matrix: Include a probability and impact matrix
(PxI matrix) to rate risks as a high, medium, or low risk. Figure 1-1 shows
a sample probability and impact matrix that's balanced. The low, medium,
and high rankings are relatively balanced, as opposed to having more
squares indicating high risk, as a risk-averse organization might show. The
PxI matrix will be applied in the section, Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis: Tools and Techniques.
Figure 1-1: Sample probability and impact matrix.




             As part of establishing your definitions for probability and impact,
     you are, in essence, defining your thresholds for action. A threshold
     defines the point where you need to take action. By identifying the
     combination of probability and impact that defines an event as a low,
     medium, or high risk, you're stating when you can merely observe the
     event compared with taking action to minimize the event compared with
     needing to avoid the event altogether.
     Revised stakeholder tolerances: If needed, update your risk tolerances
     as viewpoints that might have shifted while compiling the risk
     management plan.
     Reporting and tracking formats: Describe how risks will be recorded
     and reported during the project. This can include a sample risk register,
     sample risk data sheets, and risk analysis templates.
  Whew! That is a lot of information! But remember, risk management is the
  least well-practiced discipline in project management. Having a robust risk
  management plan helps you integrate good risk management practices into
  your project.



    Why it's important to define probability and
                      impact
Joe might define an event as high probability if its chance of occurring is greater than 50%.
Marie might say that 50% is a medium probability, and to reach the high threshold, it has to
have greater than 80% probability of occurring.
The same can be said about impact. On a small project, you can define impact for any
objective. In other words, you don't differentiate the project objectives. For larger projects, you
might spend time defining the high, medium, and low impacts for scope, schedule, cost, and
quality. As I mention earlier in the chapter, the risk management process should mirror the
complexity and criticality of the project.
When establishing definitions for probability and impact, you can use a cardinal (numeric)
scale or an ordinal (descriptive) scale. A cardinal scale might rank probability as
    0%-20%
   21%-40%
   41%-60%
   61%-80%
   81%-100%
An ordinal scale could rank probability as
   Very low
   Low
   Medium
   High
   Very high
You can use the same approach for rating impacts as very high, high, medium, and so on, or
cardinally, such as on a scale of 1-10 or 1-5.




           Risk category. A group of potential causes of risk.
 Risk breakdown structure (RBS). A hierarchical representation of risks
 according to their risk categories.
 Probability and impact matrix (PxI matrix). A grid for mapping the
 probability of each risk occurrence and its impact on objectives if that risk
 occurs.
 The PMBOK Guide presents one approach to the risk management plan. Of
 course, there are others. Ultimately, the needs of the project determine what
 should be in your risk management plan.


          When answering questions in risk management, always keep in mind
       that prevention is preferred over reaction.
Identify Risks
 Identifying risks is everyone's job. Even though the risk management plan
 defines roles and responsibilities for risk management, everyone should be on
 the lookout for events that could negatively affect the project as well as
 opportunities to improve project performance. Think about it as a sailor in a
 crow's nest with a telescope, constantly sweeping the horizon for perils.


         Identify Risks. Determining which risks may affect the project and
      documenting their characteristics.
 Risk identification and the subsequent analysis and response take place
 throughout the project.

 Identify Risks: Inputs
 To do a thorough job in identifying risks, you need to look at all the elements
 in the project management plan and all the other project documents as well as
 environmental factors associated with the project.


         Planning takes place throughout the project, as does risk
      management. Not all project management plan components or project
      documents are available at the beginning of the project. As they become
      available, though, they should be referenced for sources of risk.
 The four categories of documents you can look at are
    Project management plan elements (Chapter 3 in this minibook)
    Project documents (Chapter 3 in this minibook)
    Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) (Book I, Chapter 2)
    Organizational process assets (OPAs) (Book I, Chapter 3)
 Here is a list of the relevant information from each category.
    Project management plan elements
    * Risk management plan
   * Cost management plan
   * Schedule management plan
   * Quality management plan
   * Human resource management plan
   * Scope baseline
   * Schedule baseline
   * Budget
   Project documents
   * Project charter
   * Stakeholder register
   * Cost estimates
   * Duration estimates
   * Network diagram
   * Assumption log
   * Issue log
   * Performance reports
   * Earned value reports
   * Resource requirements
   * Procurement documents
   Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs)
   * Benchmarks
   * Industry information
   * Studies, white papers, and research
   * Risk attitudes
   Organizational process assets (OPAs)
   * Risk registers from past projects
   * Lessons learned
I know that seems like quite the laundry list. However, risk can come from
any aspect of the project. That's why it is important to review all project
management plan elements, project documents, and the project environment
to get a full understanding of the risks on your project.

Identify Risks: Tools and Techniques
With all this information to review, the main techniques you will use are to
analyze, compare, and contrast the documentation. If you see any
inconsistencies, record that as a risk. For example, if your Assumption Log
states that you will have an independent third-party vendor perform product
testing but your budget doesn't account for the associated costs, you have
inconsistencies among your project documents. This will cause you either to
overrun your budget, or perhaps to not have the quality review by a third
party that you need to ensure an unbiased assessment of the product.


       If the plans and documents that you review are incomplete or of poor
    quality, that's also a risk.
Gathering information
As I mention earlier, risk identification is everyone's job. Some easy ways to
identify risks include holding a brainstorming session with your project
stakeholders. You can also conduct individual and group interviews. A more
formal method of gathering information is using the Delphi technique.
The Delphi technique
I present the Delphi technique in Book III, Chapter 2 as a technique for
collecting requirements. It can also be used to identify risks.


         Delphi technique. An information-gathering technique used as a way
     to reach a consensus of experts on a subject. Experts on the subject
     participate in this technique anonymously. A facilitator uses a
     questionnaire to solicit ideas about the important project points related to
     the subject. The responses are summarized and re-circulated to the
     experts for further comment. Consensus may be reached in a few rounds
     of this process. The Delphi technique helps reduce bias in the data and
     keeps any one person from having undue influence on the outcome.
For identifying risks, follow these steps:
1. Describe the project or the aspect of the project you want to identify
  risks for.
2. Select a panel of experts, who should remain anonymous throughout
  the process.
3. Send out background information on the project along with a
  questionnaire to each expert participant.
4. The facilitator compiles information returned from the experts,
  filtering out irrelevant content and content that can lead to loss of
  anonymity.
5. The facilitator sends out the compiled and cleaned responses to the
  questionnaire for the experts to comment on.
  They can comment on individual observations or on the observations of the
  group as a whole.
  As a result of the comment process, people may want to modify their input.
6. Several iterations of the analysis, response, and discussion take place
  until consensus is reached or until there is no more movement on the
  outcome.



        The Delphi technique is useful because the anonymity encourages
    more honest and creative feedback. Studies have found that groups of
    individual experts that come to consensus have a strong forecasting
    ability.
Root cause analysis and diagramming techniques
Another information-gathering technique is root cause analysis, which seeks
to find the underlying source of a problem and then identify preventive
actions. A root cause analysis can include diagramming techniques.


       Root cause analysis. An analytical technique used to determine the
    basic underlying reason that causes a variance or a defect or a risk. A
    root cause may underlie more than one variance, defect, or risk.
Some of the more common diagramming techniques include
   Cause and effect diagrams (also known as fishbone or Ishikawa diagrams)
   Process flow charts or system diagrams
   Influence diagrams that show relationships among variables



       Many of the diagramming and analysis techniques are similar to
    techniques you see in quality management. For quality, you're looking at
    how to keep defects out of your product and project. This is closely
    related to risk management, which looks at what could go wrong and
    how to prevent it.
Risk identification analysis
Various types of analysis are helpful in risk identification:
    Checklist analysis: This type uses a risk checklist. The problem with this
   approach is that after people complete the checklist, they might infer that
   they're done with risk identification. A checklist should be only a starting
   point, not an ending point.
   Assumptions analysis: This type reviews the documented assumptions
   for accuracy, stability, consistency, and completeness.
   SWOT analysis: SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and
   Threats) analysis comprises
    * Internal organizational analysis to identify internal strengths and
      weaknesses that can help or hinder the organization
    * External environment analysis to identify opportunities and threats in
      the market or among competitors
Internal or external experts can complete the preceding techniques. Some
experts have information on the specific technology being used, others have
experience in similar projects, and still others are familiar with the market.

Identify Risks: Outputs
The risk register is started as an output of this process. However, you will add
to it as you analyze your risks and develop responses to them. Initially, you're
documenting your risks.


        Documenting a risk statement like, "The budget is at risk" is not
     acceptable. That gives very little information to work with when
     addressing the risk. The following risk statements are much better:
   Because the cost to install security cameras in the childcare center is
   greater than anticipated, there is a risk we will overrun the budget.
   The city might not approve the plans, thus causing a schedule delay.
   A team member might be reassigned to a higher priority project, thus
   causing a schedule delay.
All risk statements start with the cause and then define the effect. The
approach to describing the risk event is different, but both approaches provide
something to work with when deciding how to analyze and respond to the
risk. At this point in time, you might already know how you're going to
respond to the risk event. In that case, you can enter a potential response in
the risk register. However, it's a good practice to get a robust list of risks,
analyze them, and then develop responses because a group of risks can often
be addressed by one response. Your risk register will follow you throughout
the rest of the risk management processes.


         Risk register. A document in which the results of risk analysis and
     risk response planning are recorded.
The risk register details all identified risks, including description, category,
cause, probability of occurring, impact(s) on objectives, proposed responses,
owners, and current status.


         The risk management plan describes how risk management will be
     structured and performed on the project. It is a management document.
     The risk register keeps track of identified risks, their ranking, responses,
     and all other information about individual risks. It is a tracking
     document.


         Because you are progressively elaborating your project plan elements
     and your project documents, you will also progressively elaborate your
     risk register. As more is known about the project, existing risks can be
     further elaborated, and new risks will be identified.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
 If you did a thorough job identifying and documenting risks, you will have
 quite an intimidating list of things that could go wrong. Many people think,
 "Why bother? I don't have time to address all these. If I did, I wouldn't have
 time to manage the project." And that's precisely why you should take the
 next step of conducting a qualitative analysis, which is just fancy
 terminology for determining the probability and impact of each event and
 then ranking the risks based on that determination. At that point, about 80
 percent of your risks will remain on a watch list. You should take a proactive
 approach toward the remaining 20 percent.


         Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. Prioritizing risks for further
      analysis or action by assessing and combining their probability of
      occurrence and impact.

 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Inputs
 The main ingredients you need to begin the process are the risk register,
 scope baseline, risk management plan, and any historical information you can
 get your hands on. The risk management plan has good information to assist
 you in this process:
    Roles and responsibilities for the analysis process
    Risk categories you use to group similar risks
    Definitions of probability and impact, which can be inclusive of all
    objectives or a definition of impact for each objective
    A probability and impact (PxI) matrix template
    Documentation of the risk tolerance level -- overall or for each objective
    -- that can include a prioritization of the objectives and project constraints

 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Tools and
 Techniques
 The primary technique for analyzing and prioritizing risks is a PxI analysis
 that is later charted on a PxI matrix.
To conduct a PxI assessment, you start with the risk statement (see Identify
Risks: Outputs) in the risk register. You might interview the team member
with the most information about the risk or do some research to understand
the risk. For complex and technical projects, you might call in a subject
matter expert or conduct a risk workshop or survey. The outcome is rating the
likelihood (probability) of the event occurring as well as the impact if the
event occurs. This information is entered into the risk register and the PxI
matrix.
Look at how this process would be applied using the three risks identified for
the childcare center example:
For this example, the date is July 6; assume the following information:
    Because the cost to install security cameras in the childcare center is
   greater than anticipated, there is a risk we will overrun the budget.
   Ten cameras are planned for installation around the childcare center and
   the playground. Each camera is estimated to cost $250. However, the
   camera model that was estimated is no longer available, and the new
   model costs $310 each. Reducing the number of cameras, though, will
   compromise the security and is thus an unacceptable trade-off.
   The city may not approve the plans, thus causing a schedule delay.
   You interviewed the contractor, who stated that of the last ten childcare
   centers he built, the city sent back plans on four. The time to resubmit and
   get approval ranged from 14-35 days. You submitted your plans on June
   30. The city has a 30-day time frame to get back to you.
    A team member may be reassigned to a higher priority project, thus
   causing a schedule delay.
   You heard that your team member in charge of security might be pulled off
   the project and replaced by someone who is new to the company and
   without the same experience level. You don't have confirmation, though.
Table 1-1 shows a PxI matrix, with the probability and impact by objective
filled out. The table uses a cardinal rating of 1-5 for both probability and
impact.
The score is determined by multiplying the probability times the impact. If
multiple objectives are impacted, you add the scores. For example, if you
look at the risk of the city not approving the plans, you multiply
   (2 x 3) + (2 x 3) = 12



        Include a section for comments on your risk register. For the
     information in Table 1-1, you would expect to see an explanation on the
     score, as shown in Table 1-2.

Table 1-2 Risk Register Score Explanations
ID
Statement
  Comments

              Because the cost to install
                                                 The cameras have gone up in price. We can't get them at a
              security cameras in the
                                                 lower rate. The overall cost impact is $600. This is a minimal
  1           childcare center is greater than
                                                 impact to the overall budget and will be funded by
              anticipated, there is a risk we
                                                 contingency reserve.
              will overrun the budget.
                                             If the city delays the permits or we have to rework the plans,
              The city might not approve the we will need to pay overtime to crash the schedule. This will
  2           plans, thus causing a schedule impact our schedule by needing to fast-track some activities
              delay.                         and add overtime on others. Thus, the schedule and budget
                                             are both impacted.
              A team member may be               At this point, the team member being reassigned is only a
              reassigned to a higher-priority    rumor, so we are rating probability as a 2. However, if he is
  3
              project, thus causing a            reassigned, there might be some rework and quality issues
              schedule delay.                    because the replacement is not as experienced.


  At this point, responses are set for some cases (such as fast-tracking the
  schedule and working overtime), but the responses aren't formally outlined.
  When planning responses, you might apply multiple responses, or you might
  use a response that impacts multiple risks. At this point, you're only
  analyzing the risks.
  The PxI matrix in Figure 1-2 is for the schedule objective. It demonstrates
  how risks would be plotted if you were looking only at schedule impacts. You
  would have one of these for all objectives.




Figure 1-2: PxI matrix for the schedule objective.


  If you're not rating each objective individually, you would obviously have
  just one matrix that combines impact scores.


            The PxI matrix in Figure 1-2 is called a "5 x 5" (5 by 5) because it
     rates risks in five grades of probability and five grades of impact. You
     can use a 3 x 3, 10 x 10, 5 x 7, or whatever configuration you want.
     Most people use an odd number, but beware of too many risks
     congregating in the middle cell. Try to keep the middle cell empty so
     you can have a more definitive rating.
When assessing risks, take into consideration the urgency of the situation.
Given that the date is July 6, the plans have been submitted to the city for
approval, and the approval is due in three weeks, that is your most urgent
risk. Even if it didn't have the highest score, you might consider moving this
up your list for responses based on the near time frame.
Another technique to apply is determining the data quality. This means that
you can perform a good risk assessment only if you have quality data. In
other words, Garbage In, Garbage Out.
After analyzing the risks, you may find that you have groups or categories of
risks, such as technical risks, requirements risks, schedule risks, and so on.
Categorizing risks can help you later when developing responses because you
can develop one response that will be effective for several risks.

Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis: Outputs
Based on your analysis, you update the risk register with the probability,
impact, score, and comments, as shown in the preceding sections. Based on
the scores and your urgency assessment, prioritize your risks. Some risks will
require further analysis, and those go into the quantitative risk analysis
process that I cover next. Some risks don't need further analysis, and you can
work with your team to develop responses; I cover risk responses later in this
chapter. However, most risks go on a "watch list," and you check the
probability, impact, and urgency on watch list risks throughout the project. If
any of those factors change, you might need to escalate the risk and develop a
risk response. Or, if the event passes without occurring, the probability drops
to 0, and the risk is closed. The watch list isn't a separate list; it just means
you are not taking the time to develop a risk response, other than to "watch"
the risk.
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
 Not all projects need to conduct a quantitative risk analysis. That is usually
 reserved for the mega-projects. Remember, though, the PMP exam assumes
 you have a large project, so you need to be familiar with the techniques in this
 section.


         Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. Numerically analyzing the
      effect of identified risks on overall project objectives.
 As the name implies, the techniques in this process are quantitative: In other
 words, you have to do the math! If you're math-phobic, review this part of
 the book enough times to develop a comfort level with the concepts.
 The purposes of performing quantitative analysis are to
    Perform a deeper analysis on those risks that can potentially and
    substantially impact a project objective.
    Determine the likelihood of meeting cost and schedule objectives and
    provide a range of outcomes.
    Determine realistic schedule and budget targets given the project risks.
    Provide a method to quantify some of the uncertainty in the project to
    make better decisions.



         If you're engaging in this process, you should do it both before and
      after you develop risk responses. You should expect to see the overall
      project risk drop significantly after applying risk responses.

 Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Inputs
 You need several components of the project management plan to conduct a
 quantitative risk analysis:
    Schedule management plan
    Cost management plan
   Risk management plan
Of course, you also need your risk register with your prioritized risks and any
organizational or external information you can use to better understand the
nature of the high risks.

Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Tools and
Techniques
The first step to quantifying uncertainty is to get more information. This is
generally done via research and interviewing subject matter experts. Because
quantitative risk analysis is associated with the schedule and cost objectives,
focus on those estimates. Assume that you're gathering cost estimates to
determine whether a budget of $2.5 million is sufficient for the childcare
center. Here are the steps you would take:
1. Revisit your cost estimates and get an optimistic, a pessimistic, and a
  most-likely estimate for each WBS element.
2. Sum the optimistic, pessimistic, and most-likely estimates for the
  project as a whole.
3. Document your assumptions, basis of estimates, and rationale for each
  set of estimates.
4. Apply the PERT equation to the estimates.
  This gives you an expected cost for each element and the project as a
  whole.
5. Use software to create a probability distribution of the values.
6. Compare the sum of the most likely estimates with the sum of the
  expected value estimate.



         The PMP exam will use the PERT (Program Evaluation and Review
     Technique) equation that I discuss in the chapters on duration and cost
     estimating (Book III, Chapter 3, and Book IV, Chapter 1). That equation
     is
   (optimistic + 4 (most likely) + pessimistic) / 6

You'll almost always find the sum of the most likely to be significantly less
  than the sum of the expected value. And because the expected value is the
  50% probability figure, you will discover that your "most likely" estimate is
  not very likely at all!
  Figure 1-3 shows some common displays of probability distributions.




This figure is based on a graphic by ModelRisk. Use is courtesy of Vose Software.
Figure 1-3: Probability distributions.


  The three curves represent three different scenarios. Curve A indicates that
  the optimistic and most likely estimates are close together and that the
  pessimistic estimate is significantly greater. Curve B indicates that all three
  values are evenly distributed. Curve C indicates that the optimistic value is
  significantly less than the most likely and pessimistic values, which are close
  together.
  Curve A is a common occurrence because generally, the best case scenario
  and most likely are not that far off. However, if things really go wrong, the
  worst case scenario can be really bad! In Curve A, your expected value will
  be higher than your most likely value.

  Scenarios, modeling, and simulations
  Before getting too deep in this section, look at some key definitions.


             Sensitivity analysis. A quantitative risk analysis and modeling
          technique used to help determine which risks have the most potential
          impact on the project. It examines the extent to which the uncertainty of
          each project element affects the objective being examined when all other
          uncertain elements are held at their baseline values. The typical display
     of results is in the form of a tornado diagram.
Expected Monetary Value (EMV) analysis. A statistical technique that
calculates the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that may
or may not happen. A common use of this technique is within decision tree
analysis.
Decision tree analysis. A diagramming and calculation technique for
evaluating the implications of a chain of multiple options in the presence of
uncertainty.
Simulation. A simulation uses a project model that translates the
uncertainties specified at a detailed level into their potential impact on
objectives that are expressed at the level of the total project. Project
simulations use computer models and estimates of risk, usually expressed as a
probability distribution of possible costs or durations at a detailed work level,
and are typically performed by using Monte Carlo analysis.
I explain each technique in a bit more detail.
Sensitivity analysis
You use a sensitivity analysis to see which variables have most impact on a
project objective. You can develop what-if models or simulations to see the
impact of a risk on either the budget or the schedule. Many times, the
outcomes are graphed in a tornado diagram. Figure 1-4 shows the impact of
various events on the schedule.
A tornado diagram has the following characteristics:
   The longer the bar, the more sensitive the project objective is to the risk.
    The risks are presented in descending order, with the largest impact on the
   top and the least impact on the bottom.
    It allows the team to focus on those risks with the greatest impact on a
   project objective.
A tornado diagram isn't the only way you can display information, but it is a
common choice. You can also run a what-if scenario for your schedule (or
budget) to see the impact of a risk event on the overall schedule or budget.
Figure 1-4: Sensitivity analysis for schedule.


  Expected Monetary Value (EMV)
  To determine the expected monetary value of a risk or a decision, do the
  following:
  1. Identify the scenarios that could occur.
  2. Determine the probability of each scenario.
  3. Determine the monetary value associated with each outcome.
  4. Multiply the probability times the monetary value of each outcome.
  5. Sum the outcomes to get the expected monetary value of the risk or
 decision.
Note that none of the scenarios might occur: You're simply trying to get an
average outcome given the uncertainty of the environment.
Consider this example. You're trying to decide whether to purchase software
and customize it or to develop it inhouse. If you develop inhouse, you risk
losing resources to other projects because there is a 50/50 chance that you'll
lose 40% of your staff. If you keep your staff, developing software will cost
$172,000. If you lose staff, you have to hire outside contractors, and
developing software will cost $208,000. To calculate the expected value, add
the values of each alternative; see the results in Table 1-3.




If you purchase ready-made software, though, you have risk related to
customization. There is a 60% chance that you will have to do only a little
customization, which would bring the total cost to $152,000. And there is a
40% chance that you will have to do a lot of customization, which would
bring the total cost to $188,000. To calculate the expected value, add the
values of each alternative (see Table 1-4).




Your decision would be to purchase software because the cost is lower. As
you can see, EMV can be calculated easily in a spreadsheet or a table. More
often, it is displayed as a decision tree, as I discuss next.
   In an EMV analysis, opportunities are usually expressed as positive
values, and threats are expressed as negative values.
  Decision tree
  Figure 1-5 uses the same information as in Table 4-1, but it depicts it
  graphically.




Figure 1-5: Decision tree for inhouse software development versus purchasing.


  A decision tree is a simple way to get a visual display of the uncertainty and
  the various decision options for project risks.
Simulation
Most risk simulations use software to run thousands of possible iterations and
come up with a probability distribution of the results. Here are the steps
involved.
1. Start with multiple estimates (optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely)
  for each work package and enter them into the software.
  Assume duration estimates for our example.
2. Enter the number of iterations you want the software to run.
  Usually, 1,000-5,000 is sufficient without becoming overkill.
3. Run the simulation.
  The computer takes random amounts from the range of duration estimates
  for each work package and produces a probability distribution.
4. Analyze the information.
  The data show the likelihood of hitting a particular schedule target and tell
  you how much time you need to achieve 80% confidence (or 50%, or
  whatever level you want).



        Monte Carlo simulation. A process that generates hundreds or
     thousands of probable performance outcomes based on probability
     distributions for cost and schedule on individual tasks. The outcomes are
     then used to generate a probability distribution for the project as a
     whole.
Figure 1-6 shows a Monte Carlo simulation that was run 1,000 times.
   The x-axis shows the total duration in days. For this example, the duration
   range is 23-37 days.
    The y-axis on the left shows the number of occurrences a specific total
   duration occurred. You use this axis with the bars that indicate the number
   of times the simulation showed the duration of a specific number of days.
   Rarely was the duration 23 days or 27 days. There were more than 140
   instances when the duration was 30 days.
    The y-axis on the right shows the cumulative (overall) likelihood that a
   cumulative duration will occur. Use this with the line that indicates the
       cumulative likelihood the total duration will come in at or under a
       specified duration. You can see the line intersects the bar for 30 days at the
       50% likelihood point. This is the expected duration: 50% of the time, the
       duration will be greater than 30 days; 50% of the time, it will be less than
       30 days.




Courtesy of Pritchard Management Associates, Frederick, MD.
Figure 1-6: Monte Carlo simulation.


  If you were using this information to determine the amount of time you
  needed for the work and you wanted an 80% confidence rating, you would
  select 32 days.


             For this process, you must employ expert judgment. Expert judgment
         is needed to get the range of estimates, convert them to probability
         distributions, conduct a sensitivity analysis, determine event outcomes
         for decision trees, and conduct a simulation.

  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Outputs
  What does all this work get you? Well, for starters, it gets you quantified
  information on those risks that pose the greatest risk to your project. EMV,
  decision trees, and PERT analysis can help with that. It helps you understand
which risks will have the greatest impact to your project. You can use a
sensitivity analysis to get that information. A simulation will tell you the
likelihood of meeting cost and schedule objectives. You can also use the
simulation to note project performance trends. For example, if you run the
simulation once per quarter and find that the probability of hitting your
budget target is progressively going down, you'll want to take some
corrective action.
Plan Risk Responses
 Your risk register should now be updated with a prioritized list of risks.
 During the process of planning risk responses, you will determine the most
 appropriate responses to risks and assign an accountable person to manage
 each risk.


         Plan Risk Responses. Developing options and actions to enhance
      opportunities and to reduce threats to project objectives.
 Keep in mind several key points when planning risk responses:
    Responses need to be appropriate to the significance of the risk. A low
    risk doesn't require a lot of time and effort to develop a response.
     Responses need to be cost effective. Don't spend more money to respond
    to a risk than the value of the event itself.
    Responses should be realistic given the environment. If your project is
    fairly low in priority in the project portfolio, don't expect people to drop
    what they're doing to respond to a minor risk.
    Risks need to be assigned to someone to manage. Without an
    accountable person to watch for the event, implement proactive responses,
    and notice when changes in the environment affect the risk, you can't
    expect to be able to respond effectively.
     All parties need to agree on the approach for managing a risk. If you
    think a vendor should take steps to reduce the probability of a risk event,
    make sure that the vendor agrees to take those steps.
     Responses need to be timely. Whenever possible, actions should be
    based on a proactive solution, not a reactive response.
 Many risk events will have multiple responses. These responses will likely
 show up in components of the project management plan. For instance, you
 might need to put activities into the schedule to avoid or mitigate certain
 events. You might also need to add funds to accommodate transferring the
 risk to a vendor.
Plan Risk Responses: Tools and Techniques
The risk management plan defines the thresholds and probability and impact
combinations that require action. You use this information along with the
information in the risk register to begin developing responses.
The four categories for negative risk (threat) responses are
   Avoid
   Transfer
   Mitigate
   Accept



        Risk avoidance. A risk response strategy whereby the project team
     acts to eliminate the threat or protect the project from its impact.
Risk transference. A risk response strategy whereby the project team shifts
the impact of a threat to a third party, together with ownership of the
response.
Risk mitigation. A risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to
reduce the probability of occurrence or impact of a risk.
Risk acceptance. A risk response strategy whereby the project team decides
to acknowledge the risk and not take any action unless the risk occurs.
When avoiding a risk, you're taking actions that eliminate the threat. For
instance, if you have uncertainty associated with a deliverable, you can do
more research to eliminate the uncertainty. If you have multiple schedule
risks, you can extend the schedule to avoid the schedule constraint putting the
delivery date at risk. For risks associated with technology, you might be able
to find a proven or less-risky technology.
Transferring risk usually equates to spending money to give the risk
management to another party. This can include insurance and contracts.
Consider an insurance policy: You pay an insurer to absorb the financial risk
of an uncertain event. If the event occurs, it is still your problem: The
insurance company merely foots the bill.
         The same is true for transferring risk to a vendor, who might be better
     qualified to manage the risk. If the vendor isn't effective, though, you're
     still on the hook for the result.
Mitigation tries to reduce or eliminate the probability of an event occurring,
or the impact if it does. You can do iterative development and prototyping,
run additional tests, or have redundant systems to mitigate the probability of
an event or the impact of the event.
Acceptance can be passive: In other words, you do nothing. If the event
occurs, you deal with it in the moment. Acceptance can also be active: For
example, you can have a contingency plan. If the event occurs, you take
specified actions. A common acceptance strategy is to have contingency time
or budget to absorb overruns for unknown events.
Look at some of the risks identified for the childcare center example. Table 1-
5 shows just the ID, risk statement, and response. A full risk register would
include the probability, impact, score, response owner, and other relevant
information.

Table 1-5 Risks and Responses
ID
Statement
Response

           Because the cost to install security
           cameras in the childcare center is Accept. This is a minimal impact to the overall budget and
1
           greater than anticipated, there is a will be funded by contingency reserve.
           risk we will overrun the budget.
                                                 Mitigate. Follow up with the city once per week. If it
           The city might not approve the        appears there is an issue, begin a corrective action
2          plans, thus causing a schedule        immediately and submit it to reduce multiple cycles of
           delay.                                submissions. This has a cost implication, but the permits
                                                 are a critical factor, so we will accept the cost variance.
                                                 Accept with a contingency plan. We have no ability to
           A team member might get
                                                 influence staff reassignments. However, if this seems
           reassigned to a higher-priority
3                                                likely to occur, we will have the leaving employee work
           project, thus causing a schedule
                                                 with the new employee for a week to make sure she is up
           delay.
                                                 to speed on remaining work.

           Because we don't have a network
           or experience hiring childcare staff,
                                                 Transfer. We will outsource the hiring to a firm that
4          we might not be able to find
                                                 specializes in childcare staffing.
           qualified candidates, thus causing
           degradation in the quality of care.

                                                 Mitigate. We will have an enrollment campaign for the
           If the enrollments are not at 50 by
                                                 center. If we don't have 50 enrollments by November 1,
5          January, we will be operating at a
                                                 we will give incentives for enrollments prior to December
           loss, causing a budget overrun.
                                                 1.

           Because the swing set is not in
           stock, we needed to place a back Avoid. We will redesign the playground to use a different
6
           order, causing a potential schedule model swing set that is in stock.
           slip.
Opportunity management
There is a completely different, but related, set of responses for opportunities.
I haven't really talked much about opportunity management, so I address it
briefly here.


        Opportunity. A risk that will have a positive effect on one or more
     project objectives.
Identifying opportunities
You can use the same techniques for identifying opportunities as you do for
identifying threats. Here are some examples of opportunities:
   Because Joanne is being replaced, there is an opportunity to have John
   work on our project. John has a higher skill set than Joanne, so we can
   complete the work ten days early.
   By combining an order for supplies with other projects and departments
   in the organization, we can reduce the cost by 15%.
   If we outsource the requirements gathering, we can reduce the work
   package duration by three weeks.
Opportunity analysis
You then list those opportunities in the risk register and perform a probability
and impact assessment on them. The impact looks at the objective it affects
and the degree of impact. You can use a mirror approach to your probability
and impact matrix for risks. When ranking opportunities, look for those
opportunities with the highest impact and the highest probability and rank
those at the top of the list. It is unusual to put opportunities through a
quantitative risk analysis; therefore, you will not need to do that for the exam.
Opportunity responses
Here are the four responses for opportunities, a description of each, and an
example of how they can be applied:
   Exploit. Take steps to ensure that it's realized. This is the counterpart to
   avoiding a risk. If you wanted to exploit the opportunity to save money on
   supplies, you would approach the other project managers and functional
   managers to coordinate ordering and purchasing. By taking the initiative
   and moving ahead, you are ensuring that you will benefit from the
   opportunity.
   Share. You share an opportunity when you don't have the ability to take
   advantage of the situation yourself. You find someone to work with to be
   able to reap the rewards. This is the counterpart to risk transfer. For
   example, if your company wanted to bid on a contract because it's a good
   fit for the engineering aspect of the contract but weak in the construction
   aspect, your company could approach a construction firm and offer to
   partner with it on the bid. By sharing the opportunity of combining each
   organization's strengths, you have a better chance to win the bid.
    Enhance. Increase the probability that the opportunity will occur, or the
   benefit (impact) if it does. This is similar to mitigating a risk. Using the
   earlier hypothetical opportunity of replacing Joanne with John, you could
   approach John's manager directly and see about negotiating for him. This
   proactive approach will improve your chances of obtaining John, although
   it won't guarantee them.
    Accept. This is the same for opportunities and risks. This is a passive
   approach. If the opportunity presents itself, you will take advantage of it,
   but you are not proactively pursuing the opportunity.
More information about risk responses
As you go through the risk register to develop responses and assign an
accountable person to manage them, you will discover that you should apply
multiple responses to certain risks. For example, you might transfer the
search for the director of the childcare center to a staffing agency, or you
could post the position internally and on job-search boards. Thus, you are
transferring and mitigating.
Using this same example, if the staffing agency doesn't come through, you're
still in a bind of not having a director. In addition, you might have additional
risks associated with outsourcing. For example, if you were initially planning
on doing this work inhouse, but you decide to outsource it, you now have
more expenses, which equates to a risk for your budget -- and that is a
secondary risk.


         Secondary risk. A risk that arises as a direct result of implementing a
     risk response.
You have to treat the secondary risk as a new risk and put it through the
analysis and response processes. For a situation like this, you would likely
accept the residual risk and develop a contingency plan. One step further, you
could also identify a risk trigger stating that if you don't have at least three
candidates identified by November 15, you will have the lead educator and
the operations manager split the duties associated with the director's role.


        Sometimes, a response to one risk can serve to reduce the severity of
     several other risks.

Plan Risk Responses: Outputs
By this point, you should have a robust risk register. After the responses are
taken into consideration, you want to reassess the probability and impact of
the risk events and the overall risk to the project. If you ran a Monte Carlo
simulation to determine the likelihood of meeting cost and schedule
objectives (see the earlier section "Simulation"), you should re-run it now.
The sample risk register in Figure 1-7 will give you an idea of the
information you should have after this process is complete.
In addition to the information in the risk register, you likely will have the
following information:
   Trigger conditions
   Residual risks
   Fallback plans
   Workarounds
   Contingency reserves



         Trigger conditions. An event or a situation that indicates that a risk
     is about to occur.
Residual risk. A risk that remains after risk responses have been
implemented.
Workaround. A response to a threat that has occurred, for which a prior
response had not been planned or was not effective. (A workaround is
distinguished from a contingency plan in that a workaround is not planned in
advance of the occurrence of the risk event.)
Contingency reserve. Budget within the cost baseline or performance
measurement baseline that is allocated for identified risks that are accepted
and for which contingent or mitigating responses are developed.
Fallback plan. Include an alternative set of actions and tasks available in the
event that the primary plan needs to be abandoned because of issues, risks, or
other causes.
Contingency reserve should be included in the schedule and the budget. It is
commonly derived as a percent of the residual risk for the overall project.
If your contingency plans aren't effective, you have two options:
   Use a fallback plan when the contingency response is not adequate.
   Create a workaround, which is an unplanned response to an event.
Figure 1-7: Risk register after risk response planning.


  Say you decide that if you don't have a director by December 15 and you
  aren't comfortable with the lead educator taking over part of the director's
  responsibilities, you could decide that as a fallback, you will delay the
  opening until the position is filled. On the other hand, say you hire the
  director, but two days before the center is scheduled to open, she decides to
  take another job. Now you're in the position of needing to work around the
situation to find a way to make it work.


         Many times, there is too much information on each individual risk to
     record in the risk register. Keeping a risk data sheet (as shown in Figure
     1-8) to track this information by risk can be a good way to address this
     situation.
Based on all the work you did in planning risk responses, you will need to
update several components of the project management plan as well as other
project documents. Here is a list of places to start. Of course, the needs of the
project will dictate which elements you need to update.
   WBS and WBS dictionary
   Schedule baseline
   Cost performance baseline
   Schedule management plan
   Cost management plan
   Quality management plan
   Procurement management plan
   Human resource plan
   Assumption logs
   Technical documentation
Your decision to transfer risk to a third party will probably create some
secondary risks and will likely necessitate procurement activities. You need to
make sure that those decisions are documented and that the activities and
funding are allocated.
Figure 1-8: Risk data sheet.
Key Terms
 Risk management has its own set of vocabulary. There are quite a few terms
 to remember here, so make sure you are comfortable with them before taking
 the exam.
    Risk
    Threat
    Opportunity
    Risk tolerance
    Risk appetite
    Risk management plan
    Risk category
    Risk breakdown structure (RBS)
    Probability and impact matrix (PxI)
    Risk register
    Delphi method
    Root cause analysis
    Risk register
    Sensitivity analysis
    Expected Monetary Value (EMV)
    Decision tree analysis
    Simulation
    Risk avoidance
    Risk transference
    Risk mitigation
    Risk acceptance
    Opportunity
Exploit
Share
Enhance
Secondary risk
Residual risk
Triggers
Workaround
Contingency reserve
Fallback plan
Chapter Summary
 This complex section covers five planning processes. Some of the math in the
 quantitative analysis section can be intimidating, but I'm sure that if you go
 through it a few times, you'll do just fine.
    Risk management deals with the inherent uncertainty in projects. Risk can
    be negative (threats) or positive (opportunities).
     The degree of risk management you apply should be consistent with the
    complexity and criticality of the project. The risk management plan is used
    to document your approach to risk management on the project.
     You should look everywhere for events that can impact your project.
    Review all documents, interview all stakeholders, develop diagrams, and
    conduct an analysis to identify risk events. These are then documented in
    the risk register.
     Qualitative risk analysis helps prioritize risks. Risks are prioritized based
    on the probability of occurrence, the impact if they occur, and how soon
    they are likely to occur.
     The probability and impact (PxI) analysis and PxI matrix are used to plot
    risks. The PxI matrix, definitions, and rating should be tailored to meet the
    needs of your organization and project. Multiplying the probability by the
    impact gives you a risk score. Your risk score will help prioritize your risk
    list.
     Quantitative analysis is used to conduct further analysis on risks that can
    substantially impact a project objective. It can also be used to determine
    the likelihood of achieving cost and schedule objectives.
    Techniques used in quantitative analysis include
    * Sensitivity analysis
     * Interviewing
     * Creating probability distributions
     * Conducting an Expected Monetary Value (EMV) analysis
     * Creating a decision tree
* Running a simulation
 To respond to threats, you can avoid, accept, transfer, or mitigate the
threat. To respond to opportunities you can exploit, enhance, share, or
accept the opportunity.
 You can develop risk triggers, contingency plans, and fallback plans for
risks. Use contingency reserves of funding and time to reduce residual
risks.
Prep Test
                       Multiple Choice

1. Your approach to risk management on a project should be
  documented in which document?
 A   Risk register
 B   Risk data sheet
 C   Risk management plan
 D   Risk breakdown structure

2. What is a good way to develop a structure to systematically
  group risks?
 A   Risk register
 B   Risk data sheet
 C   Risk management plan
 D   Risk breakdown structure

3. The degree to which an organization is able to tolerate
  uncertainty on projects is
 A   Risk averseness
 B   Risk avoidance
 C   Risk tolerance
 D   Risk seeking

4. You pull together a group of subject matter experts. Some have
  expertise in risk, some in the technology your project is using,
  and some in project management. You keep the participants
  separated and anonymous and then send a questionnaire
  asking them what risks they think the project is most
  susceptible to. This goes on for several rounds until they reach
  consensus. What is this technique called?
 A   Brainstorming
 B    Delphi technique
 C    Monte Carlo simulation
 D    Assumptions analysis

5. Looking for risks from the perspective of external opportunities
  and threats and internal strengths and weaknesses is an
  example of
 A    A SWOT analysis
 B    A root cause analysis
 C    Directed brainstorm
 D    Assumptions analysis

6. Which technique helps determine which risks have the most
  potential impact on a project, and what type of diagram is used
  to depict this?
 A    EMV, a decision tree
 B    Monte Carlo simulation, a probability distribution
 C    Sensitivity analysis, a tornado diagram
 D    Expert judgment, a decision tree

7. All the following are responses to opportunities except
 A    Exploit
 B    Enhance
 C    Accept
 D    Transfer

8. Taking actions to reduce the probability or the impact of a threat
  is an example of
 A    Risk mitigation
 B    Risk avoidance
 C    Risk transference
 D   Risk acceptance

9. To respond to a risk of not having available staff inhouse to do
  some work, you decide to outsource the work to a vendor. Now
  you have a new risk that the vendor won't meet the tight delivery
  date. This new risk is an example of
 A   A workaround
 B   A contingency plan
 C   A secondary risk
 D   A residual risk

                           Scenario 1
Use this PxI matrix to answer the following two questions.




1. The PxI matrix represents an organization that is
 A   Risk averse
 B   Risk tolerant
 C   Risk neutral
 D   Risk taking
2. A risk that was ranked as high-high would have a risk score of
 A    25
 B    16
 C    9
 D    20

                           Scenario 2
Your company needs more space, and you're considering whether to
relocate or build out existing space. Historically, there has been a
problem with availability of furniture and equipment at your existing
location. With a new location, you're concerned about the amount of
build-out you'd have to do. You draw a decision tree to represent the
possible outcomes.




1. What is the value of the remodel, and what is the value of the
  relocation?
 A    Remodel = $193,500, relocation = $166,400
B   Remodel = $380,000, relocation = $340,000
C   Remodel = $190,000, relocation = $170,000
D   Remodel = $195,400, relocation = $165,200
Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Risk management plan. A risk management plan describes how
  risk management will be structured and performed on the project.
  Review Plan Risk Management: Outputs.
2. D. Risk breakdown structure. A risk breakdown structure provides a
  structure that ensures a comprehensive process of systematically
  identifying risks. Check out Plan Risk Management: Tools and
  Techniques.
3. C. Risk tolerance. Risk tolerance refers to the amount of risk a
  person or an organization is willing to tolerate. Look at Projects
  Breed Uncertainty.
4. B. Delphi technique. The Delphi technique works with a group of
  anonymous experts to reach consensus. Go over Identify Risks:
  Tools and Techniques.
5. A. A SWOT analysis. A SWOT analysis looks outside and inside an
  organization for threats. Read Identify Risks: Tools and Techniques.
6. C. Sensitivity analysis, a tornado diagram. A sensitivity analysis
  helps determine which risks have the most potential impact on a
  project, and the tornado diagram is a visual display of the
  information. See the information in Sensitivity analysis.
7. D. Transfer. Transfer is the only option that is used for threats.
  Check Plan Risk Responses: Tools and Techniques.
8. A. Risk mitigation. Mitigation seeks to reduce the probability and/or
  the impact of a threat. Go over Plan Risk Responses: Tools and
  Techniques.
9. C. A secondary risk. A secondary risk is the result of implementing
  a risk response. Look at Plan Risk Responses: Tools and
  Techniques.

                            Scenario 1
1. A. Risk averse. There is more dark-gray than any other shade.
  Review Plan Risk Management: Outputs.
2. B. 16. High = 4. 4 x 4 = 16. Review Perform Qualitative Risk
  Analysis: Tools and Techniques.

                          Scenario 2
1. A. Remodel = $193,500, relocation = $166,400. The sum of the
  remodel is (45% x $155,000) + (55% x $225,000) = $193,500. The
  sum of the relocation is (60% x $152,000) + (40% x $188,000) =
  $166,400. Go back over Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis: Tools
  and Techniques.
       Chapter 2: Getting Help --
        Procuring Project Scope
Exam Objective
    Review the project scope and schedule to determine what, if any,
    scope or resources will need to be procured.



 Project procurement concerns purchasing project scope. This knowledge area
 can be approached from the perspective of the buyer or the seller. The buyer
 needs to carefully consider which parts of the project scope to buy, which
 must be made inhouse, and which parts to make or buy.
 Procurement can take place any time during the project life cycle although
 the identification of which items will ultimately be procured is generally
 made early, during scope definition. After the work breakdown structure
 (WBS) is decomposed to deliverables, it can be used to determine the "make
 or buy" decisions.
 Procurements other than readily available commercial goods are executed
 with a contract. Sometimes that contract is called an agreement, a purchase
 order (PO), a subcontract, or an understanding. However, because it is a legal
 document, a contract obligates the seller and the buyer to perform in specific
 ways. Therefore, there is usually input or oversight by each organization's
 legal department and/or purchasing department.
 When a project procures product scope from outside the organization, the
 contract management work associated with administering the procurement
 and the contract needs to be integrated with the other project work. The
 development and delivery schedule of the buyer and seller need to integrate,
 the quality requirements need to be aligned, risks associated with the
 procured items need to be addressed, and communication between the buyer
 and the seller needs consensus. Thus, contract management can be a complex
 process, particularly for large procurements. It gets even more complex when
 multiple vendors are involved on a project. Therefore, careful upfront
 planning and analysis are imperative to ensure a smooth integration of all
stakeholders.
                Quick Assessment
1. Name three reasons to purchase scope.
2. Which type of contract has the least amount of risk for the
  purchaser?
3. A(n) ______ ______ ______ contract has aspects of a fixed price
  and a cost-reimbursable contract.
4. The ______ ______ ______ documents the approach to managing
  the bid process and administering the contract.
5. A(n) ______ ______ ______ is used when the buyer is looking for
  a solution as opposed to just shopping for the best price.
6. A mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller to provide
  the specified product or service or result and obligates the buyer to
  pay for it is a(n) ______.
7. (True/False). You should consider risk when you are determining
  whether to procure something for the project.
8. If you are setting up a weighted scoring model, and the weight of
  the criterion is .4 and the score is 3, what would the rating be?
9. Understanding of need, overall cost, and management approach
  are all examples of ______ ______ ______.
10. Which type of contract has a point of total assumption?
                           Answers
1. Reasons to purchase scope include cost, availability of skills, small
  volume requirements, limited inhouse capacity, transferring risk,
  maintaining supplier relations, and readily available goods. For
  more, see Plan Procurements: Tools and Techniques.
2. A firm fixed price contract has the least risk for the buyer. This is
  discussed in the Fixed price contracts section.
3. A time and material contract has aspects of both fixed price and
  cost-reimbursable contracts. Time and material contracts are
  discussed in the Time and material contracts section.
4. The procurement management plan documents the approach for
  managing the bid process and the contract administration. Read
  about the procurement management plan in the The procurement
  management plan section.
5. A request for proposal is used when the buyer is more interested in
  a proposed solution rather than just price. Look over the information
  in Procurement documents.
6. Contract. You will see contracts discussed in Procurement Basics.
7. True. A risk response for some risks is to transfer the risk via a
  contract. See the information in Plan Procurement Management:
  Inputs.
8. 1.2. The weight times the score equals the rating. Learn more
  about this in the Source selection criteria section.
9. Source selection criteria. All those elements are used to determine
  the best proposal for the procurement. You can see more about this
  topic in Source selection criteria.
10. Fixed price incentive fee (FPIF). This is the only contract type that
  has a point of total assumption. Read more about it in Fixed price
  contracts.
Procurement Basics
 Because procurements deal with contractual relationships, I want to start by
 defining a contract.


         Agreements. Any document or communication that defines the initial
      intentions of a project. This can take the form of a contract,
      memorandum of understanding (MOU), letters of agreement, verbal
      agreements, e-mail, and so on.
 Contract. A mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller to provide
 the specified product or service or result and obligates the buyer to pay for it.
 For a contract to be valid, there must be mutual agreement between the
 parties. In other words, you need an offer, acceptance of the offer, and
 consideration (in this context, the fancy legal term for payment or money).
 Contracts must have a legal purpose, and must be entered into by someone
 with capacity or delegated procurement authority, usually a contracting
 officer.


         Exam questions dealing with this knowledge area assume that the
      procurement is large and based on a contract. Although it's true that you
      can purchase labor and supplies, you should address these questions as if
      you were purchasing something significant: say, more than $1 million.
      Also, questions on the exam assume that you are in the role of the buyer.


Plan Procurement Management
 For some projects, you won't have any procurements. In that case, you won't
 need the processes in this knowledge area. However, most large projects have
 at least a few procurements.
 Procurements involve a relationship between the buyer and the seller. You
 may see the seller referred to as
    Contractor
    Subcontractor
    Vendor
    Service provider
    Supplier
 The buyer may be referred to as
    Client
    Customer
    Acquiring organization
    Purchaser
    Service requestor



        Plan Procurement Management. Documenting project procurement
     decisions, specifying the approach, and identifying potential sellers.


Plan Procurement Management:
Inputs
 Many individual elements that make up the project management plan need to
 be taken into consideration when planning what to purchase, when to
 purchase, and how much to purchase. At a minimum, review the following
 project plan elements and project documents:
    Scope baseline
    Requirements documentation
    Activity resource requirements
    Project schedule
    Activity cost estimates
    Risk register
    Stakeholder register
In addition, consider risk (discussed in the preceding chapter). As I mention
there, one risk response is to transfer risk. The decision to transfer risk via a
contract is an input to this process. Therefore, review the risk register and any
risk-related contract decisions.
Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) play a big role in this process. In
particular, you will want to have information about
   Availability of goods and services in the marketplace
   Marketplace conditions
   Potential suppliers and their past performance and reputation
   Any specific local requirements, regulations, or restrictions
For large procurements, the purchasing department will usually have template
contracts as well as a set of policies and procedures that you have to follow.
For complex procurements, or if you have multiple vendors, you should have
a specific person from the contracts or purchasing department assigned to
your team.

Picking the right contract type
Contract types are organizational process assets (OPAs). The type of contract
you select can increase or reduce your risk. The objective in selecting a
contract type is to select a contract that shares the risk between the buyer and
the seller appropriately while providing sufficient incentive for the seller to
perform.
The three basic families of contracts are
   Fixed price
   Cost-reimbursable
   Time and material
You can enhance these contract types with incentive fees or fixed fees. The
terms cost, fee, and price are used precisely in procurements. The following
definitions describe how contract terminology is used:
   Fee: Profit, in the contracting world
   Cost: The amount of funds it takes to complete the work
   Price: Cost plus the fee
Fixed price contracts
Fixed price contracts are favored when the scope of the project is clearly
defined and is not subject to change. With this type of contract, the seller is
required to finish the work, regardless of the final price. Therefore, the
majority of the cost risk is on the seller. There are several types of fixed price
contracts. After some definitions, I talk about the firm fixed price and fixed
priced incentive fee contracts.


        Fixed price contract. A type of contract that sets a fixed total price
     for a defined product or service to be provided. Fixed price contracts
     may also incorporate financial incentives for achieving or exceeding
     selected project objectives, such as schedule delivery, dates, cost and
     technical performance, or anything that can be quantified and
     subsequently measured.
Firm fixed price (FFP) contract. A type of fixed price contract where the
buyer pays the seller a set amount (as defined by the contract), regardless of
the seller's costs.
Fixed price incentive fee (FPIF) contract. A type of contract where the
buyer pays the seller a set amount (as defined by the contract), and the seller
can earn an additional amount if the seller meets defined performance
criteria.
Fixed price with economic price adjustment (FP-EPA) contract. A type of
contract that is used when the seller's performance period spans a
considerable period of years. It is a fixed price contract with a provision
allowing for predefined final adjustments to the contract price due to
changing conditions, such as inflation, cost increases, or decreases for
commodities. The EPA clause must relate to a reliable financial index that is
used to adjust the final price.
About fees
In procurement jargon, the word fee is synonymous with profit. The fee is
what the seller receives after all the costs have been paid. A fixed fee remains
the same regardless of the level of performance on the contract. Fixed fees
usually are used on cost-reimbursable contracts. Incentive fees can be used to
stimulate performance on schedule, technical, quality, cost, or other types of
performance. They can be used to motivate the seller to deliver early or to
reach performance or quality standards. Award fees are based on a broad set
of subjective criteria. They are used on cost-reimbursable contracts.
Firm fixed price
Most buyers prefer a firm fixed price contract because they know the price
upfront. The buyer and the seller agree on a price for the work. The price
remains the same unless there is a scope change. All risk for cost growth is on
the seller. However, this isn't always the best choice, particularly if the
project scope is still evolving or subject to change.
Fixed price incentive fee
Fixed price incentive fee (FPIF) contracts establish a price ceiling and build
in an incentive fee (profit) for cost, schedule, or technical achievement. The
term "fixed price" can be misleading. When the buyer is incentivizing cost
performance, the buyer and seller establish a cost target, a target fee, and a
share ratio, such as 80/20, 70/30, or something similar. Cost performance
below the target cost earns an incentive fee. Cost performance above the
target cost means the seller relinquishes some of the target fee.


         When a contract has a share ratio for an incentive fee, the first
     number is what the buyer keeps, and the second number is what the
     seller keeps. Both numbers must total 100%. A 70/30 share ratio means
     that if the actual cost comes in under-target by $20,000, the buyer keeps
     $14,000 (70% of 20,000), and the seller gets the remaining $6,000.
Here's an example. Say you have a contract with a target cost of $400,000, a
price ceiling of $460,000, a target fee of $40,000, and an 80/20 share ratio. In
this case, the price ceiling is the fixed price part. Regardless of the total cost,
the buyer won't pay more than $460,000. However, if the seller delivers the
scope for less than $400,000 (target price), the seller gets the target fee of
$40,000 plus 20% of the amount less than $400,000. However, if the cost is
greater than $400,000, the $40,000 fee is reduced by 20% of the amount over
$400,000.
See how this plays out if the actual cost is $425,000.The incentive fee would
be calculated as follows:
   ((Target cost - actual cost) x share ratio) + target fee
   ((400,000 - 425,000) x .2) + 40,000
   (-25,000 x .2) + 40,000 = 35,000

Therefore, the total price of the contract would be
   $425,000 + $35,000 = $460,000

In this case, the price came in right at the ceiling. If the actual price had been
more, the ceiling would have stayed at $460,000, and the seller would have
started to lose some of his fee. The point at which the seller hits the dollar
amount where he has to give back some of the fee is the point of total
assumption.


        This concept of the point of total assumption is something that started
     showing up on the PMP exam a few years ago. It is not in the PMBOK
     Guide. Likely, only one or two questions mention it. It is found only on
     FPIF contracts.
Cost-reimbursable contracts
Cost-reimbursable contracts are used when the scope of work isn't well
defined or is subject to change. This is useful for research and development
work. With this type of contract, the buyer must reimburse the seller for
legitimate costs associated with completing the work, plus a fee. The buyer
and seller agree to a target cost upfront, and fees are calculated from that
target cost. The three main types of cost-reimbursable contracts are
   Cost plus fixed fee
   Cost plus incentive fee
   Cost plus award fee
After some definitions, I'll walk you through a comparison calculation of a
cost plus fixed fee and a cost plus incentive fee.


         Cost-reimbursable contract. A type of contract involving payment
     to the seller for the seller's actual costs, plus a fee typically representing
     the seller's profit. Cost-reimbursable contracts often include incentive
     clauses where if the seller meets or exceeds selected project objectives,
     such as schedule targets or total cost, then the seller receives from the
     buyer an incentive or bonus payment.
Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contract. A type of cost-reimbursable contract
where the buyer reimburses the seller for the seller's allowable costs
(allowable costs are defined by the contract) plus a fixed amount of profit
(fee).
Cost plus incentive fee (CPIF) contract. A type of cost-reimbursable
contract where the buyer reimburses the seller for the seller's allowable costs
(allowable costs are defined by the contract), and the seller earns its profit if it
meets defined performance criteria.
Cost plus award fee (CPAF) contract. A type of cost-reimbursable contract
where the buyer reimburses the seller for the seller's allowable costs
(allowable costs are defined by the contract), but the majority of the fee is
earned based only on the satisfaction of certain broad subjective performance
criteria defined and incorporated into the contract.
A fixed fee puts more risk on the buyer because the seller gets the same fee
regardless of the capability to meet the target cost. Here is an example of how
a cost plus fixed fee calculation would work.
Assume that the target cost is $300,000, and the fixed fee is $20,000.




Now look at the same scenario with a cost plus incentive fee with an 80/20
share ratio.
Like a fixed price incentive fee, the incentive percentage is applied to the
difference between the target cost and the actual cost. By coming in under the
target cost, the seller receives 20% of the difference between target and actual
costs.
In Project 1, 80% of the cost savings between $300,000 and $280,000
remains with the buyer, and 20% (or $4,000) goes to the seller as an
incentive, in addition to the $20,000 fee.




         Sometimes, the fee is expressed as a percentage of the target cost. For
     example, the target cost is $300,000, and the fee is 10%, so the fee target
     is $30,000. The fee is not a percentage of the actual cost; it's a
     percentage of the target cost.
Time and material contracts
Time and material (T&M) contracts are generally used for smaller contracts
when there is not a firm scope of work or the work is for an indefinite period.
Hourly labor rates and material rates are agreed to upfront (this is the fixed
part of the contract), but the amount of time and material are subject to the
needs of the job or the buyer. Generally, expenses are reimbursed at cost.
Many times, this type of contract is used until the scope of work can be well
defined. It may include a not-to-exceed amount.


        Time and material (T&M) contract. A type of contract that's a
     hybrid contractual arrangement containing aspects of both cost-
     reimbursable and fixed price contracts. Time and material contracts
     resemble cost-reimbursable type arrangements in that they have no
     definitive end because the full value of the arrangement is not defined at
     the time of the award. Thus, time and material contracts can grow in
     contract value as if they were cost-reimbursable-type arrangements.
     Conversely, time and material arrangements can also resemble fixed
     price arrangements. For example, the buyer and seller preset the unit
     rates, when both parties agree on the rates for the category of senior
     engineers.

Plan Procurements: Tools and Techniques
The techniques you will apply in this process are
   Determine which items you will make inhouse and which you will
   procure from an outside source.
   Conduct market research to identify the technology and resource
   availability.



        Of course, any time you are working with procurements, you will
     need some expertise in the form of procurement or contracting
     specialists. Make sure you have someone on your team who can help
     you with the legal and contractual issues.
To make or buy: That is the question
Of the many things to consider when deciding to procure project scope, some
decisions are obvious. For example, you might procure goods if your
organization doesn't have the skills necessary to develop the product. Or, in
other cases, you might have the skills but not the capacity, or you don't have
enough resources to get the work done in a timely manner.
Sometimes, the reasons to keep work inhouse are fairly obvious. For
example, if the item you need is your organization's core competency -- a
fundamental knowledge or an ability that the organization possesses -- you
have the resources, and you can do it efficiently and inexpensively. Perhaps
proprietary reasons determine keeping work inhouse.
The following table summarizes standard reasons to make or buy scope:
Reasons to Make             Reasons to Buy
Less costly                 Less costly
Use existing capacity       Use supplier skills
Maintain direct control     Small volume requirement
Maintain design secrecy     Limited inhouse capacity
Develop a new competency    Maintain supplier relations
Company's core competency Transfer risk
 Available staff             Readily available

 For certain products or services, you may have the option to keep the work
 inhouse or to outsource it. You will want to do some market research to help
 you make a good decision.
 Market research
 For those deliverables or services that can be either purchased or developed
 inhouse, market research can be used to help determine the market conditions
 that will inform your make-or-buy decision. For deliverables or services that
 you know you will purchase or outsource, market research can help you
 identify emerging technologies, qualified vendors, and alternative
 approaches.
 Information gathered from market research can help refine the information in
 the statement of work (SOW), the procurement management plan, and the
 source selection criteria.

Plan Procurements: Outputs
 After deciding which elements to make and which to buy and selecting the
 contract type, you can document your procurement management plan,
 develop procurement documents and the SOW, and define your source
 selection criterion.

 The procurement management plan
 A component of the overall project management plan, the procurement
 management plan describes how all facets of the procurement will be
 conducted. For small projects with simple purchases, a paragraph in the
 project management plan will suffice. For complex procurements, or when a
 project has numerous procurements or high-risk procurements, the plan
 should be more detailed and robust. The following components are fairly
 common for a procurement management plan, but obviously, the needs of the
 project will dictate the contents:
    Type of contract for each procurement
    Roles, responsibilities, and limits of decision-making authority on
    procurements
   Relevant policies, procedures, guidelines, and templates
   Strategy for managing and integrating multiple procurements
   Strategy for integrating procurements into the rest of the project
   Procurement assumptions and constraints
   Strategy for handling long lead items
   Procurement milestones for each procurement
   Reporting requirements for sellers
   Required bonds, warranties, insurance, licenses, and permits
   Format for the SOW
   How and if independent cost estimates will be used
   A list of prequalified sellers
   Selection criteria and weighting
   Processes for managing contracts
   Process for procurement audits
   Risk management issues
Figure 2-1 shows a sample procurement management template.
The source selection criteria listed in the procurement management plan will
be used to score seller proposals and should be specific to the item(s) being
procured. Here are some items to keep in mind while you establish source
selection criteria:
   Understanding of need
   Overall cost (includes operating and maintenance costs)
   Financial capacity
   Technical capability and approach
   Management approach
   Risk sharing
   Production capacity
     Business type (for example, women-or minority-owned or small business)
     Past performance and references
     Warranty
     Intellectual property and proprietary rights




Figure 2-1: Sample procurement management plan.
Source selection criteria
The criteria that are essential to being able to perform the contract are
screening criteria. If a proposal doesn't demonstrate that the seller meets the
criteria, then the seller is screened out of the process. Examples include
needing specific licenses, having a minimum number of years of experience,
or being financially sound. U.S. federal government contracts require that the
source selection criteria be published. However, many commercial
procurements do not publish the selection criteria.
Some criteria can be set up as a weighting system. In this case, you identify
the most relevant criteria and then weight them relative to one another. Here
are the steps involved, along with a simple example:
1. Establish the criteria you will evaluate proposals against.
  For this scenario, you decide on cost, references, and schedule.
2. Rank the criteria in order of importance.
  You decide on schedule, cost, and then references.
3. Establish a relative numeric weight for each criterion.
    * Schedule = 50%
    * Cost = 30%
    * References = 20%
4. Determine how you will objectively score proposals.
  Table 2-1 shows how proposal information might be scored.




5. Score the proposal.
  You determine scores by comparing the information in the seller's proposal
  against the Proposal Weighting Criteria.
6. Multiply each vendor's scores by its weight to get a rating, and then
  sum the ratings.
  Table 2-2 shows the calculations.




7. Select the proposal with the highest total rating.

Procurement statement of work
The procurement statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of the
work to be done. It describes the deliverables in sufficient detail to allow
sellers to determine whether they can complete the work, but it doesn't define
how the work must be done. The SOW can be very simple or very complex,
depending on the needs of the project. Because it is the meat of the contract,
it needs to be clear, concise, and not open to interpretation.
You might see the following types of elements in a procurement SOW:
   Specifications
   Performance requirements
   Support work, such as training and documentation
   Quality requirements
   Reporting requirements
The specifications, performance requirements, and support work will be
defined and elaborated as part of the project scope definition (discussed in
Book III, Chapter 2). The quality requirements are defined as part of the Plan
Quality Management process (Book IV, Chapter 2). Reporting requirements
should mirror the reporting needs for the overall project. Planning for
 communication and reporting is discussed in Book IV, Chapter 4.

 Procurement documents
 Procurement documents make up the package you send out to potential
 sellers. This package can be called a bid, tender, or quotation when the
 primary deciding factor is price. When the buyer is looking for a technical
 solution and is weighing factors other than price, you might hear the term
 proposal. Common terms for procurement documents are
    Request for Quote (RFQ)
    Invitation for Bid (IFB)
    Request for Proposal (RFP)
    Invitation for Negotiation
    Tender Notice
 The procurement documents contain the SOW, instructions on how and when
 to respond, and any required contractual provisions.

Key Terms
 Procurement and contracting have their own language. Many terms here have
 specific meanings when applied to contracting. Make sure you are familiar
 with how these words are used in the context of project procurements.
    Agreement
    Contract
    Fee
    Cost
    Price
    Fixed price contract
    Firm fixed price (FFP)
    Fixed price incentive fee (FPIF)
    Fixed price with economic price adjustment (FP-EPA)
Cost-reimbursable contract
Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
Cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)
Cost plus award fee (CPAF)
Time and material (T&M) contract
Procurement management plan
Screening criteria
Weighting criteria
Procurement statement of work (SOW)
Procurement documents
Request for proposal (RFP)
Request for quote (RFQ)
Chapter Summary
 Here are the main ideas to take away from this chapter.
    For purposes of the PMP exam, procurements are large and complex,
    requiring knowledge of contracts and legal terms.
    Procurements need to be integrated with the nonprocured project work,
    other procurements, and the organization's operations.
    The three basic families of contracts are fixed price, cost-reimbursable,
    and time and material. You can include an incentive fee on fixed price and
    cost-reimbursable contracts. Cost-reimbursable contracts can also have a
    fixed fee or an award fee.
    The price of procurement is the cost plus the fee. Price = Cost + Fee
    Fixed fee contracts are favored when the scope of the project is clearly
    defined and not subject to change. Fixed fee contracts include firm fixed
    price (FFP), fixed price incentive fee (FPIF), and fixed price with
    economic price adjustment (FP-EPA).
    Cost-reimbursable contracts are used when the scope of work is not well
    defined or is subject to change. The three main types of cost-reimbursable
    contracts are cost plus fixed fee (CPFF), cost plus incentive fee (CPIF),
    and cost plus award fee (CPAF).
    Time and material (T&M) contracts are generally used for smaller
    contracts when there is not a firm scope of work, or when the work is
    scheduled for an indefinite period.
     A "make or buy" assessment will let you know which items you must buy,
    items you must make, and those items you can make or buy.
    The procurement management plan describes how all facets of the
    procurement are to be conducted.
    The procurement statement of work describes what will be purchased but
    not how it will be developed.
                          Prep Test
                      Multiple Choice
1. Which of the following is a reason to procure scope?
 A    Maintain direct control.
 B    Maintain design secrecy.
 C    Small volume requirement.
 D    Develop a new competency.

2. Which type of contract places the most risk on the buyer?
 A    FFP
 B    FPIF
 C    CPIF
 D    CPFF

3. Which type of contract allows for a final adjustment to price
  because of inflation or changes in the cost of commodities?
 A    FP-EPA
 B    FPIF
 C    CPFF
 D    T&M

4. The point at which the seller has to give back some of the fee is
  called
 A    The refund point
 B    The point of absorption
 C    The point of total assumption
 D    The fee assumption point
5. You just won a contract to provide a telecommunications
  infrastructure to a large company with several locations. You
  have a cost plus fixed fee (CPFF) contract. The target cost is
  $200,000. The target profit is 10%. The final costs come in at
  $150,000. What is the total price for the contract?
 A    $170,000
 B    $150,000
 C    $200,000
 D    $220,000

6. You're doing the close-out for a project to design an airport. The
  contract is a cost plus incentive fee (CPIF) contract. The target
  cost is $200,000, with a 10% target profit. The final cost was
  $180,000. The incentive split is 80/20. How much is the total
  contract price?
 A    $200,000
 B    $196,000
 C    $184,000
 D    $204,000

7. Which document records a narrative description of work for a
  procurement?
 A    A statement of work
 B    A procurement management plan
 C    Contract terms and conditions
 D    The scope statement

8. If you have a complex procurement that isn't well defined and
  you're looking for a vendor to solve the problem and come up
  with a solution, what is the best type of bid document to
  prepare?
 A    RFP
 B    IFB
 C   RFQ
 D   IFN




1. What is the total for company A?
 A   4.1
 B   3.75
 C   11
 D   3.15

2. Which company should be selected based on the weighted
  scoring?
 A   Company A
 B   Company B
 C   Company C
 D   Company D
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Small volume requirement. If you need only a few items, it's best
  to procure rather than manufacture. Review the section Plan
  Procurements: Tools and Techniques.
2. D. CPFF. A cost plus fixed fee contract reimburses the seller for
  expenses, and the fee does not change based on performance.
  Look at Cost-reimbursable contracts.
3. A. FP-EPA. A fixed price economic price adjustment contract
  allows for adjustment because of changes in price based on an
  agreed-upon index. Go to Fixed price contracts.
4. C. The point of total assumption. The point of total assumption is
  where the seller starts to return some of the fee. Look at Fixed price
  contracts.
5. A. $170,000. The cost was $150,000. The fee was fixed at 10% of
  the target: that is, $20,000. Thus, the cost plus the fee is $170,000.
  See the information in Cost-reimbursable contracts.
6. D. $204,000. The final cost is $180,000. The target cost is
  $200,000 with a 10% target fee, or $20,000. The 20% share ratio is
  (200,000 - 180,000) x 20% = $4,000. Therefore, the final price is
  $180,000 + 20,000 + 4,000 = $204,000. Check out Cost-
  reimbursable contracts.
7. A. A statement of work. The procurement statement of work (SOW)
  has a narrative description of the work that needs to be done. You
  will find information on the SOW in the section on Procurement
  statement of work.
8. A. RFP. An RFP is used for proposals that don't have a firm scope
  and need help solving a problem. This is discussed in Procurement
  documents.
                           Scenario 1
1. B. 3.75. The score for schedule is 2.4. The score for cost is .75.
  The score for references is .6. This sums to 3.75. You can review
  this information in Source selection criteria.
2. C. Company C. The score for A is 3.75, the score for B is 3.15, the
  score for C is 4.1, and the score for D is 2.65. C has the highest
  score. Review Source selection criteria.
  Chapter 3: Who Are All These
  People? Planning Stakeholder
          Management
Exam Objective
    Perform stakeholder management planning to ensure effective
    engagement of stakeholders throughout the project.



 Many a project has met its demise by failing to manage stakeholders
 effectively. When I introduce the process of identifying stakeholders in Book
 II, Chapter 3, I discuss how to conduct a stakeholder analysis to assess how
 much influence each stakeholder has on a project and whether that influence
 was favorable toward the project -- or not so favorable.
 In this chapter, I show you how to manage stakeholders and their level and
 type of engagement on a project. You'll probably encounter some
 stakeholders whom you want to encourage to support your project, and you'll
 likely also find others whom you'll be happy with if they just don't actively
 resist your project.
 Because of the potential numerous stakeholders with a wide range of
 influence, it is imperative to engage in careful upfront planning to ensure
 effective engagement of all stakeholders.
                Quick Assessment
1. Name three components of the project management plan that can
  be helpful in planning stakeholder management.
2. Which element of the project management plan identifies project
  team reporting structure that can be used for managing
  stakeholders?
3. Organizational culture is an example of a(n) ______ ______
  ______ that influences your stakeholder management plan.
4. The stakeholder register from a prior project is an example of a(n)
  ______ ______ ______ that can help you create a stakeholder
  management plan.
5. Meeting with people who have technical experience in your
  project's technical field is an example of ______ ______ ______.
6. A stakeholder who is ambivalent about your project is said to be
  ______.
7. A stakeholder who has no knowledge of your project is classified
  as ______.
8. In which document would you record your strategy for
  management stakeholder involvement?
9. The main tool you have to influence stakeholders is ______.
10. (True or False). An external vendor on your project is a
  stakeholder.
                          Answers
1. Project life cycle, schedule, communications management plan.
  Components of the project management plan that are helpful in
  planning stakeholder management include the project life cycle,
  schedule, communications management plan, procurement
  management plan, quality management plan, and human resources
  management plan. You may come up with a different list. All
  aspects of the project management plan should be reviewed during
  the Plan Stakeholder Management process. For more, see Plan
  Stakeholder Management: Inputs.
2. Human resources management plan. The human resources
  management plan contains the project team resources, their roles
  and responsibilities, reporting structure, and the staffing
  management plan. This is discussed in the Plan Stakeholder
  Management: Inputs section.
3. Enterprise environmental factor. Organizational culture is an
  enterprise environmental factor that limits your options when
  developing a stakeholder management plan. See the Plan
  Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques section.
4. Organizational process asset. One of the organizational process
  assets that you can use from a previous project is the stakeholder
  register. Read about the organizational process assets in the Plan
  Stakeholder Management: Inputs section.
5. Utilizing expert judgment. Meeting with people who have expertise
  in the technical field is an example of utilizing expert judgment.
  Look over the information in the Plan Stakeholder Management:
  Tools and Techniques section.
6. Neutral. I discuss stakeholder categories in the Plan Stakeholder
  Management: Tools and Techniques section.
7. Unaware. See the information in the Plan Stakeholder
  Management: Tools and Techniques section.
 8 Stakeholder management plan. The stakeholder management plan
   is used to document your approach to managing stakeholder
   engagement. Learn more about this in the Plan Stakeholder
   Management: Outputs section.
 9. Communication. Communication is the best method to work with
   stakeholders and manage their engagement level. You can see
   more about this topic in Plan Stakeholder Management: Outputs.
 10. True. A stakeholder is an individual, a group, or an organization
   that may affect, be affected by, or perceive itself to affected by a
   decision, an activity, or an outcome of a project. Read more about it
   in Plan Stakeholder Management: Inputs.

Plan Stakeholder Management
 As you plan on how best to manage stakeholder engagement, you will want
 to consider
    Which stakeholders are active in each phase of the project lifecycle
    Whether a stakeholder is a supporter of your project or a resistor
    The information each stakeholder needs and the best way to impart that


   information          Plan Stakeholder Management. Developing
   appropriate management strategies to effectively engage stakeholders
   throughout the project lifecycle, based on the analysis of their needs,
   interests, and potential impact on project success.

 Plan Stakeholder Management: Inputs
 You should consider each component of the project management plan to help
 you plan for effective stakeholder engagement. For example:
   Project lifecycle: Informs you about the activities, processes, expertise,
   deliverables, and approvals needed in each phase of the project.
   Traditional waterfall lifecycles require a different method of engaging
   stakeholders than an agile lifecycle.
    Schedule: Identifies which resources will be active in the project at any
   given time.
    Communications management plan: Describes who needs information,
   the type of information they need, and when they need it.
   Procurement management plan: Identifies vendors, contractors, and
   other external stakeholders that you will need to determine how best to
   work with.
   Quality management plan: The quality management plan can highlight
   quality requirements, measurements, and techniques that may require
   special attention, such as sending quality results to external regulatory
   agencies or to an external customer.
   Human resource management plan: Identifies the project team
   resources, reporting relationships, and roles and responsibilities.
The stakeholder register records stakeholder identification information and
the stakeholder category, such as supporter, neutral, or resistor. You will use
the register to create a stakeholder engagement assessment.


        The organizational culture and politics are very influential in how
     you can manage stakeholder engagement. For instance, in a highly
     bureaucratic organization, you need to make sure you have plenty of
     documentation as well as a communications management plan that takes
     into consideration the multiple layers of information and approval.
     Conversely, in a lean and flat organization, stakeholder engagement may
     be much less formal.


        Reviewing lessons learned, stakeholder registers, and stakeholder
     management plans from prior projects can help you create an effective
     stakeholder management plan for the current project.

Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and
Techniques
To create an effective stakeholder management plan, you need to meet with
people with expertise in several areas:
    Technical: People with expertise in the technical fields involved in the
   project can help you understand the stakeholders who will be involved
   during each phase of the lifecycle, what their concerns will be, and how
   they can contribute to the project.
    Management: Management can let you know the types of reports that are
   needed and provide insight into senior management concerns as well as
   some of the politics you need to be aware of to manage stakeholders
   effectively.
    Previous project managers or team members: People who have worked
   on similar projects will be able to tell you where the pitfalls are and what
   to watch out for on the project. They can provide valuable advice and
   inform you of techniques that were effective in the past.



        Analyzing the current level of stakeholder engagement and the
     desired level of stakeholder engagement is a useful way to start
     developing a stakeholder management plan. You can start with the
     power/support grid (see Book II, Chapter 3) and note the current
     category of each stakeholder to determine whether you want to take
     steps to increase that stakeholder's support for your project.
Another technique for mapping stakeholder engagement is to classify each
stakeholder, each stakeholder's current level of engagement, and the desired
level of engagement. One way of assessing engagement is the following:
Unaware: The stakeholder is not aware of the project nor its outcomes.
   Resistant: The stakeholder is aware of the project but does not support it.
   Neutral: The stakeholder is ambivalent about the project and its
   outcomes.
   Supportive: The stakeholder feels favorably about the project and its
   outcomes.
   Leading: The stakeholder is actively engaged in promoting the project.
You can document the steps that you will take to move stakeholders from
resistant to neutral or unaware to supportive (and so forth) in a matrix called a
Stakeholder Engagement Assessment Matrix. Table 3-1 shows a sample
Stakeholder Engagement Matrix that documents the stakeholder classification
before (B) and after (A) the stakeholder engagement strategies are employed.




Table 3-1 shows that prior to implementing a stakeholder management
strategy, Manny was unaware of the project, and that the desired outcome is
that after the plan is implemented, he will be supportive. Jocelyn is resistant,
and the desired "after" classification is neutral. This type of matrix can be
recorded as part of the stakeholder management plan, or it can be used to
develop the approach documented in the stakeholder management plan.

Plan Stakeholder Management: Outputs
The strategies and steps you take to engage stakeholders effectively are
documented in a stakeholder management plan, which is a component of the
project management plan.
A stakeholder management plan can be very high-level. For example, you can
develop a strategy based on the grid cell that you placed your stakeholders
when analyzing their engagement: say, how to move a stakeholder from high
power/low support to high power/high support. If you used the stakeholder
analysis model of unaware up through leading, you can document strategies
and steps to get from neutral to supportive or even leading.
For the running childcare center example, you might develop different
strategies for internal stakeholders (such as the sponsor, team members, and
employees) than you would for external stakeholders (such as vendors and
the city).
You can also assess strategies depending on the type of role, such as leader,
supporter, and neutral. The needs of the project will help you determine the
best approach. The four things to remember about developing stakeholder
engagement strategies are the following: Be proactive. Take time upfront
to determine how to make the most of your supportive stakeholders and also
how to minimize the potential damage from your resistor stakeholders.
   Be sensible. Some of your strategies may be politically sensitive. Use
   discretion on what you write down versus how much you consider as a
   public document.
   Use communication. The main tool with which to influence stakeholders
   and manage their expectations is communication. Information from the
   stakeholder engagement plan strategy will feed into the communications
   management plan (see Book IV, Chapter 4) and managing stakeholder
   engagement (see Book VI, Chapter 3).
   Gain support. Ensure your stakeholders' expectations align with the
   project and identify strategies to engage stakeholders in supporting your
   project.
Figure 3-1 shows a sample stakeholder management plan template.
Figure 3-1: Sample stakeholder management plan.


  You likely will need to circle back and make some updates to your
  stakeholder register, communications management plan, and other project
  management plan components and the documents.


Key Terms
  I go over some stakeholder management terms at the end of the chapter on
  Identifying Project Stakeholders (Book II, Chapter 3). There are a few new
  terms in this chapter associated with classifying stakeholder engagement:
  Unaware
     Resistant
     Neutral
     Supportive
     Leading
     Stakeholder management plan
                            Planning summary
Books III, IV, and V are all about planning. The planning process group makes up 24 percent
of the questions on the test; in other words, there will be 48 planning questions. For these
questions, you will need to be adept at the following techniques:      Planning for change
Book III, Chapter 1
   Planning the project Book III, Chapter 1
   Gathering requirements Book III, Chapter 2
   Creating a WBS Book III, Chapter 2
   Defining scope Book III, Chapter 2
   Estimating duration, costs, and budgets Book III, Chapter 3; Book IV, Chapter 1
   Planning quality Book IV, Chapter 2
   Planning for resources Book IV, Chapter 3
   Planning communications Book IV, Chapter 4
   Planning for risk Book V, Chapter 1
   Planning for procurement Book V, Chapter 2
You will also need to know the elements of and the purpose of the following:
   Change management plan Book III, Chapter 1
   The project management plan Book III, Chapter 1
   Quality management plan Book IV, Chapter 2
   Communication management plan Book IV, Chapter 4
   Risk management plan Book V, Chapter 1
   Procurement management plan Book V, Chapter 2
Chapter Summary
 Here are the main ideas to take away from this chapter.
    You need to review all elements of the project management plan, along
    with the stakeholder register, to determine the best way to manage
    stakeholder engagement throughout the project life cycle.
    Enterprise environmental factors, such as organizational structure and
    politics, influence how you can manage stakeholder engagement.
     Seek expert guidance to determine current and desired future engagement
    levels of stakeholders.
     Document your strategy in a stakeholder management plan.
                         Prep Test
                      Multiple Choice
1. Which element of the project management plan will help you
  identify requirements or measurements that need to be sent to
  outside agencies or external customers?
 A Procurement management plan B Communications
 management plan C Quality management plan D Project life
 cycle 2. Which input records information on stakeholder identification
 information and their category?
 A Enterprise environmental factors B Stakeholder register C
 Stakeholder management plan D Lessons learned 3. Which two
 enterprise environmental factors should you pay special attention to
 when developing your stakeholder management plan?
 A Organizational culture and politics B Politics and market
 environment C Organizational culture and lessons learned D
 Information from prior projects and politics 4. A stakeholder who does
 not support your project is classified as
 A A detriment
 B Neutral
 C A resistor
 D A threat

5. Which stakeholder classification actively promotes a project?
 A   Supportive
 B   Proactive
 C   High interest/high influence D   Leading

6. Jared has been asking for a faster network for the past 18
  months. You are leading a project to upgrade the network to the
  latest technology. This will increase the speed and reliability.
 Which classification of stakeholder is Jared considered?
 A    Leader
 B    Neutral
 C    High opportunity D   Supportive

7. You are leading a project to replace the phone system and the
  Acme Voice Network vendor to install a new phone system with
  the latest technology. This will increase the speed and reliability
  of your data and voice networks. Which classification of
  stakeholder is Acme Voice Network considered?
 A    A resistor
 B    A follower
 C    Neutral
 D    Unaware

8. If you have a complex procurement that isn't well defined and
  you're looking for a vendor to solve the problem and come up
  with a solution, what type of stakeholder is the vendor?
 A    A resistor
 B    A follower
 C    Neutral
 D    A supporter

                           Scenario 1
Use the following table to answer Questions 1 and 2.




1. Which stakeholder will need the most work, according to the
 table?
 A   John
 B   Lulu
 C   Tessa
 D   Avery

2. Who will help you champion the project?
 A   John
 B   Lulu
 C   Tessa
 D   Avery
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Quality management plan. A quality management plan contains
  quality requirements that may need specific stakeholder input or
  review. Review the section Plan Stakeholder Management: Inputs.
2. B. Stakeholder register. The stakeholder register lists stakeholder
  identification information and their category. Look at Plan
  Stakeholder Management: Inputs.
3. A. Organizational culture and politics. Organizational culture and
  politics both limit your options for managing stakeholders. Go to
  Plan Stakeholder Management: Inputs.
4. C. A resistor. Resistors are aware of your project but do not support
  it. Look at the Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and
  Techniques section.
5. D. Leading. Leading stakeholders take an active role in
  championing and promoting your project. See the information in the
  Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques section.
6. D. Supportive. Jared feels favorably about the project. Check out
  Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques.
7. A. A resistor. The vendor who is being replaced is likely not in
  support of your project to bring in a new vendor and new
  technology. You will find information on the stakeholder
  engagement matrix in the section on Plan Stakeholder
  Management: Tools and Techniques.
8. D. A supporter. A vendor that is helping you solve a problem feels
  favorably about the project and is supportive of it. This is discussed
  in the Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques
  section.

                           Scenario 1
1. A. John. This matrix shows that you expect to move John from
  resistant to supportive. That generally requires more work than
  moving from resistant to neutral. You can review this information in
  the Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques section.
2. C. Tessa. A leader helps champion and promote your project.
  Review the Plan Stakeholder Management: Tools and Techniques
  section.
Book VI
Managing Your Project




        For more, read the article on executing knowledge and skills at
www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book VI: Managing Your Project

Book VI: Chapter 1: Managing the Work and Assuring Quality
   Knowledge and Skills for the Executing Processes

   Direct and Manage Project Work

   Perform Quality Assurance

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VI: Chapter 2: Managing the People Side of Your Project
   Acquire Project Team

   Develop Project Team

   Manage Project Team

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VI: Chapter 3: Getting the Word Out to Stakeholders and
 Contractors
   Manage Communications

   Manage Stakeholder Engagement

   Conduct Procurements

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary
  Chapter 1: Managing the Work
     and Assuring Quality
Exam Objectives
    Execute project activities defined in the project management plan to
    create project deliverables on time and within budget.
    Follow the change management plan with regards to processes and
    procedures and implement approved changes.
    Actively employ risk management techniques as documented in the
    risk management plan to minimize the impact of risk on the project.
    Follow the quality management plan, using appropriate tools and
    techniques to assure work and scope meet the quality requirements
    and standards.



 At this point, you move from the planning processes into the executing
 processes. You are now implementing your project management plan. The
 executing processes are where the majority of the project work occurs. As
 such, it is also the most reliant upon the nature of the work being performed.
 Therefore, there isn't a lot of specific guidance I can give you, nor is there a
 lot of specific information that PMI can test on. Nonetheless, these questions
 account for 30 percent of the exam questions. In other words, 60 questions on
 the exam will be from the eight processes in the Executing process group.
 This chapter starts off with a look at the cross-cutting knowledge and skills
 you are most likely to employ in the Executing process group. Then I move
 into the Direct and Manage Project Work process. That process is integrative
 and pulls together all the work from the other processes to create the project
 deliverables.
 Next, you review the Perform Quality Assurance process. This can be a
 misunderstood process. I like to think of it as the "management" part of
 quality management. Oftentimes, this process is not done within the project
 team. There might be a separate department -- such as Quality Management
or Quality Improvement -- that acts as a third party to conduct quality audits.
The heart of this process is about auditing the performance of the project and
then ensuring that the team is using the policies, procedures, methods, and
techniques identified in the quality management plan. The intention is to
improve the performance of the project, the processes used in the project, and
the product.
                 Quick Assessment
1. Approved changes are implemented in which process?
2. Change requests include corrective actions, ______ ______, and
  defect repairs.
3. To rank options for process improvement in order from most
  impactful to least impactful, what type of chart would you use?
4. Looking for ways to remove nonvalue-adding activities is part of
  ______ ______.
5. (True/False). Process improvement is part of the Perform Quality
  Control process.
6. (True/False). Quality audits can be used to communicate best
  practices throughout the organization.
7. Documented direction for executing the project work to bring
  expected future performance of the project work in line with the
  project management plan is called ______ ______.
8. Determining whether the quality metrics identified in the quality
  management plan are appropriate for the project is part of which
  process?
9. In Perform Quality Assurance, you would use a(n) ______-______
  ______ to determine whether the cost to improve a process is
  worth it.
10. A permission and direction, typically written, to begin work on a
  specific schedule activity or work package or control account is
  known as ______ ______.
                          Answers
1. Direct and Manage Project Work. Changes are authorized in the
  Perform Integrated Change Control process and implemented in
  the Direct and Manage Project Work process. Read more about this
  in Direct and Manage Project Work.
2. Preventive actions. Preventive actions are a type of change
  request. You can read about this in Direct and Manage Project
  Work: Inputs.
3. Pareto chart. A Pareto chart ranks options for process
  improvement in order from most impactful to least impactful. Look
  over the information in Perform Quality Assurance: Tools and
  Techniques.
4. Process improvement. Process improvement can improve project
  performance by identifying nonvalue-adding activities. This is
  explained in the section on Process analysis.
5. False. Process improvement is part of the Perform Quality
  Assurance process, not the Perform Quality Control process. You
  will see this in the section on Process analysis.
6. True. Quality audits can be used to communicate best practices or
  suggest improvements. Quality audits are discussed in the section
  Quality audits.
7. Corrective action. Corrective action is a type of change request. I
  discuss this in Direct and Manage Project Work: Inputs.
8. Perform Quality Assurance. Part of quality assurance is making
  sure the metrics you are using are appropriate and effective. Look
  over the information in Table 1-2: How Quality Assurance Monitors
  Project Quality.
9. Cost-benefit analysis. It is not useful to spend more improving a
  process than the benefit it will provide. This is discussed in Perform
  Quality Assurance: Tools and Techniques.
 10. Work authorization. Work authorization is given to start work on a
   deliverable or activity during project execution. I discuss this in the
   section Direct and Manage Project Work: Tools and Techniques.


Knowledge and Skills for the
Executing Processes
 Because the majority of the project work is completed in this process group,
 you will need to employ a lot of the cross-cutting knowledge and skills.
 Think about how the following can be used as you learn the information in
 this minibook:
    Active listening
    Conflict resolution techniques
    Cultural sensitivity and diversity
    Decision-making techniques
    Facilitation
    Information management tools, techniques, and methods
    Leadership tools and techniques
    Negotiating
    Oral and written communication techniques, channels, and applications
    Presentation tools and techniques
    Prioritization/time management
    Problem-solving tools and techniques
    Relationship management
    Targeting communications to intended audiences (for example, team,
    stakeholders, and customers)
    Team motivation methods
         Questions in the Executing process group account for 30 percent of
      the exam. Although there will be many questions about the tools,
      techniques, and outputs, there will also be quite a few questions about
      the cross-cutting skills!


Direct and Manage Project Work
 Carrying out the work in the project management plan is all about integrating
 the various plans and activities of the project. A lot of your time is spent
 analyzing information and coordinating your team members' actions. While
 managing the work, you need to be flexible and nimble to respond
 appropriately to the day-to-day situations, issues, and risks that arise. You
 will have to call on your interpersonal skills to be an effective leader. During
 this process, you will also be implementing approved changes to the project
 management plan. The process of getting changes approved is in the
 Monitoring and Controlling process group. After the changes are approved,
 they are implemented in this process.


         Direct and Manage Project Work. Leading and performing the
      work defined in the project management plan and implementing
      approved changes to achieve the project's objectives.
 Notice that there are no processes in the Executing process group for scope,
 schedule, cost, or risk. (For a list of the processes in the Executing process
 group, see Book I, Chapter 4.) The underlying assumption is that these are so
 tightly connected that they are the nexus of the Integration process of Direct
 and Manage Project Work. In the start of the planning processes, you can plan
 your scope independent of your schedule and cost, but you can't execute
 scope independent of the schedule or the budget or risk events. Therefore,
 you can consider this Integration process the direct intersection of those
 knowledge areas and all the others as well. Table 1-1 shows the execution
 activities you will be conducting arranged by knowledge area.

 Table 1-1 Executing Activities
                Creating deliverablesMeeting project requirementsProviding information on deliverable
Scope           statusRequesting scope changesRepairing any defective products or resultsImplementing
                corrective or preventive actions regarding deliverables
                Performing activities as defined in the scheduleRefining duration estimatesProviding
Time            status information on the duration and forecasts for completion datesRequesting changes
                to the scheduleImplementing corrective or preventive actions regarding the schedule
                Committing costsExpending resourcesTracking cost informationProviding status
                information regarding expenses committed and incurredRefining cost estimatesProviding
Cost
                forecast information for future expendituresRequesting changes to the
                budgetImplementing corrective or preventive actions regarding the budget
                Ensuring the quality process is being implemented as plannedEnsuring the planned
                quality process is effectiveImplementing quality auditsSharing good practicesIdentifying
Quality
                and documenting quality gapsImproving process effectivenessRequesting changes to the
                quality process
                Acquiring project staffTraining team membersManaging team performanceEnhancing and
Human
                improving team performanceMentoring and coaching team membersProviding feedback to
Resources
                team membersProblem solvingResolving conflicts
                Reporting work performance resultsDistributing information as indicated in the
Communication
                communications management planDocumenting and distributing lessons learned
                Implementing risk response plansProviding information regarding risk statusManaging
Risk
                resources assigned to risk activities

                Releasing procurement documentsConducting bid conferencesApplying source selection
Procurement
                criteriaAwarding contracts
                Interfacing with internal and external stakeholdersManaging stakeholder
Stakeholders
                engagementResolving issues


You can see that even though there isn't any specific information about the
product, you are doing a heck of a lot of product work as well as project
work! If you use this table to help you conceptualize all the work of the
project, you can better understand the context of questions on the exam.

Direct and Manage Project Work: Inputs
Most of what you work with when creating deliverables is following the
guidance of the project management plan, which is an important input to this
process. You are subject to the organizational processes and constraints. The
most common ones to keep in mind are
       Organizational policies
       Procedures
       Work guidelines
       Information from past projects
       Organizational infrastructure
   Information systems
Approved change requests are also inputs to the Direct and Manage Project
Work process. The PMBOK Guide uses the term "change request" as an
umbrella to encompass not only a request to change some aspect of the
product or project, but also corrective action, preventive action, and defect
repairs. There are specific definitions for each of those terms.


        Change Request. A formal proposal to modify any document,
     deliverable, or baseline.
Corrective Action. An intentional activity that realigns the performance of
the project work with the project management plan.
Preventive Action. An intentional activity that ensures that the future
performance of the project work is aligned with the project management plan.
Defect. An imperfection or deficiency in a project component where that
component does not meet its requirements or specifications and needs to be
either repaired or replaced.
Defect Repair. An intentional activity to modify a nonconforming product or
product component.
You will generally see change requests as an output from the Monitoring and
Control processes, and some of the Executing processes. They are inputs to
the Perform Integrated Change Control process, where they are analyzed to
determine whether they should be accepted, rejected, or deferred. The Direct
and Manage Project Work process is where the approved change requests
come to be implemented. Figure 1-1 shows where change requests come
from.
Figure 1-1: Seeing where change requests come from.


  Direct and Manage Project Work: Tools and
  Techniques
  The work in this process is accomplished by the expert judgment on your
  team. Your team members, including any vendors, have the technical
  expertise and experience to complete the work. You will also use the
  supporting information systems to accomplish work.
As the project manager, you'll be busy applying your expertise with the
following types of activities:
   Implementing policies and procedures: All work needs to be
   accomplished according to company policy. Think about safety policies,
   quality policies, human resource policies, and the like.
    Making sure team members have work authorization and are using
   approved methods of accomplishing work: If you think about managing
   a large project with multiple vendors doing work, you want to make sure
   that you maintain visibility and control of when work starts and how it
   progresses. A work authorization system is designed to do that.


            Work Authorization: A permission and direction, typically
   written, to begin work on a specific schedule activity or work package or
   control account. It is a method for sanctioning project work to ensure that
   the work is done by the identified organization, at the right time, and in the
   proper sequence.
   Ensuring a common understanding of the work: One of the most
   frustrating events that can happen on a project is to have team members
   doing their best to meet the project objectives but not having the same
   understanding of what that means. Part of your job is to make sure
   everyone has the same understanding of the work that needs to be done
   and also that everyone understands the prioritization of the work so they
   can manage their time effectively.
    Enabling: A big part of your job is enabling the team members to perform
   their work. This includes removing barriers, solving problems, and
   fostering communication among team members.
    Managing interfaces: A large project has many interfaces, both internal
   as well as outside the organization. Internal interfaces can include
   interfacing with operations, with other projects, and inside the project.
   External interfaces can be almost anything from regulatory and
   government agencies to the public to suppliers.
   Implementing risk management actions: While executing the project,
   you will implement planned risk responses, such as taking mitigating
   actions or transferring risk via procurement. You may also need to
  implement a contingency plan if a risk event occurs.
   Making decisions: Regardless of the decision-making process you use,
  your job is to make decisions that impact the project. Most project
  managers will consult with their team members and interview stakeholders
  before making decisions, but a big part of your everyday job is making
  decisions, whether they are little decisions or major decisions that impact
  the entire project.



       Use a decision log to keep track of your decisions. It can be
    frustrating to make a decision in a team meeting and then revisit the
    same decision months later because no one can remember what the team
    decided on. A decision log tracks the decision, the impacted parties, the
    date, and any comments. It can also log approval if the decision needs
    buy-in from other stakeholders.


       Meetings are an integral part of any project. You hold meetings to
    both inform stakeholders and to get information from them. You can
    hold meetings to brainstorm, evaluate options, and resolve problems and
    issues. You can also use meetings to make decisions about the product or
    the project.
Best practices for meeting management include
   Make sure that all the appropriate stakeholders and decision makers are at
  the meeting.
   Communicate the purpose of the meeting.
   Have an agenda.
  Manage participation so that all meeting attendees have time to interact,
  ask questions, discuss options, and so forth.
   Take notes or minutes.
   Document and follow up on action items and issues.

Direct and Manage Project Work: Outputs
  The outputs of executing the project work are fairly logical. You have your
  deliverables and the work performance data. You can see in Figure 1-2 that
  work performance information is an input to nine Monitoring and Controlling
  processes.
  Some specific definitions are associated with deliverables and work
  performance information. Take a look at them to make sure you understand
  what PMI means by these terms.




Figure 1-2: Work performance information goes here.
         Deliverable. Any unique and verifiable product, result, or capability
      to perform a service that is required to be produced to complete a
      process, phase, or project.
 Product. An artifact that is produced, is quantifiable, and can be either an end
 item in itself or a component item. Additional words for products are material
 and goods.
 Result. An output from performing project management processes and
 activities. Results include outcomes (for example, integrated systems, revised
 process, restructured organization, tests, trained personnel, and so on) and
 documents (for example, policies, plans, studies, procedures, specifications,
 reports, and so on).
 Work Performance Data. The raw observations and measurements
 identified during activities being performed to carry out the project work.
 You might have change requests, depending on how the work is going, and
 you will update components of the project management plan and project
 documents. Change requests that are a result of this process can address
 project or product issues. You might see a change request to revise work
 instructions, the schedule, scope, budget, or requirements. It's common to see
 requests for preventive and/or corrective actions as a result of this process.

Perform Quality Assurance
 Quality assurance is sandwiched between Plan Quality Management and
 Control Quality. In reality, the flow is different. First, you plan the quality
 processes, policies, techniques, methods, and metrics. Then, using the tools in
 quality control, you measure the results by using the identified tools,
 techniques, and methods to see whether they comply with the identified
 metrics. In quality assurance, you're identifying whether the process is
 working -- and if there are ways to improve it. Table 1-2 summarizes this
 flow.

 Table 1-2 How Quality Assurance Monitors Project
 Quality
Plan Quality Management                 Control Quality               Perform Quality Assurance

Identifies the policies and                                           Are we using those policies and
procedures used on the project                                        procedures? Are they appropriate?

Identifies the quality processes used                                 Are we using those processes? Are
on the project                                                        they appropriate?
Identifies the tools and techniques     Measure using the identified Are these the right tools and
used to measure quality                 tools and techniques.        techniques?
Identifies the metrics and
                                        Compare the measurements Are the metrics appropriate? If there
measurements for the product and
                                        with the metrics.        are variances, what is the cause?
project
                                        Identify gaps in planned      Can we improve our policies,
                                        versus actual                 procedures, tools, techniques, or
                                        measurements.                 methods?

                                                                      Develop corrective action plans for
                                                                      problem areas.

                                                                      Communicate areas that work.




         Perform Quality Assurance. Auditing the quality requirements and
      the results from quality control measurements to ensure that appropriate
      quality standards and operational definitions are used.


         Quality assurance is predominately concerned with improving
      processes, which will lead to improved results. Therefore, much of the
      information in this chapter focuses on process performance, analysis,
      and improvement.
The intent of performing quality assurance is to provide confidence that the
processes, products, deliverables, and data are sound and will meet the
documented requirements and specifications.

Perform Quality Assurance: Inputs
Inputs for the Perform Quality Assurance process come from the project
management plan, the Plan Quality Management, and the Control Quality
processes. Here are brief descriptions of the inputs:
     Quality management plan: Describes the quality assurance approach,
    including processes, procedures, methods, and tools that will be used for
    quality assurance. For more on the quality management plan, see Book IV,
    Chapter 2.
     Process improvement plan: The Perform Quality Assurance process is
    the umbrella for improving processes for the organization and the project.
     Quality metrics: The specific measurements that a project, product,
    service, or result needs to meet to be considered in compliance. Metrics
    can also describe the measurement process or tool used to measure the
    outcome. You can read up on quality metrics in Book IV, Chapter 2.
     Quality control measurements: The outcomes from the measurements
    taken in the Control Quality process (see Book VIII, Chapter 2).

Perform Quality Assurance: Tools and Techniques
The same tools and techniques introduced in Plan Quality Management (see
Book IV, Chapter 2) and that will show up in Control Quality (see Book VIII,
Chapter 2) can help in this process. The difference is that here, they are
predominately process-oriented rather than product-or project-oriented. Table
1-3 shows how tools and techniques are applied to assure quality.

Table 1-3 Tools and Techniques in Quality Assurance
Tools/Techniques How It Is Used

Cost-benefit
                       Determine whether cost to improve a process is worth the benefit.
analysis

Cost of quality        Determine whether you can invest in prevention costs to reduce the cost of failure.
                       If you have unexpected, negative, or erratic trends in measurements from the control
Control charts
                       charts, the process should be analyzed for improvement opportunities.
Benchmarking           Benchmark process-improvement goals to improve process results.

Design of              Identify multiple variables in the process that can be modified in conjunction with one
experiments            another to improve a process.

                       Conduct a random audit of process documentation or quality control documentation to
Statistical sampling
                       determine whether the appropriate processes and procedures are being employed.
Flowcharting           Create a flow chart of a process to find redundant work or steps that don't add value.

Cause-and-effect       Use to determine the drivers of process problems and identify areas where you can
diagrams               make adjustments to improve performance.
Histograms             Quantitatively identify the impact of each source of errors or defect.

                       Rank those areas with the least-favorable outcomes to apply corrective action to those
Pareto charts
                       areas first.

Run charts             Identify trends in performance. Negative trends should be analyzed for corrective
                       actions.
Scatter diagrams      Look at how two independent variables relate. You may be able to modify one variable
                      to improve the results of a second variable.
Inspection            Inspect a process to determine whether it's functioning optimally.


In addition to the tools and techniques listed in Table 1-3, the additional
quality management tools in Table 1-4 may be of use.

Table 1-4 Additional Quality Management Tools and
Techniques
Tools/Techniques             How It Is Used

Affinity diagrams            Group similar ideas for example causes of defects.
Process decision program Identify the steps necessary to achieve a goal and how those steps can lead to
charts (PDPC)            a failure in attaining the goal.

Interrelationship diagraphs Show how relationships among multiple systems or entities interact.
                             Used to decompose systems and show parent-child relationships. A WBS is an
Tree diagrams
                             example of a tree diagram.

                             Identify key issues and alternatives that can be prioritized by using a weighting
Prioritization matrices
                             system to rank alternatives and solutions.
                             Shows activities in the order in which they occur: a version of a schedule
Activity network diagrams
                             network diagram.
                             Shows the strength of relationships between variables, using rows and
Matrix diagrams
                             columns that intersect.


Quality audits
Quality audits are used to perform a structured review of the project to
determine whether the team is complying with project and organization
policies, procedures, and processes. Those areas not in compliance will result
in some type of deficiency report. The team will then develop a corrective
action plan and assign someone to implement the plan and follow up on the
deficiency report.
For those areas in compliance, no action is needed. For those areas that are
performing well, the audit team may identify the good or best practices being
employed and share them throughout the organization so other teams can
improve their performance as well.
Quality audit example
To see how a quality audit could occur on a project, I use my running
childcare center example. During the project, the quality assurance
department announced that it would be auditing the project, specifically
interested in safety, procurement, and project management practices. Here's
the setup:
   On the first day of the audit, Quentin (from Quality Assurance) walked
   around the site with George, the foreman. Quentin had a checklist of
   safety policies and procedures that he wanted to ensure were being
   followed. He also walked around and looked at all the equipment and the
   workers to make sure that the job site was safe and secure. He found one
   instance where a cord for a piece of equipment was not properly coiled.
   He also noted that some of the material was not stored properly. This was
   noted, and the foreman corrected it immediately.
   Next, Quentin checked the safety log and noted only one incident of a cut
   finger. The cut did not require stitches or transport to urgent care. The
   incident was properly logged.
   On the second day, Quentin asked to see all the procurement
   documentation. He reviewed the bid documents, the source selection score
   sheets, the statement of work, status reports, and invoices. There were
   three instances where a contractor was late with a deliverable, but the job
   was currently on time. Therefore, no corrective actions were noted.
   On the third day, Quentin reviewed the project documentation. He noted
   that all the documentation was complete and in good order. The cost
   variances were acceptable (-3%), and the project was on schedule. In
   addition, there were very few change requests. He interviewed the project
   manager and noted that he usually saw significantly more change
   requests. The project manager replied that he had spent more time than
   usual gathering stakeholder requirements. Then he had a meeting with the
   parents and showed them drawings of the childcare center. The contractor
   and architect attended the meeting. There were a few requested changes,
   which were incorporated into the plans. Quentin seemed very pleased
   with this process. He noted that this was a good practice and that he
   would share it with other project managers.

Process analysis
Because Perform Quality Assurance is concerned with process improvement,
I take a brief moment here to discuss how the process improvement flows.
The process improvement plan is developed in the Plan Quality Management
process. It should contain at least the following information:
   Existing process description
   Current process metrics
   Targets for improvement
   Approach for improvement
   Flow of the existing process
In the Perform Quality Assurance process, the target process is analyzed, and
alternative approaches for improvement are identified. As a result of the
analysis, the best alternative is selected, and a flow of the new process is
developed. At that point, a change request is generated. If approved, the new
process is implemented. Figure 1-3 shows how the three steps work together.


        Think of process improvement as Kaizen, the Japanese philosophy
     that focuses on the continuous improvement of processes.

Perform Quality Assurance: Outputs
The intended outcome of quality audit and process improvement activities is
to reduce the cost of quality and/or to increase customer satisfaction. Any
corrective actions identified in quality audit, as well as any opportunities to
improve processes, will go through the Integrated Change Control process.
Change requests can take the form of
   Changing a policy
   Changing a procedure
   Changing a process
   Corrective action
   Preventive action
   Changing the quality management plan
Depending on the results of the Perform Quality Assurance process, you may
also need updates to the project management plan, project documents, and the
organizational process assets.
Figure 1-3: Process improvement steps.



Key Terms
  Many of these terms are used throughout this book and Books VII and VIII,
  where I discuss monitoring and controlling. Therefore, you need to
  understand these terms well enough to be able to explain them and use them
  in context.
      Direct and Manage Project Work
      Change request
      Corrective action
      Preventive action
      Defect
Defect repair
Work authorization
Deliverable
Product
Result
Work performance information
Perform Quality Assurance
Quality audit
Process analysis
Chapter Summary
 This chapter is the foundation for doing the project work of creating
 deliverables and results. The chapter also discusses ways to ensure that the
 project processes are operating as designed. The executing concepts are
 relatively simple, but because they make up the backbone of a project, you
 need to be comfortable with them.
    The majority of the project work is performed in the Direct and Manage
    Project Work process. It combines the executing function for scope,
    schedule, cost, and risk knowledge areas.
     The team uses the organizational policies, procedures, work guidelines,
    information from past projects, the organizational infrastructure, and
    information systems to perform its work.
     Direct and Manage Project Work is where approved change requests are
    implemented. Change requests can include preventive actions, corrective
    actions, and defect repairs.
    As a project manager, you're following organizational policies while
    supporting your team, managing stakeholders, and making decisions.
     As a result of the work, the team produces deliverables, work performance
    information, and change requests, and updates the project management
    plan and project documents.
    Quality assurance monitors whether quality policies and procedures are
    being used as intended.
     Perform Quality Assurance is concerned with process more than the
    product. The process uses information from quality control measurements
    to determine whether the quality processes are effective.
    Quality audits can result in corrective actions and can also be used to
    share best practices across the organization.
    Process analysis seeks to find ways to improve process effectiveness and
    efficiency.
                         Prep Test
1. Examining process problems and conducting a root-cause
  analysis is part of
 A   Process changes
 B   Process improvement
 C   Process analysis
 D   Process implementation

2. Creating deliverables is part of which knowledge area?
 A   Communication
 B   Human resources
 C   Risk
 D   Scope

3. Approved change requests are an input to Direct and Manage
  Project Work. In which process are they approved?
 A   Perform Integrated Change Control
 B   Any control process
 C   Monitor and Control Project Work
 D   Perform Quality Control

4. A documented direction to perform an activity that can reduce
  the probability of negative consequences associated with
  project risks is known as
 A   Defect repair
 B   Preventive action
 C   Corrective action
 D   A change order
5. An artifact that is produced, is quantifiable, and can be either an
  end item in itself or a component item is a(n)
 A    Deliverable
 B    Product
 C    Result
 D    Artifact

6. In which process would you measure product results to
  determine whether they conform to quality requirements?
 A    Plan Quality
 B    Improve Quality
 C    Perform Quality Assurance
 D    Control Quality

7. In which process do you determine whether measurement
  metrics are appropriate?
 A    Plan Quality
 B    Perform Quality Improvement
 C    Perform Quality Assurance
 D    Control Quality

8. If you wanted to determine whether investing in more rigorous
  prevention costs would result in less rework and scrap, and
  ultimately be more cost effective, which tool would you use?
 A    Cost of quality
 B    Benchmarking
 C    Cause-and-effect diagram
 D    Statistical sampling

9. To identify the root cause of a problem in a process, which tool
  would you use?
 A   Cause-and-effect diagram
 B   Design of experiments
 C   Pareto diagram
 D   Control charts

10. Which technique is used to perform a structured, independent
  review to determine compliance with policies and procedures?
 A   Inspection
 B   Quality audit
 C   Cause-and-effect diagram
 D   Statistical sampling
                          Answers
1. C. Process analysis. Examining process problems and their root
  cause are part of process analysis. Check out Process analysis.
2. D. Scope. The scope processes define the deliverables for the
  project via the processes of collecting requirements and creating a
  WBS. Review Table 1-1: Executing Activities.
3. A. Perform Integrated Change Control. Change requests are
  analyzed, and a decision is made in the Perform Integrated Change
  Control process. Look at Direct and Manage Project Work: Inputs.
4. B. Preventive action. Preventive action is a documented direction
  to perform an activity that can reduce the probability of negative
  consequences associated with project risks. Check out the
  definitions in Direct and Manage Project Work: Inputs.
5. B. Product. An artifact that is produced, is quantifiable, and can be
  either an end item in itself or a component item is a product.
  Review the definition in the Direct and Manage Project Work:
  Outputs section.
6. D. Control Quality. Control Quality is where you take
  measurements to ensure compliance with the plan and metrics.
  Take a look at Table 1-2: How Quality Assurance Monitors Project
  Quality.
7. C. Perform Quality Assurance. Perform Quality Assurance is where
  you determine whether the metrics you're using are appropriate.
  Review Table 1-2: How Quality Assurance Monitors Project Quality.
8. A. Cost of quality. The cost of quality would help you identify
  whether the costs associated with prevention are more cost
  effective than the costs associated with internal failure. Check out
  Table 1-3: Tools and Techniques in Quality Assurance.
9. A. Cause-and-effect diagram. A cause-and-effect diagram can help
  you identify the root cause of a problem. Go over Table 1-3: Tools
  and Techniques in Quality Assurance.
10. B. Quality audit. A quality audit is a structured independent review
  to determine compliance with policies, processes, and procedures.
  Look at the information in the Quality audits section.
Chapter 2: Managing the People
     Side of Your Project
Exam Objectives
    Acquire and manage project resources, both internal and external, to
    execute the project. Follow the procurement management plan to
    acquire external resources.
    Employ leadership, training, motivating, mentoring, and other
    interpersonal skills to maximize team performance.

 Executing the project is where the real skills in managing, leading, and
 working with people come into play. The interpersonal skills that you need to
 successfully acquire, develop, and manage the team are described in this
 chapter. Of course, they're deployed throughout the project, but because the
 majority of the work occurs during the execution, those skills and processes
 are outlined here.
 Unlike many of the other processes, the processes in this chapter are more
 concerned with people rather than deliverables. Some skills that you're most
 likely to use include
    Negotiating
    Communicating
    Team building
    Developing trust
    Influencing
    Motivating
    Resolving conflict
    Leading
    Making decisions
 In addition to these skills, I also discuss management styles and power.
 There's a lot to cover!
                 Quick Assessment
1. To take advantage of expertise in a different location and to
  incorporate people who work at home, you should establish a(n)
  ______ ______.
2. Herzberg developed a theory based on hygiene and ______
  factors.
3. The five distinct phases of team building are forming, ______,
  ______, performing, and adjourning.
4. Someone who is published in his or her field and trains others has
  _______ power.
5. "It's my way or the highway" demonstrates which style of conflict
  management?
6. As you acquire your project team, you will want to reference the
  component of the human resource plan that documents the role,
  authority, responsibility, and competency for each position on the
  project team. Where would you find this information documented?
7. (True/False). Paraphrasing and summarizing someone's message
  is an indication of disrespect because it infers a lack of
  communication skills.
8. ERG is a motivation theory. What does the "R" stand for?
9. A project team that is all in one physical location is said to be
  ______. This is also known as a(n) ______ matrix.
10. If you are having a conflict with a team member, is it best to let
  things settle down for a while, confront the situation directly, or set
  up an intermediary to discuss the situation?
                          Answers
1. Virtual team. A virtual team allows you to bring a broad range of
  skills and diversity to the team. For more on this topic, see Acquire
  Project Team: Tools, Techniques, and Outputs.
2. Motivation. Herzberg developed the Motivation-Hygiene Theory.
  You can read up on several motivation theories in the section on
  Interpersonal skills.
3. Storming, norming. Bruce Tuckman developed this model for team
  building. Read about it in Interpersonal skills.
4. Expert. A published person who trains others has expert power.
  The person might or might not have position power, but at the very
  least she has expert power. Read about the types of power in the
  section on Power.
5. Forcing. "It's my way or the highway" demonstrates a forcing style
  of conflict management where the person enforcing the decision is
  not open to collaboration or compromise. Conflict management is
  covered in Resolving conflict.
6. Roles and responsibilities. The human resource plan, which
  includes roles and responsibilities, is an input to the Acquire Project
  Team process. Read about this in the section Acquire Project
  Team: Inputs.
7. False. Paraphrasing and summarizing a message is part of active
  listening, which is considered a key interpersonal skill. For more on
  active listening, go to the section Interpersonal skills.
8. Relatedness. ERG stands for Existence, Relatedness, and Growth.
  Read more about this topic in Interpersonal skills.
9. Co-located, tight. Co-location and a tight matrix are ways of
  indicating that there are no virtual team members and everyone on
  the team is in the same physical location. This is discussed in Co-
  location.
10. Confront the situation directly. The Code of Ethics and
  Professional Conduct states that we should confront a conflict
  directly but still be professional and respectful. Look over the
  information in Resolving conflict.
Acquire Project Team
 Acquiring your project team is all about bringing team members onto your
 project team. This can include internal and external resources. Of course, if
 you are using external resources, you will need to follow your procurement
 management plan (see Book V, Chapter 2). I discuss how to conduct a
 procurement to bring external resources onto your team in the next chapter of
 this minibook.


        Acquire Project Team. Confirming human resource availability and
     obtaining the team necessary to complete project activities.


        The PMP exam assumes that you're working on a large project. For a
     large project, you would have a core group of people helping to plan the
     project. After the plans are finalized, you bring on the hundreds of
     resources needed to complete the work. In other words, you would staff
     the team as part of executing the project. Obviously, for a small project,
     the group responsible for planning the work would also be doing the
     work, so acquiring the team would occur very early in the planning
     phase.

 Acquire Project Team: Inputs
 Think back to the information you put together for your human resource
 management plan (see Book IV, Chapter 3). This is where much of that
 information will be used. The main components of the human resource
 management plan are
    Roles and responsibilities: This component of the human resource
    management plan documents the role, authority, responsibility, and
    competency for each position on the project team.
    Project organization charts: This component describes the reporting
    relationships on the team. You might see a hierarchy chart or a
    responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) here. There is an example of a
    RAM in Table 3-2 of Book IV, Chapter 3.
   Staffing management plan: This component includes
   * Staff acquisition: Describes how you will bring new team members on
     board, both from within the organization and external to the
     organization
   * Resource calendars: Identifies when specific roles are planned to be
     used; can include histograms
   * Staff release plan: Describes how team members will be released from
     the team
   * Training needs: Identifies those parts of the work that will require
     training
   * Recognition and rewards: Defines criteria for rewards and recognition
   * Compliance. Describes any licensing, permitting, or other regulatory or
     compliance requirements
   * Safety: Defines any safety rules and policies applicable to the project
In addition to the information from the human resource management plan,
you are constrained by the project environment and resource availability in
your organization. The process and ability to acquire resources will be
significantly influenced by whether you work in a project-oriented culture, a
matrix environment, or a functionally driven environment. You will also need
to be mindful of the human resource policies and procedures you will need to
follow.

Acquire Project Team: Tools, Techniques, and
Outputs
In some situations, you will have preassigned resources. This might occur
because your organization bid on a proposal and submitted resumes of the
promised resources as part of the bid. However, in most cases, you have to
negotiate with functional managers, resource managers, and other project
managers.
Negotiation
You should negotiate for those team members who have the skill sets you
identified in your RAM or other planning documents. This might mean that
you're not necessarily looking for the most-skilled resource but rather a
resource that meets your needs. A highly skilled resource is always nice to
have on the team, but if you don't have work that requires those skills, you're
paying for a level of competency you don't need. Also, a highly skilled
resource person may get bored easily and look for something more interesting
to do.
If, on the other hand, you get someone with a lower level of competency, you
might have issues with the schedule, your quality requirements, and rework.
In some situations, you might need to go outside the organization to acquire
the skills you need. If you didn't plan for this upfront, you could overrun the
budget; therefore, your ability to negotiate and influence are important in this
process.
Virtual teams
One way of taking advantage of resources that have the skills you need is to
incorporate them as a virtual team member. In other words, this team member
isn't co-located with you or the rest of the team. Some benefits to using
virtual team members include
   They might have the skills you need that aren't available locally.
   They might cost less than going outside the organization.
   You can take advantage of employees who work at home because of
   disabilities, personal reasons, or telecommuting policies.
   Travel costs can be reduced.



      PMI uses the term co-located or tight matrix to indicate that team
    members are in the same office.
However, when you establish a virtual team, spending extra time on
communications is critical. You want people to feel connected even though
they don't get to see each other. In addition, when you can't read someone's
body language, you miss some good communication cues, so establishing as
many communication channels as necessary to reduce the opportunities for
misunderstandings is important.


       Have some type of regular face-to-face interaction, even if only a few
    times per year. Nothing can replace the relationships you build when you
    can sit across from someone and solve a problem or discuss an issue.
    Using telephone, web conferencing, e-mail, and faxes is good for
    addressing routine situations, but to build a team and to solve complex
    problems, being in a room together is best.
If you aren't able to negotiate for onsite or virtual team members, you will
need to acquire them from outside the organization. This can be as simple as
bringing in an external subject matter expert, or as complex as outsourcing
the capabilities of an entire department.
Multicriteria decision analysis
Sometimes you will have to choose between a potential team member who
has experience and expertise but little time and poor teamwork skills, and a
potential team member with less experience but more time and a better
attitude. In this type of circumstance, evaluate which criteria are more
important on your project to help you make the best staffing choices. Some
common criteria to consider include
   Availability
   Cost
   Experience
   Desire to work on the project
   Competencies
   Attitude
   Geography
   Flexibility of skill set
After you have your team members identified, you make team assignments,
create a team directory, and then update the resource calendars and human
resource management plan as necessary.


         The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct states that as a project
     manager, we do not discriminate against others based on, but not limited
     to, gender, race, age, religion, disability, nationality, or sexual
     orientation. You might see this standard referenced on a question about
     acquiring team members.
Develop Project Team
 Here are two aspects to developing your team:
     Developing team member competencies and skills
     Developing the team as a whole by getting individuals to work together,
    thereby improving project performance



        Develop Project Team. Improving the competencies, team member
     interaction, and the overall team environment to enhance project
     performance.
 The intended outcomes of developing the project team and creating a team
 culture include
    Improved feelings of trust
    Higher morale
    Lower conflict
    Increased productivity
    Collaboration
    Higher cooperation
    Sharing knowledge and experience
    Leveraging cultural differences



        The exam blueprint specifically mentions skills and knowledge in the
     areas of cultural sensitivity and diversity. The Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct (see Book IX, Chapter 2) states that project
     managers should inform themselves about the norms and customs of
     others and avoid engaging in behaviors that could be considered
     disrespectful.

 Develop Project Team: Inputs, Tools, and Techniques
The human resource management plan, resource assignments, and resource
calendars are inputs for developing the project team.
To support and develop your project team, you will need to find ways to
inspire and motivate team members as well as build, maintain, and lead the
team toward the desired outcome.
A big part of being successful managing a project is utilizing good
interpersonal skills. You might hear this referred to as "soft skills" or "people
skills." In my opinion, having good interpersonal skills is one of the most
important requirements for being a project manager.
Interpersonal skills
The PMBOK Guide lists interpersonal skills as a tool and technique for this
process. Leading, team building, and motivating are three of the most
important interpersonal skills you can demonstrate to develop a high-
functioning team.
Leadership
Leadership means different things to different people. When developing a
team, here are some key behaviors you should demonstrate:
    Vision: You have to have a clear vision of what you want to accomplish
   and how you want the team to contribute to that vision. Part of this entails
   communicating the vision clearly, and part is influencing the team in
   supporting and owning the vision. This can include letting team members
   know what's in it for them if they support the vision.
    Trust: There are two aspects of trust in this process. The first is that team
   members have to trust that you have the skills and abilities to lead them
   through the project. The second is that they have to trust that you will
   support them, remove barriers, and empower them.



       The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct states that we strive to
    create an environment in which others feel safe to tell the truth.
   Communication: Earlier, I mention that communicating the vision
   clearly is important. Another aspect of communication is the way you
   communicate. You need to match your communication style to the needs
   at hand. Sometimes this means being clear and concise; other times, it
   means listening or being empathetic. Your ability to communicate
   appropriately will make a big difference in your ability to lead effectively.
    Active listening: Many people consider listening part of communication,
   but because it is such an important skill in project management, I am
   listing it separately. Active listening should include
    * Making eye contact, facing the person speaking, and having an open
      posture, such as not crossing your arms or legs
   * Giving the speaker your full attention without distractions or planning
     your response
   * Paraphrasing, summarizing, and/or clarifying the message to ensure you
     understand the message correctly
   * In situations where you're talking with someone who is emotional, you
     should empathize with the person, indicating that you understand what
he is feeling
Training
The human resource plan identifies areas that may require training. Of the
many different options for training, some are
   Classroom
   Online
   Mentoring
   On-the-job
   Coaching
Team building
Team building should be done early, and it should be done often. Some team
building is formal, such as a retreat. Other team building is informal, such as
going out for lunch, or starting a meeting by asking everyone present to share
a little known fact about herself or telling something she is proud of. The
intention is to get people comfortable working together effectively.
To form an effective team, people need to trust and respect the other team
members and understand how to work well with them. Bruce Tuckman is a
psychologist who conducted research in group dynamics. He developed a
ladder (shown in Table 2-1) that describes the various stages of team
building.

Table 2-1 Stages of Team Building
Phase
Description
        The team first comes together. Members get to know each other's name, position on the team
Forming and department, and other pertinent background information. This might occur in the kick-off
        meeting.
         Team members jockey for position on the team. This phase is where people's personalities,
Storming strengths, and weaknesses start to come out. There might be some conflict or struggle as people
         figure out how to work together. Storming might go on for some time or pass relatively quickly.
        The team starts to function as a team. At this point, members know their places on the team and
        how they relate to and interface with all the other members. They are starting to work together.
Norming
        There might be some bumps in the road, but these are resolved quickly, and the team moves into
        action.
           The team becomes operationally efficient. This is the mature team stage. Teams that have
Performing been together for awhile are able to develop a synergy. By working together, members
           accomplish more than other teams and produce a high-quality product.
             The team completes the work and moves on to other projects. If the team has formed a good
Adjourning
             relationship, some members might be sad about leaving the team.


The intended outcome is for the team to develop a synergy and a relationship
in which members can solve problems and perform work more effectively
and efficiently.
Motivating
Motivation entails influencing people to perform certain actions. After all, not
everyone is motivated by the same type of reward. Much research has been
conducted as to what motivates people. As such, theories abound.


        The following motivation theories appear most often on the PMP
     exam, and I describe each in a more detail.
   McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y
   Herzberg's Motivation-Hygiene Theory
   Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
   ERG Theory
   McClelland's Theory of Needs
   Vroom's Expectancy Theory
Theory X and Theory Y
As proposed by Douglas McGregor, Theory X and Theory Y describe two
different types of workers and how they should be managed. Theory X states
that management believes that workers will do as little as possible to get by,
and thus need a great deal of direction. Theory Y states that management
believes that workers are interested in doing their best and, given the
freedom, will perform well. Table 2-2 compares the two.

Table 2-2 Theory X and Theory Y
Theory X
Theory Y

The average worker has an inherent dislike   The average worker wants to be active and finds the
of work and will avoid it if possible.       physical and mental effort on the job to be satisfying.
Because of their dislike for work, most      The greatest results come from willing participation, which
people must be controlled before they will   will tend to produce self-direction toward goals without
work hard enough.                            coercion or control.
The average worker prefers to be directed    The average worker seeks the opportunity for personal
and dislikes responsibility.                 improvement and self-respect.
The average worker is not ambitious, and     Imagination, creativity, and ingenuity can be used to solve
desires security above everything else.      work problems by a large number of employees.


Motivation-Hygiene Theory
Frederick Herzberg believed that the two aspects to the work environment are
hygiene and motivation. He stated that hygiene factors (detailed in the
following table) don't motivate a worker to perform. However, the way they
are implemented -- or not implemented -- can lead to employee
dissatisfaction. On the other hand, motivation factors lead to higher
individual performance. Table 2-3 shows examples of hygiene and motivation
factors.

Table 2-3 Motivation-Hygiene Theory
Hygiene Factors
Motivation Factors
Policies
Achievement
Administration
Recognition
Working conditions
Growth
Salary
Advancement
Status
Interest in the job
Supervision
Job challenge
  Security


  Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs
  One of the most well known of all motivation theories is Maslow's Hierarchy
  of Needs; see Figure 2-1. This theory states that human beings have basic
  needs and that we need to meet lower-level needs before we can move onto
  the next level of needs. This theory is shown as a pyramid.




Figure 2-1: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs.
  ERG Theory
  ERG Theory is similar to Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, but it focuses on
  existence, relatedness, and growth needs. Figure 2-2 shows the ERG
  hierarchy.
     Existence includes the needs for food, drink, shelter, and safety.
     Relatedness needs include the need to feel connected to other individuals
     or a group. Relatedness needs are fulfilled by establishing and maintaining
     relationships.
     Growth needs are fulfilled by personal achievement and self-actualization.




Figure 2-2: ERG Theory.


  McClelland's Theory of Needs
  David McClelland posited that people are motivated by power, achievement,
  or affiliation, and that how you manage a person is different based on what
  motivates that individual. Table 2-4 compares McClelland's three
  motivational drives.

 Table 2-4 Theory of Needs
Need
Behavior
        These people like to organize, motivate, and lead others. Rewards should be focused on giving
Power
        them more responsibility.
              These people are result oriented. They like to reach a goal and be recognized for it. They like
Achievement
              challenges that are reasonable.
  Affiliation These people seek acceptance and belonging. They like being part of a team.


  Vroom's Expectancy Theory
  Victor Vroom states that "intensity of work effort depends on the perception
  that an individual's effort will result in a desired outcome." Employees are
  motivated when they believe the following:
      Putting in more effort will yield better job performance.
       Better job performance will lead to organizational rewards, such as an
      increase in salary or benefits.
       These predicted organizational rewards are valued by the employee.
  The theory supports the concept of the reward being tied to performance, and
  ensuring that the reward is what the employee wants. It emphasizes the links
  between behavior, rewards, and the organization's goals (see Figure 2-3).




Figure 2-3: Expectancy Theory.
Ground rules
It is useful to establish ground rules in the beginning of the project to set
expectations on how people should interact with each other. Some key items
to include are
   How decisions will be made
   How the team will communicate with each other
   How conflicts will be addressed
   Meeting guidelines (only one person talks at a time; no side
   conversations)
Some teams use a team operating agreement to document their team
approach. A team operating agreement might include the team's values and
principles, meeting guidelines, and direction on when decisions can be
revisited. It should be signed by all team members. If you have a large team,
you might want to use it for the project management team only. See Figure 2-
4 for an example of a team operating agreement form.
Figure 2-4: Sample team operating agreement.


  Co-location
  Co-location can help build team camaraderie by having all the team members
  in the same location. This facilitates communication, problem-solving, issue
  resolution, and relationship building. If having the team all in one place isn't
  feasible, sometimes having a team meeting room where the team has its status
  meetings and stores project documentation is a good substitute.
Rewards and recognition
Rewards and recognition are separate from, but closely tied to, motivating.
You have to know what motivates folks to reward them appropriately.
According to McClelland, someone who is motivated by affiliation won't feel
rewarded if you give her more responsibility. However, someone who is
motivated by challenges or power will feel rewarded by receiving more
responsibility.
Oftentimes, project managers don't have the capability to give or withhold
raises, but sometimes they have perks at their disposal or the capability to
hand out bonuses. For example, they may be able to give out company logo
wear or gift certificates to local restaurants.


       Keep these key points in mind that apply regardless of what
     motivates people:
    Reward only that behavior you want to see more of, such as meeting a
   milestone because the work was well planned and executed -- not because
   heroics and overtime were needed to meet it because the work wasn't well
   planned.
    In general, win-win rewards are better than win-lose rewards. For
   example, rewarding the team for pulling together to overcome a challenge
   is a win-win because everyone worked together and everyone gets
   rewarded. Comparatively, a reward for the team member of the month
   means that if one person wins, others lose. Win-win creates collaboration;
   win-lose creates competition.



        The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct (see Book IX, Chapter
     2) specifically states that project managers should not reward or punish
     based on personal considerations, including but not limited to,
     favoritism, nepotism, or bribery.

Develop Project Team: Outputs
A team performance assessment looks at how the team is performing. This is
different than a team member performance assessment that measures how a
specific team member is performing. I cover team member performance
assessments shortly. The team performance assessment should measure both
technical achievement and interpersonal competencies.
Technical achievement looks at the scope and quality that have been
produced by the team as well as whether the project is on time and on budget.
Interpersonal competencies look at the team's ability to communicate
effectively, how well members collaborate, how they are doing making
decisions and resolving conflicts, and their overall morale. Another aspect
that you can look at is how well they work together and whether some team
synergy is developing. You should document areas that need improvement
and develop a strategy to improve underperforming areas.
The Develop Project Team process and the Manage Project Team process are
the only processes that update the environmental factors. They update the
skill sets of individual team members.
Manage Project Team
 Managing the team has a different focus than developing the team.
 Developing the team is more team-focused, and managing the team is more
 team member-focused.


         Manage Project Team. Tracking team member performance,
      providing feedback, resolving issues, and managing changes to optimize
      project performance.

 Manage Project Team: Inputs
 Looking at the team performance assessment and the work performance
 reports can help you determine where the trouble spots are in the project.
 Work performance reports (see more about these in Book VIII, Chapter 2)
 provide information about the project status for scope, quality, schedule, cost,
 risks, and issues. The team performance assessments will tell you whether the
 team is working together well or whether there are pockets of conflict and
 dysfunction.
 In addition to the team and work performance reports, you're going to get
 your best information by walking around, talking with team members, and
 observing behavior. Of course, this is a bit more difficult with virtual teams.
 That just means you have to make a concerted effort to reach out and touch
 base with virtual team members to see what's happening with them.


          You aren't going to be able to tell whether something is bothering a
      team member from individual progress reports: All you're going to get is
      status. To get a feel for what is worrying the team member, what barriers
      he is encountering, and where you can step in and help, you have to get
      out from behind your desk and talk to people face to face. Some team
      members might think that you're being nosy or hovering, but to be
      effective, you need to see for yourself what's happening.
 The issue log contains information that you can use to identify whether a
 team member's behavior is causing issues and to track team member progress
on issue-resolution activities.

Manage Project Team: Tools and Techniques
Observing team member interaction with each other and with customers gives
you a good idea of the team member attitude and team work. One-on-one
conversations (even casual ones) can tell you a lot about morale, motivation,
points of pride, and sources of conflict.
On very large projects, you'll probably be responsible for submitting a
performance appraisal for team members. On medium or small projects, this
can be a more informal process. The team member's manager might ask you
for formal or informal feedback about the team member. Either way, look for
ways to provide constructive feedback that can help the team member
improve performance. Some topics include
   Training that will help build skills
   Goals for professional development
   Clarifying or modifying roles and responsibilities
   Resolving any workplace issues



        Be careful about how you approach performance appraisals. Many
     policies and procedures and even union constraints control how you
     communicate with someone about his job performance.
 Resolving conflict
 Conflict is a natural event on projects. Many stakeholders have differing
 needs that can lead to conflict. If you add tight time frames and the pressure
 of working on a critical project, tempers can flare.


       Conflict management on the PMP exam
There are quite a few standards from the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct that can
be referenced on the exam when discussing conflict. All the standards are covered in Book
IX, Chapter 2, but here is a list of topics that refer specifically to conflict:
   We listen to others' points of view, seeking to understand them.
   We approach directly those persons with whom we have a conflict or disagreement.
   We conduct ourselves in a professional manner, even when it is not reciprocated.
   We do not act in an abusive manner toward others.



 Many people shy away from conflict. However, when handled appropriately,
 conflict can be constructive. You can actually reach a better understanding of
 the project and find better ways of performing work. The key is involving the
 team in problem-solving techniques. Three behaviors will help the team stay
 focused on resolution instead of escalation:
     Keep the conversation open. Make sure to foster open communication.
     Team members need to state their positions and why they feel that way.
     Withholding information is counterproductive.
      Focus on the issues. To keep things constructive, people need to focus on
     the facts surrounding the conflict. Blame, conjecture, and assumptions are
     contrary to good problem-solving. Don't let people focus on personalities
     or "he said, she said" type of behavior.
      Focus on the present. Sometimes people bring baggage with them. Treat
     each conflict and situation separately. Resolving a conflict is not the time
     to rehash past problems.
Causes of conflict
With so much uncertainty on projects, there is ample opportunity for conflict.
In reality, though, you can group most conflicts into the following seven
categories, which I list by frequency of occurrence.
1. Schedule
2. Priorities between the objectives
3. Scarce resources
4. Technical approach
5. Administrative procedures
6. Cost
7. Personality
Sometimes personality is the main problem, but if you look deeper, you will
see the underlying cause is usually one of the other six issues, and the
personality issues just exacerbate the problem.
Managing conflict
For the exam, you will need to know the following six approaches to resolve
conflict, as shown in Table 2-5. The Approach column has the name or label
you will see on the exam. The Description column is a brief definition. The
Situation column describes when the approach is most useful.


       Some conflict management approaches have multiple labels, so be
    prepared to respond to either label on the exam.

Table 2-5 Conflict Management Styles
Approach
Description
Situation

                     Confronting the conflict When you have confidence in the other party's ability to
Confronting/Problem-
                     together as a problem to problem-solveWhen the relationship is importantWhen you
solving
                     be solved                need a win-win solution
              Win-win through           When there is time and trustWhen the objective is to learnWhen
Collaborating collaborating and meeting you want to incorporate multiple viewsWhen there is time to
              to resolve issues         come to consensus
                         Looking for some   When there is a willingness to give and takeWhen both
                         degree of          parties need to winWhen you can't winWhen an equal
Compromising
                         satisfaction for   relationship exists between the parties in conflictWhen the
                         both parties       stakes are moderateTo avoid a fight

                        Emphasizing areas
                                          To reach an overarching goalTo maintain harmonyWhen
                        of agreement and
Smoothing/Accommodating                   any solution will be adequateWhen you will lose
                        de-emphasizing
                                          anywayTo create goodwill
                        areas of conflict
                                           When you are rightIn a do-or-die situationWhen the stakes
                    Win-lose; imposing the
Forcing                                    are highTo gain powerIf the relationship is not
                    resolution
                                           importantWhen time is of the essence
                    Retreating from the
                                           When you can't winWhen the stakes are lowTo preserve
Withdrawal/Avoiding situation; having a
                                           neutrality or reputationIf the problem will go away on its own
                    cooling-off period




         In general, the best approaches are the collaborating and
      confronting/problem-solving. Forcing is usually considered the least
      desirable approach. Confronting doesn't mean being confrontational:
      Rather, it means confronting the problem rather than avoiding it.
Decisions and problem-solving
One of the more important roles of the project manager is making decisions
and solving problems. I have seen many situations where the project
manager's inability to solve a problem or unwillingness to make a decision
has negative impacts on the project. Look at some of the methods used to
make decisions and solve problems and the factors that influence methods,
and then take a look at a model you can use when managing your projects.


         The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct states that as project
      managers, we need to demonstrate transparency in our decision-making
      process.
Styles and influences
You will notice that decision-making and problem-solving styles are similar
to conflict-resolution styles:
   Command: Used when time is of the essence. This is similar to a forcing
   conflict-management style and used in the same types of situations.
    Consultation: Used when you need input and information to make an
   informed decision. One person is still making the decision, but she seeks
   input prior to making the decision.
   Consensus: Used when you need buy-in from the people involved. In
   some cases, the team will agree to a majority or plurality voting block to
   come to a decision.
   Random: Like a coin toss. It is used when any solution is fine.
The style you use will depend upon the factors involved:
   Time constraints: If time is of the essence, you might need to use a
   command or random method. Consultation and consensus take more time.
   Trust: If you trust the people involved in making the decision, or if you
   need to build trust, you should use a consultation or consensus model.
   Quality: Consensus decisions tend to lead to better decisions. Random
   decisions are least likely to lead to a good decision.
   Acceptance: If you need to have acceptance, you are best served by using
   a consensus style. You might be able to use a consultative style and still
   gain acceptance.
Problem-solving model
You can use the following model (also shown in Figure 2-5) for either solving
a problem or making a decision.
1. Define the problem. Clearly define the problem or decision. Many times,
  groups of people are unable to solve a problem because they aren't clear
  what they are trying to solve, or they're solving different problems from
  one another. You should be able to clearly articulate the problem or decision
  in a few concise sentences.
2. Define solution criteria. Define the important factors in reaching a
  decision. Is time the driver? Is technical performance the more important
    element? You might want to set up a weighted scoring mechanism similar
    to the one in Book V, Chapter 2, for procuring project scope.
  3. Brainstorm options. You and your team should consider various options
    as well as the implications and risk associated with each.
  4. Choose an option. Define the pros and cons of each option and apply the
    decision-making criteria to your alternatives. This should give you a
    decision.
  5. Evaluate the result. You can evaluate the effectiveness of your decision-
    making and problem-solving process at the end of the process. Several
    weeks later, you might want to reconvene and determine whether the
    decision or problem resolution was effective.




Figure 2-5: A problem-solving model.
Influence
Influence is the ability to compel people to behave or think in a certain way.
Because project managers often don't have a lot of power or authority, they
often need to use their influence. You can influence stakeholders by your
knowledge, charisma, trust, or reputation.
   Knowledge: In many instances, project managers have significant
   knowledge about the project and the details involved in the project. That
   knowledge can influence stakeholders to follow your lead.
   Charisma: Sometimes, people follow a person because of her charm,
   energy, or effect on others.
   Trust: When stakeholders don't have all the facts but they trust you based
   on experience, they might go along with what you want.
   Reputation: You've heard the notion, "His reputation precedes him."
   Sometimes having a good reputation is enough to influence people.



        As a project manager, you have an ethical duty to influence only with
     integrity -- not for personal gain! The Code of Ethics and Professional
     Conduct (see Book IX, Chapter 2, for more) specifically states, "We
     must make decisions and take actions based on the best interests of
     society, public safety, and the environment."
Power
Closely related to influence is the concept of power. Power is the ability to do
or accomplish something. Project managers have different types of power
depending on the organizational structure, the project, and the project
manager. Table 2-6 shows the types of power and a description of each.

Table 2-6 Types of Power
Power Type
Description

                  Based on your role as a project manager. It is defined in the project charter and the
Formal/Position
                  organizational chart. This is also called legitimate power.
       Based on what you know. Subject matter experts and team members have expert power for their
Expert portion of the project. There may be people who outrank them in position power, but these people
       may have a greater influence on an outcome because of their expertise.
         The ability to give people something they desire. This can be a raise, good review, or good
Reward
         assignment.
          The ability to take away or withhold something people want. This can include not giving a bonus or
Penalty
          not giving a recommendation to someone.
           There are two types of referent power. One type is personality-and charisma-based. The other is
Referent
           based on whom you know, or whom you are associated with: affiliation.


Here are examples of each type of power:
   Position power: Because you are the project manager, you have the
   position power defined in the project charter to resolve team conflicts,
   determine the project organizational structure, and define the change
   control system for the project.
   Expert power: The system engineer on your project has 25 years of
   experience. He knows how to set up a requirements-gathering process and
   a testing and verification process for the project you're managing.
   Therefore, you allow him to make those technical decisions.
    Reward/penalty power: The resource manager assigns resources to your
   team. She has the reward power to give you really good resources or the
   penalty power to assign unproven or problematic resources.
    Referent power: The two types of referent power are
    * Personality: Your lead scheduler is a really funny person, always
      smiling and with something nice to say to everyone. People want to be
      around him and usually follow what he has to say because they like his
      personality. This is a type of charismatic referent power.
    * Affiliation: The administrative assistant on your project is married to the
      Chief Operating Officer. Because you don't want her to say anything
      bad about you to her husband, you're always polite. She has power
      based on affiliation.
At different times in the project, you're likely to use different types of power,
and you're likely to be affected by different types of power. Like influence,
you should always use your power for the good of the project and the good of
the organization.


          The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct states that as project
      managers, we do not exercise the power of our expertise or position to
      influence the decisions or actions of others in order to benefit personally
      at their expense.
Management styles
There are many different styles of leading and managing. Throughout the
project, you will use many -- if not all -- the styles. It really depends on the
team members, the team experience, the organization's culture, and your own
skill.


         There are a lot of terms used to convey specific meanings. If you
     aren't familiar with the terms and how they are used, you will have a
     difficult time with this part of the exam. After you know the vocabulary,
     it's fairly easy to do well.
   Analytical: Based on technical knowledge of a situation. Finding facts
   and making decisions based on reasoning.
   Autocratic: Top-down style where the leader makes the decisions, and
   everyone else follows.
   Bureaucratic: Procedure and process driven. Management is based on
   following the rules and guidelines.
   Charismatic: Management based on an influential personality.
   Coaching: Helping others to achieve their outcomes.
    Consensus: Getting everyone's input and having the group come up with
   the decision or solution.
   Consultative: Getting everyone's input. This can mean that the project
   manager does what the team wants, or it can mean that the project
   manager gets everyone's input before making the decision (consultative-
   autocratic).
   Delegating: The project manager working with the team to identify the
   work that needs to be done and then delegating the work to team members.
   Democratic: Also known as participatory management. The team comes
   up with the approach and owns the outcome.
   Directive: Similar to an autocratic style. The manager makes the
   decisions and tells the team what to do.
   Driving: Similar to directive but with more of an urgent edge. The edge
  may be based on time constraints or a competitive nature.
  Facilitating: Working with the group to lead its members to develop a
  decision or resolution.
  Influencing: Using team building and teamwork to encourage the team to
  achieve the results.
  Laissez-faire: Hands-off management. The leader is available as needed
  but allows the team to manage itself.
  Supportive: Providing assistance as needed to achieve the project
  objectives. More hands-on than laissez-faire.

Manage Project Team: Outputs
The outcome of managing the team is mostly documentation updates. These
include
  Skill sets for individual team members (an enterprise environmental factor
  [EEF] as described in Book I, Chapter 2)
  Input to team member performance appraisals (an organizational process
  asset update [OPA] as described in Book I, Chapter 3)
   Project management plan components, such as the human resource plan
   Change requests for staffing
   Project documents, such as issue logs



       Issue. A point or matter in question or in dispute, or a point or matter
    that is not settled and is under discussion or over. There are opposing
    views or disagreements.
Issue log. A project document used to document and monitor elements under
discussion or in dispute between project stakeholders.


      An issue log is a good tool to use to track and manage issues.
    Common fields in an issue log include
   Issue ID
Category
Issue
Impact on objectives
Urgency
Responsible party
Actions
Status
Due date
Comments
Key Terms
 This chapter holds a whole lot of terms, not all of which are in the glossary.
 Still, you need to know them to do well on the exam.
    Acquire Project Team
    Develop Project Team
    Manage Project Team
    Forming
    Storming
    Norming
    Performing
    Adjourning
    Theory X
    Theory Y
    Hygiene factors
    Motivating factors
    Hierarchy of Needs
    Theory of Needs
    Expectancy Theory
    Confronting/problem-solving
    Collaborating
    Compromising
    Smoothing/accommodating
    Forcing
    Withdrawal/avoiding
    Command
Consultation
Consensus
Random
Formal/position power
Expert power
Reward power
Penalty power
Referent power
Analytical
Autocratic
Bureaucratic
Charismatic
Coaching
Consensus
Consultative
Delegating
Democratic
Directive
Driving
Facilitating
Influencing
Laissez-faire
Supportive
Issue
Chapter Summary
 If you've been studying the technical side of project management and the
 project management plan components, much of what is in this chapter will be
 new to you. However, with some studying, I am sure you will master it!
    Some of your resources will be preassigned, and you will have to
    negotiate for others. Some of your resources might be virtual, working
    from home, or in distant locations.
    Applying leadership when developing your team entails communicating
    your vision of the project, developing trust with the team, and
    communicating appropriately.
    Team building should be done early and often. The five stages to team
    development are forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning.
    You need to be familiar with several motivational theories for the exam:
    * Theory X and Y
    * Hygiene and Motivation
    * Hierarchy of Needs
    * Theory of Needs
    * Expectancy Theory
    Rewards and recognition should be based on good behavior and should be
    something that is important to the team member.
     Assessing the team means analyzing how the members are performing as
    a group. Assessing a team member means looking at her technical and
    interpersonal skills.
    You will encounter conflict on your project. The six techniques for
    resolving conflict are
     * Confronting/problem-solving
    * Collaborating
    * Compromising
* Smoothing/accommodating
* Forcing
* Withdrawal/avoiding
Decision-making and problem-solving styles include
* Command
* Consultation
* Consensus
* Random
The types of power are
* Formal/position
* Expert
* Reward
* Penalty
* Referent
 Many different management styles are at your disposal, depending upon
the situation and the experience of the team.
                         Prep Test
1. All the following are benefits of virtual teams except
 A Less travel expenses
 B Utilizing employees who work from home
 C Increased communication
 D Using skill sets from employees inside and outside the
 organization

2. Which interpersonal skill are you most likely to use while
  developing the project team?
 A    Motivating
 B    Political savvy
 C    Negotiating
 D    Problem-solving

3. Jan and Becky are arguing about who should have the final
  sign-off on a component of a deliverable. What stage of team
  development are they likely in?
 A    Forming
 B    Storming
 C    Norming
 D    Performing

4. Your project team has worked together for the past 14 months.
  The team has set up good processes, has a really nice synergy,
  and can accomplish its work more efficiently than most other
  teams. What stage of team development is the team in?
 A    Forming
 B    Storming
 C    Norming
 D   Performing

5. "The average worker is not ambitious and desires security
  above everything else." This statement is reflective of which of
  the following motivational theories:
 A   Theory X
 B   Expectancy Theory
 C   Hygiene factors
 D   Theory of Needs

6. Which of the following is a hygiene factor?
 A   Achievement
 B   Recognition
 C   Security
 D   Job challenge

7. People who like to organize, motivate, and lead others have a
  need for
 A   Power
 B   Achievement
 C   Security
 D   Affiliation

8. Which of the following creates the most conflict on projects?
 A   Scarce resources
 B   Technical approach
 C   Cost constraints
 D   Schedule issues

9. The most effective method of conflict resolution is
 A   Compromising
 B    Confronting
 C    Avoiding
 D    Accommodating

10. If you need to maintain harmony in the relationship and build
  goodwill, you should use which method of conflict resolution?
 A    Compromising
 B    Confronting
 C    Avoiding
 D    Accommodating

11. You have to make a decision about how to work with a
  stakeholder on your project. You call your project management
  team together and discuss the situation. You want to make sure
  everyone is in agreement with the decision. Ultimately, the team
  will vote and make the final decision. What decision-making
  style are you using?
 A    Command
 B    Consultation
 C    Consensus
 D    Random

12. Your team is discussing how to roll out an upgrade to some
  new software. It is a collegial discussion. Ultimately, you decide
  to go with the approach that George suggested. He has done
  this type of roll-out several times and has more experience than
  anyone else on the team. Which type of power and influence
  does George have?
 A    Expert
 B    Position
 C    Referent
 D    Reward
13. You are talking with Marjorie about her role on the team. You
  know she has experience and that she is looking to move up in
  the organization. You tell her that if she does a good job over the
  next couple of months, you will make sure she gets some cross-
  training and more responsibility on the project. In addition, you
  will be happy to put in a good word with her boss. Which type of
  power are you demonstrating?
 A    Expert
 B    Reward
 C    Penalty
 D    Referent

14. Your team has worked together before, and the members are
  all competent in their roles. As the project manager, you guide
  them in the process and assist them in coming to decisions, but
  you are not heavy-handed. They do most of the decision making
  themselves. Which type of management style are you using?
 A    Consensus
 B    Laissez-faire
 C    Facilitating
 D    Charismatic
                          Answers
1. C. Increased communication. Increased communication is a
  requirement for virtual teams, not necessarily a benefit. Look at
  Acquire Project Team: Tools, Techniques, and Outputs.
2. A. Motivating. You are most likely to use motivating. The other
  options are interpersonal skills, but they're not as likely to be used
  while developing the project team. Check out Interpersonal skills.
3. B. Storming. Jan and Becky are storming. They are experiencing
  conflict as they figure out how to work together. Review
  Interpersonal skills.
4. D. Performing. Your team is performing. The members have
  developed a nice synergy working together. Go to the Interpersonal
  skills section.
5. A. Theory X. Theory X states that workers are not ambitious and
  need to be closely managed. Review Interpersonal skills.
6. C. Security. Security is a hygiene factor. All the other answer
  choices are motivating factors. Look at Interpersonal skills.
7. A. Power. People who are motivated by power enjoy leading and
  organizing others. See Interpersonal skills.
8. D. Schedule issues. Schedule issues create the most conflict on
  projects. Look into Resolving conflict.
9. B. Confronting. Confronting and collaborating are the most
  effective means of dealing with conflict. Go over Resolving conflict.
10. D. Accommodating. Accommodating is the best way to maintain
  the relationship. Review Resolving conflict.
11. C. Consensus. By leaving the decision to the team, you are
  employing a consensus decision-making style. Take a look at the
  section on Decisions and problem-solving.
12. A. Expert. George has expert power because of his knowledge
  and experience. Go over the Power section.
13. B. Reward. Because you can give Marjorie what she wants, you
  have reward power. Check out the information in the section Power.
14. C. Facilitating. Guiding and assisting is a facilitating management
  style. Go over the section Management styles.
Chapter 3: Getting the Word Out
to Stakeholders and Contractors
Exam Objectives
    Ensure a common understanding by setting expectations in
    accordance with the project plan to align the stakeholder and team
    members.
    Minimize the impact of issues with the project schedule, cost, and
    resources by using the issue register to manage issues and assign
    corrective actions.
    Implement the procurement of project resources in accordance with
    the procurement plan.



 When I discuss communications in the planning chapter (Book IV, Chapter
 4), I state that 90 percent of the project manager's job is communication. This
 chapter looks at the process of managing communications according to the
 project management plan.
 Of special interest when communicating is managing stakeholder
 engagement. This can include negotiating, listening, addressing issues, and
 influencing. You significantly increase the likelihood of project success by
 actively managing stakeholders, their expectations, and their engagement
 level.
 Both processes rely heavily on effective communication skills. Therefore, in
 this chapter, I talk about how to communicate effectively as well as what
 blocks effective communication. Because a large part of your communication
 takes place in meetings, I also spend some time discussing how to run
 effective meetings.
 Another key part of getting the word out and engaging stakeholders is making
 sure that potential sellers have a chance to bid. I talk about the two parts of
 conducting procurements: seeking proposals and awarding a contract.
                 Quick Assessment
1. ______ ______ is used to distribute project performance and
  status information.
2. Which component of the project management plan is used to
  provide guidance for distributing performance reports?
3. Who is responsible for stakeholder engagement management?
4. Building trust, resolving conflict, and active listening are examples
  of ______ ______ that are used to manage stakeholder
  engagement.
5. Facilitating consensus, negotiation, and influencing people are
  examples of ______ ______ that are used to manage stakeholder
  engagement.
6. A(n) ______ ______ is used to make sure that all sellers have the
  same information.
7. (True/False). You can use an RFI to gather information before
  sending out an RFP.
8. (True/False). You can negotiate contract terms and conditions.
9. (True/False). To improve communication, you should use simple
  language and redundancy.
10. A(n) ______ is a point or matter in question or in dispute.
                           Answers
1. Performance reporting. Performance reporting is used to distribute
  project performance and status information. Read more about this
  in Performance reporting.
2. Communications management plan. The communications
  management plan provides guidance on who needs information,
  when they need it, and how it will be provided. You can read more
  about the plan in Manage Communications.
3. Project manager. The project manager is responsible for engaging
  and managing stakeholders. Take a look at how project managers
  manage engagement in the section Manage Stakeholder
  Engagement.
4. Interpersonal skills. In addition to these interpersonal skills, you will
  also use management skills and communication methods. Look at
  Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Tools and Techniques to learn
  more about this topic.
5. Management skills. Management skills are important in providing
  information, managing meetings, and maintaining good
  relationships with stakeholders. They are discussed more in the
  section on Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Tools and
  Techniques.
6. Bidder conference. A bidder conference is used to ensure a fair
  process by making sure all sellers have the same information and
  to also answer questions that bidders may have. You can read
  more on this in the Bidder conferences section.
7. True. An RFI can be used to understand the abilities of the
  potential bidders before releasing an RFP. This is discussed in the
  sidebar Doing the two-step.
8. True. You can negotiate almost anything in an agreement,
  including place of delivery, payment schedules, and terms and
  conditions. Negotiating is discussed in the "Negotiating the
    contract" section.
 9. True. Simple language and redundancy increase the likelihood that
   your message will be understood correctly. Read more in Manage
   Communications: Tools and Techniques.
 10. Issue. An issue can also be a matter that is not settled and is
   under discussion. I talk about issues in Manage Stakeholder
   Engagement: Outputs.

Manage Communications
 Obviously, you're communicating throughout the entire project lifecycle. The
 communications management plan is started early in the project (see Book IV,
 Chapter 4 for more information), and after that, it provides guidance on what
 information should be communicated, to whom, how often, when, and in
 what format. Managing communications is concerned not only with
 following the communication management plan but also with responding to
 stakeholder requests for additional information or clarification of information.


          Manage Communication. Creating, collecting, distributing, storing,
      retrieving, and the ultimate disposition of project information in
      accordance to the communications management plan.
 In Book IV, Chapter 4, I cover the basic sender-receiver model that will be
 employed throughout the project. Keep that model in mind as I cover
 information on managing communication.
 The inputs to the process are (of course) the communications management
 plan (part of the project management plan), work performance reports,
 influencing factors such as organizational culture or regulatory requirements,
 and any organizational process assets that can help you, such as information
 from past projects and communication templates.

 Manage Communications: Tools and Techniques
 In Book IV, Chapter 4, I talk about formal and informal communication and
 written and verbal communication. Here is where that is applied. Table 3-1 is
 a refresher. It includes examples of when each type of communication can be
applied.

Table 3-1 Types of Communication
Method     When to Use                                        Examples

Formal     Complex issues, virtual teams, political           Reports, presentations, contracts, white
written    situations                                         papers

Formal
           Corrective action, negotiations, critical issues   Presentations, team meetings
verbal
Informal
           Day-to-day management, routine maintenance         Memos, notes, e-mails
written
Informal   Routine management, building relationships,        Conversations, management by walking
verbal     gathering information                              around, brainstorming



Communication technology and methods
Following is a list of communication technology and methods. When
selecting communications technology, remember that not everyone has the
same degree of technological knowledge or equipment. For example, a
contractor to develop media presentations may work with Apple machines,
but the buyer may work with PCs. Baby Boomers may not be familiar with
social media, whereas Generation Y users are usually very comfortable with
all kinds of electronic communication.
When choosing a communication method, keep in mind the guidelines given
in Table 3-1.
    Meetings
    Presentations
    One-on-one conversations
    Memos
    E-mails
    Web pages
    Videoconferencing
    Teleconferencing
    Web conferencing
    Intranets
   Filing systems
   Portals
   Collaborative work tools
   Text messaging



        The most effective project managers are those who are good
     communicators. Project managers who communicate effectively to team
     members, senior management, functional managers, and any other
     stakeholders will have better outcomes than those who don't.
When communicating with someone, remember these simple techniques to
help make your communication effective:
   Seek feedback.
   Establish multiple communication channels.
   Use face-to-face communication when possible.
   Be aware of the receiver's body language and expressions.
   Communicate at the proper time.
   Reinforce words with actions.
   Use simple language.
   Use redundancy.

Information management systems
Creating, collecting, distributing, storing, and retrieving require some type of
information management system. The larger and more complex the project,
the more robust the information management system needs to be. Some
aspects of the information management system will use hard-copy
documents. I always keep a hard-copy project notebook where I store memos,
meeting minutes, external communications, and information I need on a
regular basis, such as the latest schedule.
Electronic communications management includes e-mail, web information,
electronic reports, and so forth. Electronic communications tools include
everything from web meeting tools, portals, scheduling software,
collaboration tools, and other electronic interfaces, depending on the needs of
the project.
Performance reporting
Performance reporting is a specific type of communication. Performance
reporting entails collecting and analyzing information on the project baselines
and the actual results and comparing the variances in order to communicate
current and forecasted project status.
Figure 3-1 shows an example of a project performance report.


       There are several cross-cutting skills that are relevant to the Manage
     Communications process:
   Oral and written communication techniques, channels, and applications
   Presentation tools and techniques
   Information management tools, techniques, and methods
   Targeting communications to intended audiences
Figure 3-1: Project Performance Report.


  Manage Communications: Outputs
  As a result of all the meetings and communicating, you will have updated
  project information, such as
     Stakeholder communications: Information communicated to
     stakeholders, such as issue resolution and approved changes, as well as
    feedback from stakeholders, such as product-related queries and process
    information
    Project reports: Status reports, issue logs, lessons learned, and closure
    reports
    Project presentations: Information from presentations made to project
    stakeholders
    Project management plan updates: Updates to any project baseline
    Project document updates: Schedule updates, issue log updates
    Project records: Correspondence, memos, and minutes
    Lessons learned: Causes of issues and the reasons for choosing
    corrective actions

Manage Stakeholder Engagement
 The larger your project, the more time you will spend managing stakeholders
 and their engagement level, and the more critical this process is to the success
 of your project. Imagine a project with city and county government, the
 public, the department of transportation, police, and various and sundry other
 stakeholders. Do you think that you're going to spend your time looking at a
 schedule? No. You're going to spend your time juggling the various needs
 and interests of all these very influential stakeholders!


         The cross-cutting skill of relationship management is particularly
      relevant to the Manage Stakeholder Expectations process.
 To maintain satisfied stakeholders, you want to do three things:
    Engage stakeholders. Talk to your stakeholders throughout the project to
    ensure a common understanding of the project scope, benefits, and time
    and cost estimates. You will want to ensure their continued support of the
    project.
    Actively manage stakeholder expectations. You can do a lot of this by
    seeking stakeholder input while you're planning the project. The project
    management plan and the project documents are written records that
   communicate all aspects of the project. These are an effective method of
   managing expectations. I discuss the project management plan and the
   project documents in Book V, Chapter 3.
    Address stakeholder concerns before they escalate. You might need to
   have individual conversations with some stakeholders to ensure that they
   understand situations, such as why the scope they wanted is not part of the
   project, why they can't have what they want in the time frame they want
   it, or why you require their staff for specific periods of time. By
   addressing concerns before they become issues, you will save a lot of time
   and hassle.
    Clarify and resolve issues in a timely manner. If a stakeholder has a
   concern that rises to the level of an issue that you need to document and
   address, do so as soon as is reasonable. Sometimes, this results in a change
   request to alter the schedule, the scope, or the resources. Change requests
   are discussed in Chapter 1 of this minibook.



       Manage Stakeholder Engagement. Communicating and working
    with stakeholders to meet their needs/expectations, addressing issues as
    they occur, and fostering appropriate engagement in project activities
    throughout the project lifecycle.


      Managing stakeholders can get very political. Make sure you know
    whom you are talking to and what their agenda is!

Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Inputs
During project planning, you create a stakeholder management plan that you
will use and update throughout the project. Because your main method of
managing expectations is communication, you will use your communication
management plan as well. (See Book IV, Chapter 4 for more.)
It would be nice to assume that everything will go smoothly and as planned,
but because this never happens on projects, you also need a change log. Many
change logs are based on templates or information from past projects -- in
other words, organizational process assets (OPAs).
Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Tools and
Techniques
The communication skills I discuss earlier in this chapter are applied when
managing your stakeholders. As you manage stakeholders, pay particular
attention to their needs, promoting open communication and building trust.
You can build trust by employing active listening. For more on active
listening, see Book VI, Chapter 2. The nature of projects is that they have
changes along the way. Some stakeholders will be resistant to the changes,
but you have to help them overcome their resistance. You will also use
conflict resolution skills during this process. For a refresher on conflict
resolution, see Book VI, Chapter 2.
Some interactions with stakeholders will be in one-on-one meetings. Other
times, you will be speaking to a large group and making presentations. Still
others will require you to communicate via report or other written methods.
All these situations are considered management skills.

Manage Stakeholder Engagement: Outputs
An issue log is a key output that documents an issue and the potential impact.
It can include an indicator of the urgency of the situation and the person
accountable for resolving the issue as well.


        Issue. A point or matter in question or in dispute, or a point or matter
     that is not settled and is under discussion or over which there are
     opposing views or disagreements.
Working through issues
Working through issues requires communication skills, interpersonal skills,
and management skills. I discuss these skills in various places throughout this
book, so to make the information more meaningful, I am going to use my
running example of the childcare center to demonstrate each of the skills. I
use the parents, the human resources department, and vendors as the primary
stakeholders.
For purposes of this example, I assume that the stakeholder register has the
following information. For a refresher on the stakeholder register, go to Book
II, Chapter 3.
Assume the communications management plan has the following
information:




Assume that it's November 1. The childcare center is due to open on January
1. You have the following situations documented in your issue log:
Issue                                                             Impact
                                                                  The cost will be
The contractor has discovered that the sprinkler system in the    $15,000. He will
childcare center space is not up to the new codes that went       bring in additional
into effect this year. The water pressure is not high enough,     workers to complete
and the flow rate is too low. He has submitted a change           the work so there
request to bring the system up to code.                           will not be a
                                                                  schedule slip.
The staffing for the executive director and the childcare staff
                                                                  This could lead to a
is running behind. By this time, they should have had 4
                                                                  schedule slip if
resumes for the executive director and 60 for the childcare
                                                                  there isn't enough
staff. They only have 2 for the executive director and 50 for
                                                                  staff to open the
the childcare staff. In addition, they should have had 15
                                                                  center.
signed contracts for childcare staff, but they have only 10.

Issue resolution for the childcare center
To resolve these issues, you'll need to meet with various stakeholders and
employ communication, interpersonal, and management skills.
Contractor issue resolution
To deal with issues with the contractor, you convene a meeting with the
contractor, the head of facilities, the maintenance supervisor, and yourself to
discuss options. The maintenance supervisor says that his staff can handle the
sprinkler issue, thereby saving the $15,000 for the change order. You all
review the remaining scheduled work to find a way to resequence the work so
that the maintenance staff isn't working in the same location as the
contractor's staff. By looking at a detailed network diagram and resource
histogram, you figure out that by doing some of the work after hours, some
on weekends, and rearranging the sequence of the contractor's work, you can
have the sprinkler system up to code within ten days and not lose any time on
the schedule. This scenario demonstrates collaboration, problem-solving, and
negotiation.
Staffing issue resolution
Your next meeting is with the team leader for the human resources
department. You ask her why the staffing schedule is slipping. She states that
in order to staff the center with licensed childcare workers, you have to pay
them more. It is a safety and quality risk to hire staff that aren't licensed, even
if they have experience and have met the Department of Justice requirements.
You both agree that if you do hire only licensed staff, then the operating costs
will be higher, and per Morgan Cuthbert (sponsor), the higher cost will have
to be passed on to the parents. The increased cost works out to about $15 per
week, per child. You know that this increased fee will result in some unhappy
parents and possibly lower enrollments.
You and the team leader discuss options as alternatives to the higher cost,
such as reducing the number of hours that the childcare center is open and
changing the ratio of childcare staff to children. Because the staff licensing
issue represents a change to the project scope, the sponsor (Morgan Cuthbert)
has asked you to meet with the parents to discuss impact.
You ask the team leader to accompany you to the meeting with the parents so
she can help them understand the issues and participate in the issue
resolution. She agrees. This scenario demonstrates problem-solving and
active listening.
Talking to the parents
Although the communication plan states that scope changes would be
communicated via newsletter, you believe you need to seek the parents' input,
and so you schedule a meeting in the company auditorium. You work with the
human resources team leader to put together a slide presentation that outlines
the issues and options.
The day of the meeting, about 45 parents show up. After welcoming them to
the meeting, you begin your presentation. None of the parents are happy with
the proposed price increase of $15 per week. The audience is split about
needing all licensed staff members. You switch your role from presenter to
facilitator and keep the discussion focused and resolution oriented.
At the end of the meeting, the parents agree to the following:
   They will accept a staff-per-child ratio of 1:7 instead of 1:6.
   All caregivers will be licensed.
   The center opening time of 6 a.m. will be changed to 6:30 a.m.
All these accommodations will allow the center to open with the original
rates.
The group agrees to try this arrangement for three months. At that point, they
will meet with the Executive Director and discuss whether they want to
negotiate a different arrangement. As the parents walk out, some of them stop
to shake your hand and thank you for facilitating the meeting. This scenario
demonstrates overcoming resistance to change, presentation skills, public
speaking, negotiating, and building trust.
The common outputs from the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process are
updates to project documents and the project management plan, change
requests, and updates to project records.


        One of the exam objectives in the Monitoring and Controlling
     process group states that you use the issue register to manage issues and
     assign corrective action, which is why I have included it in this section,
     because Manage Stakeholder Engagement is an Executing process.
     Wherever you see this type of question, the important point is to
      document issues in an issue register (also known as an issues log),
      determine the appropriate action, and assign it to someone to follow up
      with the resolution.


Conduct Procurements
 Conducting procurements is where you make sure your potential customers
 have an opportunity to bid in fairness. The three aspects to conducting
 procurements are
    Sending out the bid documents to qualified sellers
    Applying the source selection criteria to the bids
    Selecting a seller
 These aspects overlap in places. In the following sections, I present each
 aspect separately.


          Conduct Procurements. Obtaining seller responses, selecting a
      seller, and awarding a contract.

 Conduct Procurements: Inputs
 Your make-or-buy decisions as well as information from select project
 documents -- such as the risk register that contains risk-related contract
 decisions -- are a starting point for conducting procurements.
 The procurement management plan provides information that guides the bid
 and award process. For the bid process, it identifies the various roles and
 responsibilities as well as the procurement documents that will be used. Roles
 and responsibilities can include
    Who manages the bidder conferences
    Who sits on the selection committee
    Who negotiates with sellers
    Who has authority to sign contracts
 If you need, review the following types of procurement documents in Book V,
 Chapter 2:
   Request for Quote (RFQ)
   Invitation for Bid (IFB)
   Request for Information (RFI)
   Request for Proposal (RFP)
The procurement statement of work (defined in Book V, Chapter 2) describes
the goods or services required in enough detail so that prospective bidders
can decide whether to bid.
Many times, the contracting department or procurement department will have
lists of qualified sellers or sellers who have worked with the organization.
This information can cut down the time you spend looking for qualified
sellers, and it can also steer you clear from sellers who performed poorly in
the past.
There are some instances when you don't need to compete for a bid:
    Sole source: There is only one provider in the market. This may be
   because of high entry costs (such as a utility company) or because a
   certain company owns a patent.
    Single source: You decide you want to work with a particular contractor.
   You may have had a good relationship in the past, he may be familiar with
   your business, or you held a similar competition in the near term past. If
   the seller has specific, unique qualifications, you may choose him without
   competition as well.



        Sole source. A condition that can exist when there is only one source
     for a given product, and the buyer is thus forced to procure from only
     that source.
Single source. A condition that occurs when there are multiple qualified
sources for a given product, but the buyer or project elects to place an order
from only one seller, thus waiving the opportunity to hold a competition.
                           --Project Procurement Management. Quentin W. Fleming. FMC Press. 2003.


After bidders respond to the procurement documents, you will apply the
source selection criteria that you developed in the planning process to the
seller proposals.

Conduct Procurements: Tools and Techniques
If the procurement department doesn't have a list of qualified sellers, you
might need to do some research to find candidates to send the procurement
documents to. An Internet search or advertising in trade publications are
common methods of generating interest in the bid process.


         By law, all government agencies, as well as county, state, and federal
     governments, are required to publicize bids as well as the evaluation
     criteria used to award the contract. You can sign up to be notified of
     pending government bid opportunities.
Bidder conferences
A bidder conference -- also known as a vendor conference or contractor
conference -- is a meeting between the buyer and the prospective sellers to
ensure that everyone bidding has all the information needed to submit
proposals. Most times, bids are done in person at the seller's site, a hotel, or
conference center, or the site where the work will take place. However, it is
becoming more common to hold bidder conferences virtually by using
conference calls or web meetings.


        The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct has two standards that
     are applicable to bidder conferences:
   We provide equal access to information to those who are authorized to
   have that information.
   We make opportunities equally available to qualified candidates.

Applying selection criteria
For awarding a contract, the procurement management plan has the selection
criteria, the contract type, and bonding and insurance requirements. As I
discuss in Book V, Chapter 2, the different types of contracts are
   Firm fixed price (FFP)
   Fixed price incentive fee (FPIF)
     Fixed price-economic price adjustment (FP-EPA)
     Cost plus fixed fee (CPFF)
     Cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)
     Cost plus award fee (CPAF)
     Time and materials (T&M)
 After the seller proposals come in, you apply the source selection criteria
 developed in the planning process. For complex procurements, you might
 have a source selection board that goes through all the proposals and applies
 the criteria. The source selection board needs someone with the required
 technical expertise ("expert judgment" in PMP-speak) to read through the
 proposals and rate them from a technical perspective. Complex procurements
 may also use an independent estimate as a benchmark or a "should cost"
 estimate to evaluate proposals.



                            Conflicts of interest
The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct (see Book IX, Chapter 2) has several
standards concerning fairness that apply to awarding a contract. The intent behind these
standards is to disclose conflicts of interest and make sure that procurements and contracting
situations are conducted with integrity. The fairness standards in the Code include the
following:
   We constantly reexamine our impartiality and objectivity, taking corrective action as
   appropriate.
   We proactively and fully disclose any real or potential conflicts of interest to the
   appropriate stakeholders.
   When we realize that we have a real or potential conflict of interest, we refrain from
   engaging in the decision-making process or otherwise attempting to influence outcomes,
   unless or until
   We have made full disclosure to the affected stakeholders.
   We have an approved mitigation plan.
   We have obtained the consent of the stakeholders to proceed.




 Negotiating the contract
 After the field is narrowed to one seller or a few potential sellers, the
negotiations begin. You can negotiate everything. Here is a partial list of
some items you might want to negotiate:
   Price
   Award structure
   Schedule
   Place of delivery
   Terms and conditions
   Authority to make changes
   Technical solutions
   Proprietary rights
   Maintenance and support fees
   Payment schedule



        The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct states that as
     professionals, we negotiate in good faith and that we respect the
     property rights of others. In addition, the cross-cutting skill of
     negotiating is likely to be integrated into questions regarding contract
     negotiation on the exam.
After everything is agreed to, you can put together the contract.


        Because a contract is a legal document, it often takes a significant
     amount of time to finalize. In the meantime, both parties want work to
     start. You can use a letter contract to start work until the contract is
     signed. A letter contract lays out the general agreement, but it specifies a
     time limit: usually, 30 days. The letter agreement states the work that
     will be done and outlines the payment structure for the time that the
     agreement is in place. This allows work to begin before the legal eagles
     are done dotting all the i's and crossing all the t's.
           Before signing a contract you, or someone on your team with
        appropriate expertise, should review the potential vendor site to
        determine its readiness to perform the work. This can be called a
        "readiness review." Common items to review include
      Are the staff in place or available quickly to begin work?
      Is all the necessary equipment maintained and operational?
      Is there sufficient upfront funding to initiate operations?
     Are all needed procedures, training, and processes in place?
     Are a quality program, risk management process, and change control
     process in place?
 Sometimes projects start late because the buyer assumes the items in the
 preceding list are in place and ready to go on Day 1, but the seller has those
 resources working on other jobs until the contract is signed.



                             Doing the two-step
It's not uncommon to have a two-step proposal process and a two-step award process. For
Step 1 of the proposal process, the buyer may send out a Request for Information (RFI) to
many potential sellers, asking questions about their business, their capacity, their capabilities,
experience in the field, references, and the like. Based on the responses to the RFI, Step 2
entails sending the bid documents to a smaller pool of potential sellers.
For the two-step award process, the selection committee may set a cut-off score for
proposals. The committee would rank all the proposals for Step 1, and only the proposals
ranking higher than the cut score would move forward into negotiations.




 Conduct Procurements: Outputs
 After negotiations are finalized, the parties can sign an agreement. A simple
 purchase may be documented on a purchase order (PO) or a basic ordering
 agreement (BOA). More complex purchases will have contracts with multiple
 components and be quite complex and lengthy. The following are
 components that you could see in a contract:
      Statement of work (SOW)
     Schedule baseline
     Performance reporting
     Roles and responsibilities
     Cost, fee structure, and payment terms
     Product acceptance criteria
     Warranty, limitation of liability, and product support information
     Insurance and performance bond requirements
     Change request process
     Termination and alternative dispute resolution mechanisms



           The legal term used to indicate a legal relationship is privity. If you
       sign a contract with a seller, you have contract privity. However, if the
       seller signs a contract with a subcontractor, you have no legal privity
       with the subcontractor.
 Based on the contract, there may be changes and updates to other
 documentation, such as
     Resource calendars: You might have to add contractor resources and
     adjust the hours of inhouse resources.
     Change requests: Changes to the work, approach, and elements of the
     project management plan might require changes.
     Project management plan updates: The schedule baseline, cost
     baseline, scope baseline, staffing plan, and procurement management plan
     might require updates.
     Project documents: Requirements documentation, the stakeholder
     register and stakeholder management strategy, and the risk register might
     require updates.



              Executing process group review
This minibook describes all the processes in the Executing process group. This information
makes up 30 percent of the questions on the exam, or in other words, 60 questions. To do
well on those 60 questions, you will need to know the tools, techniques, and outputs
associated with the processes. You will also need to be proficient in the skills and knowledge
associated with interpersonal skills. Many of the questions will integrate the information from
the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. Expect to see questions that require knowledge
and skills associated with the following:
   For this topic Turn to this section
   Creating project deliverables Chapter 1, "Direct and Manage Project Work"
   Integrating scope, schedule, and cost Chapter 1, "Direct and Manage Project Work"
   Decision-making Chapter 1, "Direct and Manage Project Work: Tools and Techniques"
   Chapter 2, "Decisions and problem-solving"
   Applying quality standards Chapter 1, "Perform Quality Assurance"
   Cultural diversity Chapter 2, "Acquire Project Team"
   Resolving conflict Chapter 2, "Manage Project Team"
   Active listening Chapter 2, "Leadership"
   Motivating team members Chapter 2, "Motivating"
   Negotiating Chapter 2, "Acquire Project Team" Chapter 3, "Negotiating the contract"
   Managing and distributing information Chapter 3, "Manage Communications"
   Presentations Chapter 3, "Manage Communications"
   Solving problems Chapter 2, "Decisions and problem-solving"
   Managing relationships and expectations Chapter 3, "Manage Stakeholder Engagement"




Key Terms
 Many of the communication, stakeholder, and procurement terms are
 introduced in Book IV, Chapter 4, and Book V, Chapters 2 and 3, where I talk
 about planning processes. In addition to all the terms in those chapters, you
 should also be familiar with the following terms.
     Issues
     Sole source
     Single source
     Privity
     Letter contract
Chapter Summary
 Three separate processes are covered in this chapter: Manage
 Communications, Manage Stakeholder Engagement, and Conduct
 Procurements. Even though they are three separate processes, the concept of
 using communication to manage stakeholders (internal and external) is a
 common theme throughout each process.
     Managing Communications is about getting stakeholders the information
    they need. You follow the communications management plan and respond
    to unexpected requests for information.
    Managing stakeholder engagement is a critical component in project
    success. You need to use interpersonal and management skills.
     Proactively manage engagement and expectations to try and avoid
    situations escalating to the point of becoming an issue, but use an issue log
    to manage those situations that do end up as an issue.
    The two aspects to conducting procurements are sending bid documents to
    qualified sellers, and then applying the source selection criteria to the bids
    and selecting a seller.
     Sending bid documents entails identifying bidders and holding a bidder
    conference. Bidder conferences make sure that all bidders have the same
    information and sufficient information to respond to the bid documents.
     After the bids are submitted, you apply source selection criteria to
    determine the best candidate(s) to negotiate with. After negotiations are
    complete, you award and sign the contract.
                          Prep Test
1. All the following are techniques that you can use to make your
  communication effective except
 A   Seeking feedback
 B   Being aware of body language
 C   Using simple language
 D   Using acronyms and technical terms

2. Which of the following is not a communication blocker?
 A   Redundancy
 B   Stereotyping
 C   Selective listening
 D   Ignoring cultural differences

3. Which statement is true about managing stakeholders'
  engagement?
 A They are open to change, so as long as you keep them informed,
 you should be fine.
 B You need to spend time only with the ones who aren't supporters
 of your project.
 C You should spend time working through concerns before they
 become issues.
 D Face-to-face is the only reliable way to manage expectations.

4. You've just been informed of a regulatory change that will
  impact your project. To whom should you communicate this?
 A   The sponsor
 B   The project management team
 C   The people identified in the communications management plan
 D    Any stakeholders listed in the register

5. All the following are important actions to take to keep your
  stakeholders satisfied except
 A    Clarify and resolve issues in a timely manner.
 B    Address stakeholder concerns before they escalate.
 C    Actively manage stakeholder expectations.
 D    Make sure they receive team member status reports weekly.

6. Which information in the procurement management plan is
  used to elicit bids from vendors?
 A    Types of bid documents
 B    Types of contracts
 C    Source selection criteria
 D    Bonding requirements

7. Which is not a method used to identify potential sellers?
 A    Internet search
 B    Bidder conference
 C    Advertising
 D    Prequalified seller lists

8. A two-step award process is
 A Sending an RFI for information and an RFQ for a quote at the
 same time
 B First determining the seller pool and then finalizing the bid
 documents
 C Used to narrow the field of proposals to those you will negotiate
 with
 D Used when you want the contractor to start work but the contract
 isn't finalized
9. You and the seller have agreed to terms. The selection and
  negotiation process was long and arduous, and you're both
  ready to go to work. Because the contract is lengthy and
  complex, the legal departments have been going back and forth.
  To start work before the legal department is done, you should
  create a
 A   Basic ordering agreement
 B   Letter contract
 C   Purchase order
 D   Statement of work

10. Information on the warranty and product support belongs in
  the
 A   Contract
 B   Bid documents
 C   Selection criteria
 D   Statement of work
                           Answers
1. D. Using acronyms and technical terms. Using acronyms and
  technical terms can cause confusion. They are not effective
  communication tools. Review Communication technology and
  methods.
2. A. Redundancy. Redundancy is a good communication technique,
  not a communication blocker. Go over Communication technology
  and methods.
3. C. You should spend time working through concerns before they
  become issues. Spending time going over concerns before they
  become issues is a good way to manage stakeholders. Check out
  Manage Stakeholder Engagement.
4. C. The people identified in the communications management plan.
  The communications management plan tells you who needs what
  information. Look into Manage Communications.
5. D. Make sure they receive team member status reports weekly. Not
  all stakeholders should receive status or progress reports. Follow
  the communications management plan. Go over Manage
  Stakeholder Engagement.
6. A. Types of bid documents. Bid documents are used to get bids.
  The other options are used for awarding the contract. Review
  Conduct Procurements: Inputs.
7. B. Bidder conference. A bidder conference is used after potential
  sellers have been identified. See Bidder conferences.
8. C. Used to narrow the field of proposals to those you will negotiate
  with. All the other options are used in a two-step bid process. Go
  over the sidebar Doing the two-step.
9. B. Letter contract. A letter contract allows the contractor to start
  work before the final contract is signed. See Conduct
  Procurements: Tools and Techniques.
10. A. Contract. The contract has the warranty and product support
  information. Check out Conduct Procurements: Outputs.
Book VII
Controlling Scope and Schedule




        For more, take a look at the article on monitoring and controlling
knowledge and skills at www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book VII: Controlling Scope and Schedule

Book VII: Chapter 1: Monitoring, Controlling, and Managing
 Change
   Knowledge and Skills for the Monitoring and Controlling Processes

   Monitor and Control Project Work

   Perform Integrated Change Control

   Comparing Control Processes

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VII: Chapter 2: Controlling Project Scope
   Validate Scope

   Control Scope

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VII: Chapter 3: Controlling Your Schedule
   Control Schedule

   Control Schedule: Inputs

   Control Schedule: Tools and Techniques

   Control Schedule: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary
 Chapter 1: Monitoring,
Controlling, and Managing
          Change
Exam Objectives
    Measure project performance, identify and quantify variances, and
    determine appropriate preventive and corrective actions.
    Communicate status to stakeholders per the communication
    management plan.
    Ensure baseline integrity by updating the project management plan
    in response to approved changes and communicating those approved
    changes to the team.

 This chapter is the start of the Monitoring and Controlling processes. I start
 by looking at the integration process Monitor and Control Project Work, and
 then move into the integration process Perform Integrated Change Control.
 These processes use information from many of the other control processes as
 well as some of the Executing processes and even the integration planning
 process Develop Project Management Plan.
 The Monitor and Control Project Work process looks at project performance
 overall and compares it against the project management plan (see Book III,
 Chapter 1). Other control processes look at specific aspects of the project
 performance, such as schedule, cost, or quality, and compare those
 performance aspects with specific components of the project management
 plan, such as the schedule baseline (see Book III, Chapter 3), cost baseline
 (see Book IV, Chapter 1), and quality metrics (see Book IV, Chapter 2). I get
 into each of those aspects of control in upcoming chapters in this minibook
 and in Book VIII.
 Employing integrated change control ensures that your baselines are
 meaningful and up to date. It is what gives stakeholders confidence that your
 measurements are relevant and that you are in control of the project scope,
 schedule, cost, and quality.
 As you read through this information, try and keep in mind the integrative
 nature of each process. Think about how it relates to the project as a whole
 rather than one specific knowledge area.
                 Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). Monitoring project work is about taking corrective
  action to ensure that the project stays within the threshold limits.
2. ______ ______ is compared with the ______ ______ ______ to
  discover the degree of variance.
3. The ______ ______ ______ determines the disposition of all
  change requests.
4. To provide a standardized, effective, and efficient way to centrally
  manage approved changes and baselines, you should use a(n)
  ______ ______ ______.
5. (True/False). Deferred changes are tracked in the Direct and
  Manage Project Execution process.
6. Crossing the ______ should trigger some action, such as
  generating an exception report.
7. Which process ensures that changes to the project are coordinated
  across all aspects of the project?
8. A(n) ______ ______ ______ is a collection of formal documented
  procedures that define how project deliverables and documentation
  will be controlled, changed, and approved.
9 (True/False). Preventive action is a type of change request.
10. In which process do you approve, disapprove, or defer requested
  changes?
                          Answers
1. False. Monitoring project work entails collecting information about
  the project, compiling and analyzing it, and communicating the
  status. Controlling is about taking corrective action. Look over the
  content in Monitoring versus controlling.
2. Work performance information, project management plan. Work
  performance information communicates the work completed and in
  progress. The project management plan contains the baseline(s).
  See Monitor and Control Project Work for more information on this
  topic.
3. Change control board. The change control board reviews all
  change requests and determines whether the changes should be
  accepted, rejected, or deferred. Read about the change control
  board in Perform Integrated Change Control.
4. Configuration management system. A configuration management
  system ensures there is a deliberate, defined method to manage
  product components and project documents. Read about this in
  Configuration management.
5. False. Approved changes are implemented in the Direct and
  Manage Project Execution process. Deferred changes are pending
  until they are either approved or denied. You will find more
  information about this in Perform Integrated Change Control.
6. Threshold. A threshold can apply to cost, schedule, or other project
  parameters. When a set value (threshold) is crossed, it means you
  need to take some kind of corrective or preventive action. Look over
  Monitor and Control Project Work: Tools and Techniques.
7. Perform Integrated Change Control. Perform Integrated Change
  Control ensures that a change to the scope considers the impact to
  schedule, cost, quality, risk, and so forth, and that the change is
  reflected in all elements of the project management plan and the
  project documents. This information is discussed in Perform
    Integrated Change Control.
 8. Change control system. A change control system provides a
   structure to submit, analyze, decide, and communicate project
   changes. Check out the information in Perform Integrated Change
   Control.
 9. True. Both preventive and corrective actions are considered
   change requests. See the information in A Change Control process.
 10. Perform Integrated Change Control. The Perform Integrated
   Change Control process is where all change requests are analyzed
   and a decision is made about which action the team should take
   with regards to the change. Look over Table 1-1: Monitor and
   Control Project Work versus Perform Integrated Change Control.

Knowledge and Skills for the
Monitoring and Controlling Processes
 Monitoring and controlling project work takes place throughout the project. It
 begins as soon as you start to formalize plans, and it doesn't end until the last
 document is archived.


         Monitoring and Controlling Process Group. Those processes
      required to track, review, and regulate the progress and performance of
      the project; identify any areas in which changes to the plan are required;
      and initiate the corresponding changes.
 To master the monitoring and controlling processes, you need cross-cutting
 skills that help you gather, analyze, organize, and communicate information.
 You will also need to employ problem-solving skills as well as stakeholder
 management and decision-making skills. Keep the following list of cross-
 cutting skills in mind as you read through the information in this minibook
 and Book VIII.
    Data-gathering techniques
    Decision-making techniques
Information management tools, techniques, and methods
Leadership tools and techniques
Oral and written communication techniques, channels, and applications
Presentation tools and techniques
Problem-solving tools and techniques
Project management software
Relationship management
Stakeholder impact analysis
Targeting communications to intended audiences



    Questions in the Monitoring and Controlling process group account
 for 25 percent of the exam. Although there will be many questions about
 the tools, techniques, and outputs, there will also be quite a few that
 have to do with these cross-cutting skills!
Monitor and Control Project Work
 This process uses information from the project management plan and the
 work performance information and compares the two.


        Monitor and Control Project Work. Tracking, reviewing, and
     reporting the progress to meet the performance objectives defined in the
     project management plan.
 To begin with, look at the difference between monitoring and controlling.
Monitoring versus controlling
When monitoring project work, you're performing the following activities:
   Collecting information about the project performance
   Providing forecasts for future work
   Tracking and analyzing risks
   Communicating the status of the project
When controlling the work, you are
   Comparing the information with the project management plan
   Compiling and analyzing the information
    Developing preventive action plans to keep the project within the variance
   thresholds
   Developing corrective action plans to bring the project back within the
   variance thresholds
   Recommending defect repairs for processes that allow poor performance
   Submitting change requests to implement the preventive and corrective
   actions, defect repairs, or other necessary changes
Here is how the PMBOK Guide Glossary defines these two terms.


       Monitor. Collect project performance data with respect to a plan,
    produce performance measures, and report and disseminate performance
    information.
Control. Comparing actual performance with planned performance,
analyzing variances, assessing trends to effect process improvements,
evaluating possible alternatives, and recommending appropriate corrective
action as needed.
Notice that many of these actions take place in other processes such as
Control Risks (covered in Book VIII, Chapter 4), Control Quality (covered in
Book VIII, Chapter 2), and other control processes. You can consider Monitor
and Control Project Work the parent process to most of the other monitoring
  and control processes.

  Monitor and Control Project Work: Inputs
  Where does the information you are monitoring come from? Figure 1-1
  shows how information about work performance migrates through the various
  project processes.




Figure 1-1: Where project performance information comes from.


  Figure 1-1 breaks down into the following steps:
  1. The team performs work to create project deliverables. The work takes
    place in the Direct and Manage Project Work process. The output from that
    process is work performance data.
  2. Work performance data is an input into processes in the Monitor and
    Control process group:
      * Control Scope
      * Control Schedule
   * Control Costs
   * Control Communications
   * Control Risks
   * Control Procurements
   * Control Stakeholder Engagement
3. An output from each of the control processes is work performance
  information -- the work performance data compared with the baseline and
  the variance thresholds.
4. Work performance information is an input to the Monitor and Control
  Project Work process in Project Integration Management. The work
  performance information is combined and analyzed to create work
  performance reports that describe the project status.
The definitions for the various stages of work performance are


       Work Performance Data. The raw observations and measurements
    identified during activities being performed to carry out the project
    work.
Work Performance Information. The performance data collected from
various controlling processes, analyzed in context and integrated based on
relationships across areas.
Work Performance Reports. The physical or electronic representation of
work performance information compiled in project documents, intended to
generate decisions, actions, or awareness.
The inputs to compare actual project performance to the planned performance
are the project management plan and the work performance information. You
can see that the work performance information comes from controlling
processes in scope, schedule, cost, and so forth. The work performance
information is then compared with the project baselines and variance
thresholds documented in the project management plan. The work
performance information from scope, schedule, and cost has actual
measurements, such as the dollar amounts spent, the deliverables actually
completed, and so forth. Cost and schedule forecasts are also used when
assessing the overall project performance.


        The project management plan not only contains the project baselines,
     but also the thresholds for variance for each of the project objectives,
     including at least scope, quality, schedule, and cost.


        Threshold. A cost, time, quality, technical, or resource value used as
     a parameter, and which may be included in project specifications.
     Crossing the threshold should trigger some action, such as generating an
     exception report.

Monitor and Control Project Work: Tools and
Techniques
Monitor and Control Project Work not only involves identifying variances but
also determining whether the variance is acceptable, what caused the
variance, and what (if anything) you should do about it. This is where expert
judgment is useful. Expertise is used to analyze performance, pinpoint the
cause of variances, and determine the appropriate actions to address
performance variances. You can use a number of techniques to analyze past
and current performance and also forecast future performance.
Analytical techniques
When analyzing data, you should check the accuracy of the source data and
make sure that schedule measurements and cost measurements are using the
same scope information to report performance information. Analyze what the
combined schedule and cost information tells you. Look at a few examples of
reviewing cost data:
    Over budget, ahead of schedule
   This state could mean that you're accomplishing work faster than
   expected, so you're spending funds faster than expected. This is fine if
   you're actually spending the same amount you budgeted for the work;
   you're just doing it earlier than you planned.
   This could also mean that you're spending money to expedite work. In
   other words, you're crashing your schedule to finish quicker. (Read about
   crashing schedules in Book III, Chapter 3, and Book VII, Chapter 3.) This
   might be okay, depending on the priorities for the project. If you're trying
   to get to market as soon as possible and the sponsor or client is willing to
   spend more to get there faster, you're in good shape.
   Over budget, behind schedule
   This isn't good. You might have underestimated, or maybe you're not
   doing a good job managing the project.
   This could also mean that a risk event occurred, and you had to spend
   money and take time to respond to the situation.
    Under budget, ahead of schedule
   This might be the most suspicious of all situations. It rarely happens, so
   the results should be scrutinized to see whether the cost and schedule
   estimates were padded, or perhaps you have an error in the numbers.
   Under budget, behind schedule
   Most likely, your project is starved for resources. You're under budget
   because your labor costs are lower than expected, but you're behind
   schedule because you don't have the manpower to accomplish the work as
   planned.
From these examples, you can see that you're looking at combined
information to understand the cause of any variances and understand the
implications of the variances.
Another source of information you should review is the status of your cost
and schedule reserves. If your project is 30 percent complete but you've spent
60 percent of your reserves, you should understand the implications for your
project. Perhaps the first 30 percent was the riskiest, and the remaining 70
percent is relatively risk free. In this circumstance, your remaining reserve
should be sufficient. However, if the majority of the uncertainty in your
project is likely to be toward the end, then it's a fair assumption that you will
overrun your budget.
Forecasting
Good performance reports include cost and schedule forecasts along with the
supporting data to explain the forecasts.


        Forecast. An estimate or prediction of conditions and events in the
     project's future based on information and knowledge available at the
     time of the forecast. The information is based on the project's past
     performance and expected future performance, and includes information
     that could impact the project in the future, such as estimates at
     completion and estimate to complete.
Of the several different methods of forecasting available, the main three to
look at are
   Time series
   Regression analysis
   Expert opinion
  Time series
  A time series forecasting method uses a model to predict performance based
  on past performance. In general, time series forecasting is more accurate for a
  short-term forecast for which future events are expected to be similar to the
  recent past. Predictions get less accurate the further in the future they fall.
  Another consideration with time series forecasting is whether the work or the
  environment for the future work is different from the past work. If so, time
  series forecasting is not the best method.
  In Book VIII, Chapter 1, I discuss the earned value (EV) cost forecasting
  methods of estimate to complete (ETC) and estimate at completion (EAC).
  These are a form of a time series method. In other words, EAC and ETC take
  information from the past and project it into the future. Another time series
  method is trend analysis. Trend analysis (see Figure 1-2) entails plotting the
  progress for past reporting periods and then projecting future performance
  assuming the same trend continues. Figure 1-2 shows a trend chart that shows
  a cost forecast based on multiple scenarios.




Figure 1-2: A trend chart for a time series forecast.
Regression analysis
Regression analysis looks at the relationship among variables that cause
fluctuations in outcomes. You assume the budget is the dependent variable
and then that resource skills, availability, and cost are independent variables.
You are looking to see the expectation of achieving the budget based on
changes in each independent variable.
Expert opinion
With this method, a person (or group) estimates cost or schedule
performance; this estimate is based on knowledge and expert opinion. Experts
may develop probability estimates or build models based on various
scenarios. Sometimes this method seems as if it's based on intuition or an
educated guess. However, many times, you can't really quantify the
knowledge that experience brings. A bottom-up estimate by an expert can
oftentimes be the most accurate method of forecasting.
Other forecasting methods
Other forecasting methods include running simulations and probabilistic
forecasts (a forecast based on a probability distribution). In reality, using
multiple methods will end up with the best results.


        The PMBOK Guide mentions many analytical techniques, including
     fault tree analysis, failure mode effect analysis (FMEA), and grouping
     methods. Don't worry! You don't have to know and understand all those
     methods of forecasting. You should just understand the basic ideas that
     you can use the past performance, variables that drive the future, or
     expert judgment to develop a forecast.
One way of documenting variances is by using a simple variance analysis
form, like the one shown in Figure 1-3.
Figure 1-3: A variance analysis form.


  Monitor and Control Project Work: Outputs
  By comparing the project management plan with the work performance
  information, the project manager can determine whether any change requests
  are required.
        In context of reviewing performance, a change request can be
   Corrective action
   Preventive action
   Defect repair
These are defined in Book VI, Chapter 1. If a change request is initiated, it
will go to the Perform Integrated Change Control process that I review next.
Regardless of any changes requested, the project management plan and the
project documents are updated to reflect the current project status.
Work performance reports
The three aspects of reporting performance are progress reporting, status
reporting, and forecasting.
   Progress reporting: Identifies the activities and progress that have taken
   place since the last progress report. This includes the scope that has been
   completed, the schedule work that has been accomplished, costs that have
   been incurred, and any significant milestone achievements.
   Status reporting: Describes the state of the project overall. For example,
   a status report might indicate that you have accomplished 50 percent of the
   project work, spent 55 percent of the project funds, and are 20 months into
   a 36-month project.
   Forecasting: Attempts to predict future accomplishments for scope and
   schedule and future expenditures. A forecast report will often identify an
   updated finish date and an updated cost estimate. I detail forecasts shortly.
I start out by listing the types of information that you should have in a
performance report, and then I talk about the different ways of presenting the
information.
Performance report data
As I mention previously, the information in the reports is identified in the
communication management plan. The information and the method of
presentation will vary by audience. At the very least, all performance reports
should include
   Work completed in the current period
   Work planned for completion but not complete, along with the reason(s)
   why
   Funds expended during the current period
   Any variance in the funds expended, along with the reason(s) why
   Any corrective or preventive actions taken
   Status of existing risks and issues
   Any new risks or issues
   Forecast for future schedule performance
   Forecast for future cost performance
I show you a simple performance report illustration in Book VI, Chapter 3.
For more complete information, you might also want to report on
   Resource utilization variances
   Summary of changes requested and their status
   Any quality findings
   New and resolved assumptions
  Reporting methods
  In addition to the performance report I show you in Book VI, Chapter 3, you
  can develop more visual charts and reports, such as
      Trend charts
      Tabular
      Bull's eye charts
      Stop light charts
      Dashboards



           Knowledge and skills in reporting procedures is one of the areas that
        will be tested on the exam. Work performance reports are the primary
        outputs that will be used to test your knowledge and skills for reporting
        procedures.
  Here are some examples of the types of information you can find in work
  performance reports.
  The chart in Figure 1-4 shows the trend of the cost performance index (CPI),
  which I explain in Book VIII, Chapter 1.




Figure 1-4: A trend chart for CPI.


  Figure 1-5, a bull's eye chart, shows performance of the project by plotting
  the schedule performance index (SPI) and CPI. (See Book VIII, Chapter 1,
  for more discussion on SPI and CPI.) This chart shows that Project E is in the
  worst shape, while D and F are performing better than expected. Projects C
  and F are the closest to plan of all the projects.




Figure 1-5: The bull's eye chart.


  Some other types of charts include
      Stop light charts
      Dashboard reports
      S-curve
  The stop light chart in Figure 1-6 indicates project status green (medium
  gray) if performing well within the threshold (0%-5% variance), yellow
  (light gray) if within the threshold but getting close to going beyond it (5%-
  10% variance), or red (dark gray) if over the threshold.
Figure 1-6: Stop light chart.


  The dashboard report shown in Figure 1-7 uses a series of gauges that show
  performance, using colors from a stop light chart or using other information
  to show performance.
Figure 1-7: Dashboard report.


  The S-curve in Figure 1-8 is a common way to compare the planned value
  (PV), earned value (EV), and actual cost (AC) data for a project using earned
  value management.
Figure 1-8: S-curve.


  In general, graphics that highlight the outliers are useful for senior executives.
  The project manager and the team should look at detailed tabular reports and
  variance analysis reports to understand the reasons behind the outliers.
  Depending on your work performance, you may need to update or change
  components in your project management plan or project documents.


          The Monitor and Control Project Work process requires you to have
        knowledge and skills in the following areas to pass the exam:
     Project control limits (thresholds and tolerances for scope, schedule, cost,
     and quality)
      Project performance metrics (effort, duration, and cost)
      Controlling performance against the project management plan
  The honesty standards in the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct are
  more relevant to the Report Performance process than any other process.
  There are many ways to misrepresent information in a performance report or
  leave out information that could reflect poorly on the project. You are likely
  to see scenario questions that address honesty standards and performance
  reporting on the PMP. The following are honesty standards from the Code of
  Ethics and Professional Conduct:
Earnestly seek to understand the truth.
Be truthful in communication and conduct.
 Provide accurate information in a timely manner.
 Do not engage in or condone behavior that is designed to deceive others,
including but not limited to, making misleading or false statements, stating
half-truths, providing information out of context or withholding
information that, if known, would render statements as misleading or
incomplete.
Taking responsibility for project performance
More than any other process, the Monitor and Control Project Work process
is where you determine whether you are fulfilling your obligations to deliver
project scope, with the agreed-upon quality, in a timely manner, for the
agreed-upon budget.
If you cannot fulfill your commitments, you have an obligation to take
ownership and make corrections as needed. Taking ownership applies to you
as a project manager and to your team members as well. The project manager
and the team members need to be accountable for any issues arising from
errors or omissions in the project.


        The following responsibility standards from the Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct are applicable to all the project management
     processes; however, they are particularly relevant in the Monitoring and
     Controlling process group.
   We fulfill the commitments that we undertake -- we do what we say we
   will do.
   When we make errors or omissions, we take ownership and make
   corrections promptly. When we discover errors or omissions caused by
   others, we communicate them to the appropriate body as soon as they are
   discovered. We accept accountability for any issues resulting from our
   errors or omissions and any resulting consequences.
The sidebar "The project scheduler" shows how many of the responsibility
standards from the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct could be applied
in a project situation.
                         The project scheduler
A few weeks ago, your project scheduler went on a leave of absence. Jill, your new scheduler,
has been working on the project for four weeks. You are looking at the latest performance
report and notice some errors in the network logic, certain baselines dates are different, and
the reports don't seem reflective of what's really happening. You approach John, the PMO
manager, who assigned Jill to your project. John informs you that Bill was originally scheduled
to work on your project. However, he was pulled to work on a different project, and the only
available resource was Jill. John sheepishly acknowledges that Jill is new, and he wasn't too
sure about her skill set, but based on your issues, John agrees that Jill needs some additional
training.
You, John, and Jill review past and current performance reports to determine the real status
and identify corrective actions you need to take to get the project back on track. In your
monthly performance report that you submit to the Project Portfolio Committee, you take
responsibility for the variance and describe the actions you're taking to correct it.
This scenario demonstrates the following responsibility standards:
   We accept only those assignments that are consistent with our background, experience,
   skills, and qualifications.
   We uphold this Code and hold each other accountable to it.
   When we make errors or omissions, we take ownership and make corrections promptly.
   When we discover errors or omissions caused by others, we communicate them to the
   appropriate body as soon as they are discovered. We accept accountability for any issues
   resulting from our errors or omissions and any resulting consequences.
Perform Integrated Change Control
 It's inevitable. You will have changes to your project. Change requests can
 come from anywhere. The PMBOK Guide shows a change request as an
 output from 16 different processes. The question, then, becomes whether you
 will manage them, or whether they will manage you. The structure you
 documented in the project management plan to manage change as well as the
 degree to which you adhere to that structure determines the answer to that
 question.
 You will be managing changes to the project from inception until final close-
 out. You will have project changes, product changes, changes to plans, and
 changes to project documents. All need to be analyzed and a decision made
 whether to accept, reject, or defer the change.
 Using my running childcare center example, here are some changes that
 could occur:
    Project change: The core team member from legal has taken another job,
    so you need to bring a new team member onto the project.
     Product change: To keep down costs, management decided to have one
    large playground instead of two separate playgrounds.
     Project management plan change: The schedule was just shortened by a
    month.
     Project document change: The city has a new regulation that impacts the
    childcare center. This is now a requirement that needs to be entered into
    the requirement documentation and the traceability matrix (see Book III,
    Chapter 2).
 In Book VI, Chapter 1, I discuss the Direct and Manage Project Execution
 process. In that chapter is a figure that shows all the places a change request
 could come from -- 14 different processes, in fact, that generate change
 requests. Perform Integrated Change Control is where all the change requests
 come for analysis and a decision on whether to approve the change requests.
 The approved changes get implemented; the others don't. Before getting into
 too much more detail, review some of the key definitions associated with this
 process and managing change.
        Perform Integrated Change Control. Reviewing all change
     requests; approving changes and managing changes to deliverables,
     organizational process assets, project documents, and project
     management plan; and communicating their disposition.
Change Control. A process whereby modifications to documents,
deliverables, or baselines associated with the project are identified,
documented, approved, or rejected.
Change Request. A formal proposal to modify any document, deliverable, or
baseline.
Change Control System. A set of procedures that describes how
modifications to the project deliverables and documentation are managed and
controlled.
Change Control Board (CCB). A formally chartered group responsible for
reviewing, evaluating, approving, delaying, or rejecting changes of a project,
and for recording and communicating such decisions.
In Book III, Chapter 1, I define some of the change management and
configuration management terms. I also discuss the change control plan and
the configuration management plan along with a sample of those plans.
Perform Integrated Change Control is where those plans are put into action.
A Change Control process
Change control starts with a change request. Figure 1-9 shows an example of
a change request.
Figure 1-9: A change request form.




         Change requests can include corrective and preventive actions, as
       well as defect repairs.


         The exam questions assume that you have a robust, documented
       Change Control process for your project, and also that the Change
       Control process handles changes to the product, project, and all project
       management plans and project documents.
  Following a Change Control process requires a series of steps. You can refer
  to Figure 1-10 as I walk through each of them.
Figure 1-10: The Change Control process.


     Change request: A stakeholder fills out a change request. Change
     requests can come from any stakeholder on the project.
     Change log: Each change request is documented in a change log. The
     change log has information such as
      * Change ID
      * Category
      * Description
      * Submitted by
      * Date submitted
      * Status
      * Disposition


            At this point, the Status would be open, and the Disposition field
     would be blank.
      Analysis: You need to fully understand the impact of the change request
across all areas of the project. This is where the project management plan
comes in handy. Even if the change is not optional, you should still
analyze and document the impact on all areas of the project.
CCB meeting: The change request and the completed analysis go to the
change control board. The CCB approves the change, denies the change,
or defers the decision until more information is available. At this point, the
Disposition field of the change control log is filled in. This is called the
change request status update that is the output from the Perform
Integrated Change Control process and an input to the Direct and Manage
Execution and the Perform Quality Control processes.
Communication: Approved changes are communicated to all impacted
parties, and the change is implemented. If the change isn't approved, the
stakeholder is advised of the reasons why the change was not approved.
Document updates: For changes that are approved, the project
management plan and the appropriate project documents are updated.
 Implementation: Implementation of approved changes is managed via
the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
 Verification: All approved change requests are verified in the Control
Quality process to ensure that they were implemented as approved.



    Managing change, analyzing change, updating documents, and
 communicating about change all take time. You need to take into
 consideration that part of your time as a project manager, as well as part
 of your team members' time, will be taken up by these activities.


    Everyone must follow the change control process, regardless of her
 position in the organization. If your sponsor or the customer demands a
 change, you may have to implement it, but you still have to submit a
 change request, log the change, analyze the impacts, and so forth.


     The fairness standard "We apply the rules of the organization without
favoritism or prejudice" from the Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct should be applied throughout the project, but you may find
particular relevance when it comes to maintaining a rigorous change
control process.
Configuration management
One of the areas you will have to be familiar with for the exam is
configuration management. If you work on small projects, you might never
have heard this term. It's kind of like change management on steroids.
I define configuration management system in Book III, Chapter 1, but I am
repeating that definition here. I also want to look at some of the other
definitions you will need to do well on these exam questions. The other
definitions are not from the PMBOK Guide.


        Configuration management system. A subsystem of the overall
     project management system. It is a collection of formal documented
     procedures used to apply technical and administrative direction and
     surveillance to
Identify and document the functional and physical characteristics of a
product, result, service, or component
Control any changes to such characteristics
Record and report each change and its implementation status
Support the audit of the products, results, or components to verify
conformance to requirements
It includes the documentation, tracking systems, and defined approval levels
necessary for authorizing and controlling changes.
Configuration identification. Selection and identification of a configuration
item provides the basis for which product configuration is defined and
certified, products and documents are labeled, changes are managed, and
accountability is maintained.
Configuration status accounting. Information is recorded and reported as to
when appropriate data about the configuration item should be provided. This
information includes a listing of approved configuration identification, status
of proposed changes to the configuration, and the implementation status of
approved changes.
Configuration verification and audit. Configuration verification and
configuration audits ensure the composition of a project's configuration items
is correct and that corresponding changes are registered, assessed, approved,
tracked, and correctly implemented. This ensures the functional requirements
defined in the configuration documentation have been met.
These definitions are admittedly pretty technical. The following example
assumes that a donation was made for the childcare center to customize a van
for transporting children on field trips to nearby locations, such as zoos, the
library, and so on. This example shows how configuration management
would be applied to the design and construction of the van for babies,
toddlers, and children at the childcare center.
Configuration identification
During the design phase of building the van, you have lots of drawings of the
various systems and parts that go into the van. As you elaborate and revise
your ideas, you make changes to these drawings. As one design idea changes,
it might affect the layout and design of other components.
You can see that the number of drawings and making sure that you have the
right drawings are critical to keeping control of the project. To maintain
control of the drawings, you decide to label all systems with an "alpha" code:
The engine drawings start with an E, the transmission drawings with a T, the
chassis drawings with a C, and so forth. Then you identify each part in the
various systems and apply a number to them. Then you put a "build number"
on each drawing to indicate whether it's in the concept phase, design phase,
detail design phase, and so on. Each drawing has a date and time identifier at
the bottom.
Now assume that you're in the detail design phase of building the vehicle.
You identify the items that need to be included in this phase of the project as
well as the information you want to record about those items. For example,
you might want to have all the physical components listed along with their
size, weight, material composition, and the supplier. By looking at the
configuration control log, you should be able to identify this information --
and also see whether and when changes to the items were submitted and also
the disposition of those changes.
Configuration status accounting
During the production cycle of building the van, you find that a lot of changes
keep coming through, and you need to keep retooling part of the production
line. After you run some reports to determine where the changes are coming
from, you find that they are coming from a particular branch within the
drawing (engineering) tree. You use these reports and metrics to communicate
production status.
Configuration verification and audit
When you build your prototype van, you want to make sure that the actual
parts are consistent with what the drawings say should be in the vehicle. You
also want to make sure that the system was used to document any changes to
the parts.


         The PMP exam usually (but not always) considers the change control
     system to be a part of the configuration management system. In practice,
     it may be that the configuration management system is part of the
     change control system. Read the questions carefully to determine which
     method the question is using.


        The information in the Perform Integrated Change Control
     corresponds directly with the knowledge and skills that will be tested for
     change management techniques and integrated change control
     techniques.
Comparing Control Processes
 So far, I have talked about two processes in the Project Integration
 Management knowledge area. Table 1-1 should help you understand the
 difference between them.

 Table 1-1 Monitor and Control Project Work versus
 Perform Integrated Change Control
Monitor and Control Project Work
Perform Integrated Change Control

Comparing the project management plan
with the actual project performance     Identifying that a change has occurred or should occur
information
                                        Influencing the factors that create changes to ensure that
Providing forecasts for future work
                                        changes are agreed upon and that the process is not
performance
                                        circumvented
                                                Reviewing requested changes, including recommended
Tracking and analyzing project risks            corrective and preventive actions, analyzing the
                                                requests, and documenting the impact on the project
Ensuring that the appropriate risk responses are Approving, disapproving, or pending requested changes,
implemented                                      corrective actions, and preventive actions
Recommending corrective and preventive action
                                              Maintaining the integrity of the baselines by managing
as well as defect repair so that actual
                                              the related configuration management and planning
performance is aligned with planned
                                              documentation
performance
Ensuring that accurate and timely progress
information is available
Managing the approved changes
Key Terms
 This chapter introduces vocabulary associated with monitoring and
 controlling the project work as well as managing change to the project.
    Monitor
    Control
    Threshold
    Forecast
    Time series
    Regression analysis
    Change control
    Change request
    Change control system
    Change control board (CCB)
    Change log
    Configuration management system
    Configuration identification
    Configuration status accounting
    Configuration verification and audit
Chapter Summary
 In this chapter, I introduce the Monitoring and Controlling process group and
 discuss the cross-cutting skills you need to do well on the exam. Monitoring
 and controlling progress happens throughout the project to ensure the work is
 progressing according to plan. If changes to the plan are required, a Change
 Control process is followed to ensure the integrity of the baselines.
     Monitoring and Controlling Project Work comprises two parts: monitoring
    and controlling. Monitoring collects information and communicates
    project status. Controlling compares the project status information against
    the plan to determine whether a change request for preventive or
    corrective action should be submitted.
    Monitor and Control Project Work is a parent process to many of the other
    control processes. Performance measurements from Control Scope,
    Control Schedule, and Control Costs are combined with information from
    Direct and Manage Project Work to create a performance report.
     Work performance information is compared with the information in the
    project management plan to determine whether any action should be
    taken, other than updating the project management plan and the project
    documents.
     Reporting integrates information from controlling and executing processes
    and combines it into a report that provides an overview of the project's
    performance overall. Like with most controlling processes, reporting uses
    information from the baseline(s) to compare against actual results. Causes
    and responses to variances are explained in the performance reports.
    Forecasts use information from past performance, future drivers of
    performance, and/or expert judgment to predict future performance.
     Performance reports are distributed to the stakeholders identified in the
    communications management plan in the format indicated. Reports can be
    illustrated via reporting template, charts, tables, and graphics.
    Perform Integrated Change Control ensures the project baselines are valid
    and that only approved changes are integrated into the baselines. This
process implements the change management plan and the configuration
management plan.
 The Change Control process should include a change request, analysis,
deliberation, and a decision. Those decisions should be communicated,
and the approved changes will be implemented.
 Configuration management is used to provide direction and surveillance
to project components, products, and documents. The three parts are
identification, status accounting, and verification and audit.
Prep Test
                     Multiple Choice

1. What is the process of tracking, reviewing, and reporting the
  progress to meet the performance objectives defined in the
  project management plan?
 A   Perform Integrated Change Control
 B   Configuration Management
 C   Direct and Manage Project Work
 D   Monitor and Control Project Work

2. Which of the following is an example of a monitoring activity?
 A   Tracking and analyzing risks
 B   Fixing defects
 C   Developing preventive actions
 D   Submitting change requests

3. Which process compiles status reports and puts them into a
  single document?
 A   Monitor and Control Project Work
 B   Perform Integrated Change Control
 C   Direct and Manage Project Work
 D   Control Communications

4. Variances that are within the ______ are considered acceptable.
 A   Baseline
 B   Threshold
 C   Boundaries
 D   10% range

5. Reducing the budget by 3% is considered a
 A   Project change
 B   Product change
 C   Project management plan change
 D   Project document change

6. Approved changes are implemented in which process?
 A   Monitor and Control Project Work
 B   Perform Integrated Change Control
 C   Direct and Manage Project Work
 D   Develop Project Management Plan

7. What document is used to track the status of all changes?
 A   A change request
 B   A change log
 C   A status update
 D   A change request control log

8. Determining how you will manage version control on your
  project documents is an example of
 A   A configuration management system
 B   Configuration identification
 C   Configuration status accounting
 D   Configuration verification and audit

                          Scenario 1
A team member has come to you with an idea to revise a work
process. The new process will save time and increase quality. The
idea for the new process looks good. The team member submitted a
request and you worked with her to determine the impact to other
processes. The CCB met and has a couple of follow-up questions for
the team member to respond to before the CCB makes a decision.
1. What is the first step in the change control process?
 A Implement the new process as part of the process improvement
 initiative.
 B Analyze the impact of the change on other processes.
 C Submit a change request.
 D Bring the idea to the CCB.

2. The CCB decided to ________ the change.
 A   Defer
 B   Reject
 C   Accept
 D   Pend
Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. D. Monitor and Control Project Work. The definition of Monitor and
  Control Project Work is "The process of tracking, reviewing, and
  regulating the progress to meet the performance objectives defined
  in the project management plan." See Monitor and Control Project
  Work.
2. A. Tracking and analyzing risks. Tracking and analyzing risks is a
  monitoring activity. The others are control activities. Look at
  Monitoring versus controlling.
3. A. Monitor and Control Project Work. Monitor and Control Project
  Work takes information from control processes and puts it into a
  single performance report. Review the information in Monitor and
  Control Project Work: Inputs.
4. B. Threshold. Variances within the threshold are acceptable. Check
  out Monitor and Control Project Work: Inputs.
5. A. Project change. Reducing the budget is a project change. You
  have to change the project management plan, but the change to the
  project is the driver, not the plan itself. Go over Perform Integrated
  Change Control.
6. C. Direct and Manage Project Work. Approved changes are
  implemented in the Direct and Manage Project Work process. The
  output from Perform Integrated Change Control is "Change request
  status updates." The input shows up as "Approved change
  requests." See the section A Change Control process.
7. B. A change log. A change log is used to enter and record the
  status of each change request. Go back over A Change Control
  process.
8. B. Configuration identification. Determining how you will identify
  and control documents is configuration identification. Review
  Configuration management.
                          Scenario 1
1. C. Ask the team member to submit a change request. The first step
  is to get a change request in the system. Then you can analyze it
  and bring it to the CCB. Look at A Change Control process.
2. A. Defer. The CCB wants more information; therefore, it is
  deferring the change. Check out A Change Control process.
Chapter 2: Controlling Project Scope
Exam Objectives
    Measure project performance, identify and quantify variances, and
    determine appropriate actions. Communicate status to stakeholder
    per the communication management plan.
    Ensure baseline integrity by updating the project management plan
    in response to approved changes and communicating those approved
    changes to the team.



 You may recognize these exam objectives. After all, they're the same exam
 objectives from the previous chapter. In fact, the same exam objectives are
 used for the next chapter of this minibook as well as the first chapter of the
 following minibook. As project managers, we measure project performance
 for our scope, schedule, and cost. As part of measuring the performance, we
 identify variances and then determine what to do about them. By controlling
 scope, schedule, and cost, we ensure baseline integrity by updating our plans
 only in response to approved changes.
 The two scope processes in the Monitoring and Controlling process group are
 Control Scope and Validate Scope. Control Scope ensures that only the work
 identified as being in-scope is delivered. In other words, it guards against
 scope creep. The scope baseline and the requirements are compared results as
 depicted in work performance data to ensure that all the approved scope is
 being delivered.
 Validate Scope takes the deliverables that have been verified as correct in the
 Control Quality process and works with the customer or sponsor to inspect
 them for acceptance. After all the deliverables have been accepted, the project
 or phase moves into the closure processes.
 I start this chapter by discussing the Validate Scope process and how
 deliverables flow through the project. Then I spend some time looking at the
relationship between the various processes in the Monitoring and Controlling
process group. The last section of this chapter focuses on controlling your
project scope.
                Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). Only those deliverables that have passed quality
  inspections are accepted by the customer.
2. Deliverables from the ______ ______ process are verified and
  become inputs to the Validate Scope process.
3. Which two planning processes have inputs to the Validate Scope
  process?
4. ______ ______ is the process of monitoring the status of the
  project and product scope and managing changes to the scope
  baseline.
5. A(n) ______ is a quantifiable deviation, departure, or divergence
  from a known baseline or expected value.
6. In which process do you formalize the acceptance of project
  deliverables?
7. Which method of inspection is used for requirements you can
  validate by visual inspection?
8. When seen in a control process, is variance analysis considered an
  input, a tool and technique, or an output?
9. Adding a new feature to a product without addressing the impact
  on the cost or schedule is called ______ ______.
10. (True/False). Implementing a contingency plan is an example of
  scope creep.
                          Answers
1. False. The customer may choose to accept deliverables that don't
  pass the quality control process. The customer may waive a
  requirement, or the deliverables might not have passed because
  they are better than the requirements. Look over the information in
  the Validate Scope section.
2. Control Quality. Deliverables from the Control Quality process are
  verified and become inputs to the Validate Scope process. The
  section The flow of deliverables has more information about this
  question.
3. Develop Project Management Plan and Collect Requirements.
  These two processes have planning documents and requirements
  documentation and information used in comparison with the work
  performance data and deliverables. For more information, check
  out Figure 2-1 in The flow of deliverables.
4. Control Scope. The glossary definition of Control Scope is the
  process of monitoring the status of the project and product scope
  and managing changes to the scope baseline. You can find this
  definition in Control Scope.
5. Variance. A variance is a quantifiable deviation, departure, or
  divergence from a known baseline or expected value. Look at
  Control Scope: Tools and Techniques.
6. Validate Scope. Verified deliverables are inputs to the Validate
  Scope process. The deliverables are formally accepted by the
  sponsor, customer, or other authorized stakeholder in the Validate
  Scope process. See Validate Scope for more information.
7. Examine. There are four methods you can use in inspection.
  Examining a deliverable is used when you can visually confirm the
  requirement. You can learn more about this in Validate Scope:
  Tools, Techniques, and Outputs.
8. Tool and technique. Variance analysis is a technique used in the
    Control Scope process. Check out Validate Scope: Tools,
    Techniques, and Outputs.
 9. Scope creep. If you don't consider the impacts of a scope change
   on the schedule, cost, resources, risk, quality, and so forth, you are
   setting yourself up for challenges and disappointments. Look at the
   information in Creep versus change.
 10. False. Implementing a contingency plan is an example of a
   change in scope. Read about this in Scope change.


Validate Scope
 When I first heard the phrase "validate scope," I thought it meant that I
 needed to check with the stakeholders to make sure I had correctly heard
 what they wanted. Be forewarned, though: That's not what it means on the
 PMP exam! Rather, it means that you're receiving formal acceptance of
 project deliverables. The project charter (discussed in Book II, Chapter 2)
 identifies who can sign off that the project is complete. The project scope
 statement (discussed in Book III, Chapter 2) identifies criteria for completion.


         Validate Scope. Formalizing acceptance of the completed project
      deliverables.
 Another area where you could have trouble if you don't know the glossary
 terms is understanding the difference between validation and verification.
 These two terms can be used interchangeably or in very specific ways,
 depending on the industry in which you work. The PMP exam will say that
 verification means the product complies with requirements. Validation means
 the product meets the needs of the customer.


         Verification. The evaluation of whether a product, service, or system
      complies with a regulation, requirement, specification, or imposed
      condition. It is often an internal process.
 Validation. The assurance that a product, service, or system meets the needs
of the customer and other identified stakeholders. It often involves acceptance
and suitability with external customers.
Here is one other little nuance you should know about validating scope before
you get into the meat of the process: Validate Scope and Control Quality are
closely related. The difference is that the intent of Control Quality is to ensure
that the deliverables are technically correct. The intent of Validate Scope is to
obtain customer acceptance. This means that theoretically, you could have a
deliverable that's not correct and doesn't pass quality control but might be
accepted by the customer. The customer might waive a requirement or say the
deliverable is good enough -- or perhaps it isn't correct because you over-
delivered. In all these situations, the deliverable is not correct, but it would be
accepted.


        In general, the Control Quality process is performed prior to
     validating scope.

The flow of deliverables
Figure 2-1 shows the flow of completed deliverables through various
processes.
Figure 2-1: The flow of deliverables.


  You can see how components from the project management plan and the
  Collect Requirements process are used along with the deliverables created
  from the Direct and Manage Project Work process that have been are verified
  in the Control Quality process. Those verified deliverables are ready for
  inspection in the Validate Scope process. After the deliverables are accepted,
  they are ready for close-out.


            I want to stress an important point about the relationship between
     getting acceptance on the deliverables and closing the project or phase:
     You should perform scope validation throughout the project. You don't
     want to wait until the end of the project to show everything to the
     customer and hope that he likes it. You need to show deliverables along
     the way. The Close Project or Phase process occurs at the end of a phase
     when the customer accepts an entire set of deliverables and formally
     signs off that the phase is complete -- or, in the case of the project, signs
     off that all deliverables are complete and accepted, and then the project
     can move into project closure.

Validate Scope: Inputs
To accept the deliverables, the customer should look at the scope baseline and
the requirements. These documents contain all the detailed information about
each deliverable. Each of the documents below is discussed in detail in Book
III, Chapter 2. As a refresher, you would have the following information:
   Scope management plan: Contains information on how you will validate
   each deliverable
   Scope statement: Describes product deliverables and their acceptance
   criteria
   Work breakdown structure (WBS): Identifies all the deliverables
   WBS dictionary: Provides a detailed technical description of each
   deliverable in the WBS
   Requirements documentation: Lists all the technical requirements,
   product requirements, business requirements, and so forth
   Requirements traceability matrix: Links requirements to their origin
   and may have information on how the requirement will be verified
The project manager (or the delegated representative) should inspect the
verified deliverables and/or the work performance data and compare them
with the information in the documents listed in the preceding list.

Validate Scope: Tools, Techniques, and Outputs
The only technique used for validating scope is inspection. Inspection entails
reviewing the deliverables to make sure they meet the stakeholder needs.
There are many ways to do this:
   Test. For quantifiable requirements, you can measure. This is good for
   size, weight, and speed.
   Examine. For those requirements you can validate by a visual inspection,
   you can examine the deliverable.
   Analysis. This method is used if you can't see what is happening, but you
   can infer from the result that things work correctly.
   Demonstration. For deliverables that need to perform one or more steps,
   you can demonstrate the steps.
Take a look at how you could use each of these methods with my running
childcare center example:
   You can test how the security system works by making sure the cameras
   cover the area you need and that the alarm company is notified when the
   perimeter is breached.
   You can examine the furniture and equipment to make sure that it's child-
   size and safe.
    You can analyze the enrollment software to see that it performs as
   promised.
    You can demonstrate that the security system cameras and motion
   detectors show up in the correct locations on the computer screens and that
   they correctly represent the physical layout of the childcare center.
As I mention earlier, you should conduct validation throughout the project.
You can do it as deliverables are completed, at phase gates, or at milestones.
For the childcare center, you could perform validation at the following points:
1. Meet with the parents to gather requirements.
2. After the blueprints are complete, show the parents how the blueprints
  meet the requirements.
3. Do a walk-through when the rough construction work is done to validate
  that construction is consistent with the blueprints.
4. Do a final walk-through to gain final acceptance that the final build-out is
  acceptable.
At each inspection, you would receive sign-off from a parent representative,
the project team member in charge of engineering and construction, and the
project manager. One tool that can help you is a Product Acceptance form,
which can track verification information, such as
   Requirement
   Verification method
   Acceptance criteria
   Status
   Signature
You can set this up in a table like the form in Figure 2-2. That way, when all
the deliverables are signed off, you can move to the Close Project or Phase
process.
Figure 2-2: A Product Acceptance form.


  Those deliverables that meet the acceptance criteria are formally signed off
  by the customer. Those that don't will require a change request for defect
  repair. You should note why the deliverables were not accepted as well as the
  subsequent follow-up actions.
        A defect repair is a type of change request. I define defect repair as
      "A formally documented identification of a defect in a project
      component with a recommendation to either repair the defect or
      completely replace the component."


Control Scope
 Losing control of the project and product scope is the fastest way to get
 behind schedule and overrun your budget. Controlling the scope is
 challenging because stakeholders have differing ideas about what is in and
 out of scope, and senior managers and customers don't appreciate being told
 they can't have what they ask for. However, if you want to have any hope of a
 successful project, you must control your scope! That doesn't mean that your
 scope will never change -- because it will. Rather, this means that all
 changes must follow the change control process, and all changes must take
 into consideration the impact on schedule, cost, quality, resources, risks, and
 so forth. I discuss the Perform Integrated Change Control process in the
 previous chapter. The following definitions will help frame my forthcoming
 discussion about the Control Scope process.


         Control Scope. Monitoring the status of the project and product
      scope and managing changes to the scope baseline.
 Scope Change. Any change to the project scope. A scope change almost
 always requires an adjustment to the project cost or schedule.
 Scope Creep. The uncontrolled expansion to product or project scope
 without adjustments to time, cost, and resources.

 Creep versus change
 You can see by the preceding definitions that the difference between scope
 creep and scope change is addressing the impact of the scope change on the
 schedule, cost, and other aspects of the project.
 Scope change
 Start by looking at some of the common causes of scope changes:
   External event: Changes in the competitive environment or a new
   regulation can cause the team or the customer to reconsider the product
   scope.
    Error in defining product scope: If a requirement was left out in
   defining the scope originally, the scope will have to be changed to include
   the new requirement.
   Error in defining project scope: An error in defining the project scope,
   such as needed to employ specific procedures or processes, could entail
   changing the project scope.
    Value-adding change: Sometimes a team member finds a better way of
   accomplishing the work or determines how to improve quality by doing
   things differently.
    Implementing a contingency plan or workaround: If a risk event
   occurs and you need to take actions to respond to it, the actions could
   cause a change to either the project or product scope.
    Customer sees the product and wants changes: Some product
   development projects employ a life cycle that allows for iterative
   development as the customer and end users see interim deliverables. This
   is still a scope change, but the project team is planning for the design and
   the deliverables to evolve with each iteration.
Here's how each of these types of changes could be applied to the childcare
center.
   External event: There are new regulations regarding water pressure and
   flow rate.
   Error in defining the product: The architect didn't lay out the HVAC
   system correctly to match the floor plan.
    Error in defining the project: The project manager didn't include the
   contractor in the weekly team meetings or include the weekly report
   templates the contractor will need to submit.
    Value-adding change: The general contractor comes by one morning and
   tells you he knows of a kitchen supply wholesaler that's going out of
   business, with appliances for less than wholesale and higher grade than the
   appliances you planned for the childcare center. This change improves
   performance and reduces cost.
    Implementing a contingency plan or workaround: In Book V, Chapter
   1, I identify the following risk: "The city might not approve the plans, thus
   causing a schedule delay." If this risk did occur, the response was to
   mitigate the risk by following up weekly. If the risk occurred anyway, the
   contingency plan was to immediately start drawing up plans to resubmit.
   This is additional scope that would need to be incorporated into the
   project.
    Customer seeing the product and wanting changes: Assume that the
   parents come to the childcare center after the frame is completed but
   before any of the electric, plumbing, and HVAC work has been done.
   Some of the parents think it would be a good idea to increase the size of
   the playroom and decrease the size of the eating area. The contractor is on-
   site and says that could be done -- and that he can give you an estimate
   for cost and schedule implications by the end of the week.

Scope creep
Now look at the other side of the equation: scope creep. No project is immune
to the perils of scope creep. You have to be strong, have good scope
definition, and have a good change control process to avoid it. Here are some
common causes of scope creep:
   Lack of change control: If you don't have a well-defined change control
   system, you can't effectively control the project. It isn't enough to have a
   change control system, though. Stakeholders have to know about it, it
   can't be overly prohibitive to use, and you have to enforce it.
   Not understanding the work needed to meet project objectives: If you
   start working on a project before you understand all the work needed to
   meet the project objectives, you are likely to miss deliverables or miss the
   amount of work it takes to meet those deliverables.
    Lack of communication: Stakeholders can say what they want
   (encoding) -- and in their heads, that message is very clear. However, in
   the decoding process, the receiver might have a completely different
   interpretation of what the stakeholder wants. By not using multiple modes
   of communication, using jargon, or assuming that you understand what the
   customer wants, you are leaving yourself open to misinterpretation of
   scope -- and thus rework and scope creep -- to deliver what the
   stakeholder wants.
    Not saying no: This applies to the project manager, sponsor, and team
   members. It can be scary and unpleasant to tell someone she can't have
   what she wants. Sometimes it seems easier to just give people what they
   want and deal with the schedule and cost overruns later. You must enforce
   the change control system. You don't have to be rude about it, but you
   must make sure it is followed! If you give in once, you will get walked
   over time and time again.
To prevent scope creep, follow these rules:
1. Fully define and document your scope.
2. Meet with your stakeholders and customers often to confirm that you all
  have the same understanding of scope.
3. Establish a change control system (see Book VII, Chapter 1) that includes
    * A change request form
    * A process to analyze the impacts of change requests
    * A change control board to discuss and determine the outcome of the
      change request
    * A method to communicate change request status (approved, denied,
      pended)
    * A procedure to update plans to incorporate approved changes
4. Document the scope using requirements, a scope statement, a WBS, and a
  WBS dictionary.
5. Get sign-off on the scope and baseline it.
6. Enforce the change control system.
7. Keep project documents up to date.

Control Scope: Inputs
To this point, I've talked quite a bit about the causes of change to project
scope. Now I walk you through the process.
All control processes begin with the project management plan as an input. In
the case of the Control Scope process, you will consider the following
elements:
   Scope baseline, comprising the scope statement, WBS, and WBS
   dictionary
   Scope management plan, with a section describing how you will control
   project scope
   Change control plan that describes the overall project change control
   system
   Configuration management plan that describes how you will control the
   physical elements of the product
   Requirements management plan that describes how you will manage
   and control project requirements
In addition to the scope baseline, you will need information about the
requirements -- specifically, the requirements documentation and the
requirements traceability matrix. If you need a refresher on these, check out
Book III, Chapter 2.
Work performance data includes the deliverables that have started, their
progress to date, and the deliverables that have been completed. You will also
want to know the number of scope change requests and the status of those
requests.

Control Scope: Tools and Techniques
The team takes the information from the inputs and performs a variance
analysis. Take a minute and look at a few definitions.


        Variance. A quantifiable deviation, departure, or divergence away
     from a known baseline or expected value.
Variance Analysis. A technique for determining the cause and degree of
difference between the baseline and actual performance.
This is a fancy way of saying you are determining whether the scope you
have is consistent with the scope that was planned. Variance analysis includes
a technical as well as physical evaluation of the products. If you find a
 variance, you need to discover the degree of variance as well as the root
 cause. That information will help you determine whether you need to take
 any actions to resolve the variance.

 Control Scope: Outputs
 As a result of the variance analysis, you will have work performance
 information. The information is used to update your organizational process
 assets (OPAs), such as causes of variances and lessons learned. If your
 variances cross the threshold, you need to submit a change request for
 corrective or preventive actions or a defect repair. You might also need to
 update various elements of the project management plan, such as the scope
 baseline and probably the schedule and cost baselines as well, because a
 change in scope usually causes a change in schedule and cost. You may need
 to update your requirements information, too.



                       Data versus information
There is a difference between work performance data and work performance information.
Work performance data is an output from the Direct and Manage Project Work process. Work
performance data is the raw observations and measurements identified during activities being
performed to carry out the project work. Work performance data is a generic term that can
include
   Status of deliverables
   Implementation of change requests
   Corrective actions taken
   Preventive actions taken
   Status of defect repairs
   Forecasts for estimates to complete
   Percent of work actually completed
   Technical achievements
   Actual start and finish dates of schedule activities
Work performance information takes the baselines and compares them with the actual
performance to develop contextualized measurements of progress. For example, work
performance data might state that you have 8 of 10 widgets built, and the variance analysis
shows that they are built correctly. Therefore, work performance information states that you
are 80 percent complete with the work.
         The ability to control performance to the project management plan is
      prevalent in many of the monitor and control processes. However, it all
      starts with managing the project scope effectively. Therefore, it is
      predictable that the test questions on the ability to manage the project
      plan will focus on the Control Scope process.

Key Terms
 The following terms are used to validate and control changes to the project
 scope:
    Verification
    Validation
    Scope change
    Scope creep
    Variance
    Variance analysis
Chapter Summary
 In this chapter, I look at validating that the product meets the needs of the
 customer. I also discuss how to control the project scope.
     Validating scope is about demonstrating to the customer or sponsor that
    the deliverables meet her needs. After validation is complete, the customer
    or sponsor should approve and sign off on the scope.
    Deliverables are created in the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
    They then go to Control Quality to ensure that they are correct. After they
    are verified as correct, deliverables go to the Validate Scope process for
    customer acceptance. When all deliverables are accepted, they go to the
    Close Project or Phase process.
    Inspection is how you prove the capabilities of deliverables. You can
    measure, examine, test, and demonstrate capabilities.
     Scope change is common on projects. Scope creep is changing the scope
    without addressing the effects on time, cost, resources, or other aspects of
    the project. Any change needs to go through the Perform Integrated
    Change Control process, and the impact on schedule, cost, and other
    objectives needs to be taken into consideration before implementing the
    change.
     To control scope, you compare the baseline and requirements with the
    results. By conducting a variance analysis, you will determine whether a
    variance exists -- and if one does, whether you should submit a change
    request. You will end up with work performance information and updates
    to the project management plan, project documents, and organizational
    process assets.
                         Prep Test
1. Making sure that the deliverables are built according to the
  requirements and specifications is part of
 A    Validate Scope
 B    Control Scope
 C    Perform Quality Assurance
 D    Control Quality

2. The objective of the Validate Scope process is to
 A    Get sign-off on deliverables.
 B    Close out the project.
 C    Make sure all the deliverables meet the specifications.
 D    Make sure you understood the scope requirements correctly.

3. Which is the proper sequence of events?
 A Control Quality, Direct and Manage Project Work, Validate
 Scope, Close Project or Phase
 B Direct and Manage Project Work, Validate Scope, Control
 Quality, Close Project or Phase
 C Direct and Manage Project Work, Perform Quality Assurance,
 Validate Scope, Close Project or Phase
 D Direct and Manage Project Work, Control Quality, Validate
 Scope, Close Project or Phase

4. The requirement states that the software must pull information
  from three different reports and then average the outcome and
  show the range and standard deviation. Which inspection
  technique should you use?
 A    Test
 B    Examine
  C   Inspect
  D   Measure

5. You hired a contractor to build a deck that holds your patio
  furniture, a grill, and a fire pit. The contractor is done with the
  job and asks you to come inspect the work before submitting a
  final bill. Which technique should you use to inspect the work?
  A   Test
  B   Examine
  C   Demonstrate
  D   Measure

6. Which of the following is not an output of the Control Scope
  process?
  A   Organizational process asset updates
  B   Change requests
  C   Work performance data
  D   Project document updates

7. Which of the following is a common cause of changes to
  scope?
  A   Lack of communication
  B   Not understanding the work needed to meet project objectives
  C   Defining the work incorrectly
  D   Lack of a change control process

8. Which of the following is a common cause of scope creep?
  A   Not being able to say no
  B   A change in the marketplace
  C   Implementing a workaround
  D   A value-added change
9. If you want to prevent scope creep, you should take a number
  of steps. Of the following steps, which would you do first?
 A Get sign-off on the scope and baseline it.
 B Meet with stakeholders to affirm you have a common
 understanding of the scope.
 C Enforce the change control system.
 D Communicate changes.

10. Which of the following is an example of work performance
  information?
 A   Technical achievements
 B   Status of defect repairs
 C   60% complete
 D   Actual start date
                          Answers
1. D. Control Quality. Control Quality is about making sure the
  deliverables are built correctly according to requirements and
  specifications. Look at Validate Scope.
2. A. Get sponsor sign-off on deliverables. In Validate Scope, you
  want the customer or sponsor to accept and sign off on
  deliverables. See Validate Scope.
3. D. Direct and Manage Project Work, Control Quality, Validate
  Scope, Close Project or Phase. That is the sequence of processes
  that occur with deliverables. Review The flow of deliverables.
4. A. Test. Because you can't see what is happening, you have to
  infer, based on the result. This is an example of testing. Check out
  Validate Scope: Tools, Techniques, and Outputs.
5. B. Examine. You can examine that the deck holds the furniture and
  grill and has a fire pit. Look into Validate Scope: Tools, Techniques,
  and Outputs.
6. C. Work performance data. Work performance information is an
  input. Review Control Scope: Outputs.
7. C. Defining the work incorrectly. Incorrectly defining the work is an
  error in defining product or project scope. The other answers are
  examples of what causes scope creep. Go over Scope change.
8. A. Not being able to say no. One of the common causes of scope
  creep is not being able to say no to a customer, sponsor, or other
  stakeholder. The other options are common reasons for scope
  change. Look at Scope creep.
9. B. Meet with stakeholders to affirm you have a common
  understanding of the scope. Having a common understanding of
  project scope upfront is the first step to preventing scope creep.
  See the information in Scope creep.
10. C. 60% complete. All the other answers are examples of work
performance data. Review the sidebar Data versus information.
Chapter 3: Controlling Your Schedule
Exam Objectives
    Measure project performance, identify and quantify variances, and
    determine appropriate preventive and corrective actions.
    Communicate status to stakeholders per the communication
    management plan.
    Ensure baseline integrity by updating the project management plan
    in response to approved changes and communicating those approved
    changes to the team.



 Controlling the schedule has similar exam objectives, inputs, and outputs to
 the Control Scope (see Book VII, Chapter 2) and Control Cost (see Book
 VIII, Chapter 1) processes. However, the tools and techniques are similar to
 the Develop Schedule process (see Book III, Chapter 3).
 In the Control Schedule process, you determine the current schedule status of
 the project. Where variances exist, you need to understand the nature of the
 variances and what caused them. This allows you to respond appropriately.
 Where possible, try to influence those factors that cause variances, such as
 resource variances, scope creep, different productive rates, and so forth.
 When changes are required to the schedule, make sure that they go through
 the change control process; then, update the schedule baseline to maintain
 baseline integrity.
                Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). A schedule revision needs to go through the
  integrated Change Control process.
2. The ______ ______ ______ establishes criteria and the activities
  for developing and controlling the project schedule.
3. (True/False). A change in priorities is one of the reasons why
  project schedules slip.
4. What are the two types of schedule compression?
5. One way to optimize your schedule is to adjust ______ and
  ______.
6. Which scheduling technique should you use to analyze your
  utilization of buffer?
7. To assess how various situations can impact your project, you
  should use which scheduling technique?
8. If you want to shorten your schedule and you are willing to spend
  funds to do so, what schedule compression technique should you
  employ?
9. (True/False). An SPI of -.96 is a viable work performance
  measurement from the Control Schedule process.
10. Fast-tracking your schedule increases the possibility of ______.
                          Answers
1. False. A schedule change needs to go through the Perform
  Integrated Change Control process. A schedule revision does not.
  You can find more information about schedule revisions in Control
  Schedule: Inputs.
2. Schedule management plan. The schedule management plan is
  the part of the project management plan that establishes criteria
  and the activities for developing and controlling the project
  schedule. You can find information on the schedule management
  plan in Control Schedule.
3. True. A change in priorities is one of the reasons why project
  schedules slip; others include staffing variance and inaccurate
  estimating. To see more reasons why schedules can slip, read up
  on Control Schedule: Tools and Techniques.
4. Crashing, fast-tracking. The two types of schedule compression
  you will be tested on are crashing and fast-tracking. You can read
  about them in Schedule compression.
5. Leads, lags. Adjusting leads and lags can help you find the best
  approach for scheduling project work. You can read about adjusting
  leads and lags in Fast-tracking.
6. Performance reviews. In addition to analyzing the utilization of
  buffer, performance reviews include trend analysis and earned
  value management. Read more about this in the section
  Performance reviews.
7. Modeling techniques. Modeling techniques allow you to see how
  the schedule will be impacted based on uncertain future events.
  You can learn more about this technique in Modeling techniques.
8. Crashing. Crashing generally costs money, whereas fast-tracking
  does not. Check out Schedule compression.
9. False. You can't have a negative SPI. You can read about work
    performance measurements in Control Schedule: Outputs.
 10. Rework. Fast-tracking increases your risk for rework because you
   are overlapping activities that would normally be done in sequence.
   Look over Fast-tracking.

Control Schedule
 Your schedule is one of the most important documents you will produce. It is
 a key component in managing stakeholder expectations. It tells team
 members when they will be performing work, the type of work they will
 perform, whom team members will be working with, and how long the work
 should take. Your schedule also tells the customer when deliverables can be
 reviewed and when to expect a finished product. And the schedule lets
 management know when the project reviews are scheduled and how the team
 is doing in meeting its timelines.
 However, as much time as you spend developing this very important
 document, you will spend even more time updating and controlling the
 schedule. This chapter is all about staying on schedule and influencing all the
 variables that could cause a schedule variance.
 I start out with the process definition and a refresher on some of the terms
 associated with planning and developing the project schedule.


         Control Schedule. Monitoring the status of the project activities to
      update project progress and manage changes to the schedule baseline to
      achieve the plan.
 Schedule Model. A representation of the plan for executing the project's
 activities -- including durations, dependencies, and other planning
 information -- used to produce a project schedule along with other
 scheduling artifacts.
 Project Schedule. An output of a schedule model that presents linked
 activities with planned dates, durations, milestones, and resources.
 Schedule Baseline. The approved version of a schedule model that can be
 changed only through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis
 for comparison to actual results.
 Schedule Management Plan. A component of the project management plan
 that establishes the criteria and the activities for developing, monitoring, and
 controlling the schedule.


         The schedule baseline is your commitment to the sponsor and the
      customer about when to expect certain deliverables, phase gates, and due
      dates. The project schedule is what you use to manage the day-to-day
      project. The project schedule is likely to be adjusted on a fairly regular
      basis. The schedule baseline should change only in response to a change
      request that has gone through the Perform Integrated Change Control
      process.

Control Schedule: Inputs
 As with most control processes, you start with the project management plan,
 work performance data, and organizational process assets (OPAs). For the
 Control Schedule process, you will also have specific schedule information,
 such as the project schedule, schedule data, and resource calendars. Here is
 how each input contributes to the process:
    Project management plan: This has two components you will use in this
    process:
     * Schedule baseline: Compare your planned progress with your actual
       progress.
     * Schedule management plan: The schedule management plan should
       identify the acceptable variances for schedule performance. For
       example, if you're behind on work that's not on the critical path, is that
       considered a variance? If you're ahead on the critical path, is that
       considered a variance? Under what circumstances can you use schedule
       reserves, and what process do you use to update the plan to show that?
     Work performance data: This tells you which activities have started,
    which have finished, and how far along you are for those activities that are
    in progress.
    Project schedule: This is the day-to-day schedule used to track and
    monitor project work.
     Schedule data: This refers to any and all project specific schedule
    information. For example, a resource histogram that shows the hours of
    work by team member per week, schedule reserve or schedule buffer
    utilization, network diagrams, milestone charts, and so forth.
     Resource calendars: If you have resources that work to different
    calendars, you will need information on individual calendars. You might
    have some resources that work 80 hours in 9 days, or resources in other
    countries that have different work hours and different holidays.
     Organizational process assets: These include the organizational policies,
    templates, and procedures you need to manage the project schedule.



         You should be aware of a few scheduling nuances, such as the
      difference between a schedule change, a schedule revision, and a
      schedule update.
    A schedule change is based on a change request that's approved via the
    Perform Integrated Change Control process.
     A schedule revision may change the sequencing of activities, the
    resources on activities, the start and finish dates within an activity's float,
    or some other revision that doesn't impact the baseline schedule.
     A schedule update is when you enter status into your project schedule.
    For instance, you note that an activity started on a specific date and that
    it's now 50 percent complete.


Control Schedule: Tools and
Techniques
 Many of the techniques you will use to control the schedule are similar to
 those you used to develop the schedule. For a refresher on developing the
 schedule, you can review Book III, Chapter 3. Table 3-1 shows the techniques
 used in the Control Schedule process compared with the techniques used in
the Develop Schedule process. The italicized techniques are similar or
identical.

Table 3-1 Control Schedule versus Develop Schedule
Techniques
Control Schedule                 Develop Schedule
Performance reviews              Schedule network analysis
Project management software      Critical path methodCritical chain method
Resource optimization techniques Resource optimization techniques
Modeling techniques              Modeling techniques

Leads and lags                   Leads and lags
Schedule compression             Schedule compression

Scheduling tool                  Scheduling tool



Performance reviews
Performance reviews compare the baseline with the actual results. You can
compare several elements to determine the progress. The following is a list of
common elements you can compare:
    Planned start dates to actual start dates
    Planned finish dates to actual finish dates
    Planned duration to actual duration
    Planned effort to actual effort
In addition, your review should include determining the amount of buffer or
float you have used compared against how far along you are in the project.
For example, if you have 30 days of float for the project, you're halfway
through, and you've used 21 days of float, that might be cause for concern.
You are 50 percent done but have used 70 percent of the float. Float is used
for critical path methodology, and buffer is used for critical chain method-
ology. You can refresh your memory on these scheduling methods by
reviewing information in Book III, Chapter 3.
Performance reviews shouldn't just identify variances: They should also
address the root cause of the variance and whether corrective or preventive
actions are desired or even possible. Here are some of the common causes of
schedule variances:
   Staffing variances: If you were planning to have specific resources
   available but they're not available, you might have a variance.
    Change in priorities: When you planned the project, it was considered a
   high-priority project. However, things changed. When your project is no
   longer high priority, your resources might be available for less time than
   you planned.
   Inaccurate estimating: If your duration estimates were too aggressive,
   you should expect a negative schedule variance.
   Rate of work: Some people work really fast, and others work really
   slowly. The rate of work can affect how quickly you get work done.
   Scope creep: Of course, if you add scope without analyzing the impact of
   budget and schedule, you will most likely be behind schedule.
A performance review can be as simple as reviewing your schedule and
having the project management software identify variances, or it can be a
very structured affair that includes the sponsor, the customer, and key
vendors. These reviews can take several hours.
During the performance reviews, you should look at the current status as well
as performance trends. Charts and graphs that forecast future schedule
performance are a common method for assessing the schedule status. If the
variance is negative and greater than your schedule threshold, you should
consider various options for correcting the variances. It is common to present
earned value (EV) data at performance reviews as well. I spend quite a bit of
time going over EV in the next chapter, so I don't address it here other than to
say that you may present schedule variance (SV) and schedule performance
index (SPI) measurements as part of your variance analysis and performance
review.

Resource optimization
Throughout the project, you may revisit your resource allocation among
activities to try and optimize your resources. For example, you might move
some resources to activities on the critical path if you're concerned that those
activities won't finish on time. Or you might find that work is taking longer
than expected, and some resources are working 60-hour weeks. In that case,
you might reduce the amount of work that they're doing. Of course, this
could have negative impacts, so you have to analyze your options and select
the best one.

Modeling techniques
As the project progresses, your uncertainty in some areas will diminish, but it
might increase in other areas based on the work performance. You can use
what-if scenario analysis much the same way you do in planning by thinking
through different scenarios that could affect the project and seeing what
happens to the schedule based on those scenarios.
You can use this technique along with resource leveling to see the effect of
shifting resources, adding resources, or reducing the amount of time that
you're using specific resources. You can also use what-if scenario analysis
when analyzing the impact of risk events to see the impact on a schedule if a
specific risk occurs.
A specific type of modeling technique is a simulation that calculates the
duration based on differing assumptions. A Monte Carlo simulation will use
three different estimates (optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic) to account
for uncertainty in the duration and resource estimates. The output of a
simulation is a probability distribution for the project duration.

Leads and lags
If you're behind schedule, you may want to use leads to start successor
activities before their predecessor activities are completed. For example, if
the requirements gathering activities are taking longer than planned, you
might start some of the preliminary design work before the final requirements
documentation is complete.

Schedule compression
As you go through the project, you will probably need to find ways to
compress some parts of the schedule because other parts took longer than
expected. As I discuss in Book III, Chapter 3, the two main types of schedule
compression are crashing and fast-tracking.
Crashing
Crashing looks for cost/schedule trade-offs. In other words, you're looking
for ways to shorten the schedule by applying more resources or by spending
more. The intent is to get the most schedule compression for the least amount
of money. Some common ways of accomplishing this include
    Bringing in more resources
    Working overtime
    Paying to expedite deliverables
You want to crash only those activities on the critical path because that's the
path that drives the duration of the project. Here is an example of how you
would evaluate crashing activities on the critical path.
Assume you have a network path with five activities on it: Activity A,
Activity B, and so on. The durations and the predecessor information in Table
3-2 have been given to you, and you can assume this information is accurate.

Table 3-2 Crashing Information
Task Duration Predecessor

A    4        None
B    6        None

C    3        A
D    1        B

E    2        C, D


You also have the following information about the costs to crash each
activity.
    Task A costs $1,000.
    Task E costs $1,500.
    Task B is three times as expensive as Task A.
    Task C costs $2,400.
    Task D costs twice as much as Task A.
    To crash Task A and save 1 day, it will cost 50% more. It cannot be
    crashed more than 1 day.
     To crash Task B, it will cost $300 more per day, and it can be crashed up
    to 2 days.
      Task C can be crashed by 1 day for a cost of $600.
      Task D can be crashed by 1 day for a cost of $500.
      Task E cannot be crashed.
  If you think about it, you can probably figure out how to solve this on your
  own. Still, here's a six-step method to solve this kind of problem:
  1. Create a table that shows the regular duration and crash duration, and
    the regular cost and crash cost for each activity. Then include a column
    that shows the crash cost per day.




    By looking at the table, you can see that the least-expensive activity to
    crash is Activity B, and you can crash that by either 1 day or 2 days.
  2. Draw a network diagram that corresponds to the network information
    you were given.
    Figure 3-1 shows the network diagram. If you want a refresher on network
    diagrams, check out Book III, Chapter 3.




Figure 3-1: A network diagram.


  3. Fill in the regular and crash durations and the regular and crash costs
    according to the legend in Figure 3-2.
    Figure 3-2 shows the network diagram with cost and schedule information.
Figure 3-2: A network diagram with cost and schedule information.


  4. Add the durations for each path and determine the critical path.
    The critical path in this example is BDE, with a duration of 10 days. (Book
    III, Chapter 3 shows you how to determine the critical path.)
  5. Start by crashing the least-expensive activity on the critical path until
    you have a new critical path.
    In this example, you can crash Activity B for $300 for 1 day. Then both
    paths are 9 days.
  6. Continue this process until you reach the duration you need, or until
    you can't crash anymore.
    For this example, you can crash the network down to 7 days for a total
    additional cost of $2,200.
  The summary of this example is that the regular duration is 10 days, and the
  regular cost is $9,900. The fully crashed duration is 7 days, and the cost is
  $12,100.


          You might see this type of question in the Planning section or the
        Control section. In both instances, you're looking to gain the most
        amount of time for the least amount of cost.
  Fast-tracking
  Fast-tracking shortens the schedule by overlapping activities that are
 normally done in sequence. One way of doing this is by changing the network
 logic adjusting your leads and lags and changing a finish-to-start (FS) activity
 to an FS with a lead or to a start-to-start (SS) with a lag. The method is the
 same as covered in Book III, Chapter 3.


         Fast-tracking can increase your risk on the project and may
      necessitate rework. Make sure you understand the real relationship
      between activities when you fast-track!

 Project management software and scheduling tool
 Even though the PMBOK Guide lists project management software and the
 scheduling tool as two separate tools, they are essentially the same. Project
 management software can include more than just the scheduling tool: It can
 include budgeting and estimating software, resource management software,
 and so on. The point is that you have electronic tools to help you control your
 schedule.


         The monitoring and controlling knowledge and skills that you should
      expect to see tested for the Control Schedule process include
    Project performance metrics: specifically, effort, duration, and milestones
    Variance and trend analysis techniques
    Performance measurement techniques, specifically, CPM, PERT, SPI, and
    SV


Control Schedule: Outputs
 The outputs for this process are similar to those for the Control Scope
 process. The Control Schedule process includes schedule forecasts, but other
 than that, the differences lie in the types of data:
    Work performance information is usually earned value (EV) numbers for
    schedule variance and the schedule performance index (SPI).
    Change requests have to do with preventive and corrective actions to
    bring schedule performance in line with the baseline, or requesting a
   change to the schedule.
    Components of the project management plan that you could update
   include the schedule baseline, the schedule management plan, and the cost
   baseline.
   Project documents that could be updated include the schedule and the
   schedule data.
   Organizational process asset updates are based on causes of schedule
   variances.
Work performance information for the Control Schedule process can be easily
abused to hide schedule variances. For example, if a team member is behind
on a project activity but he plans to work overtime to catch up, he might not
disclose that the activity is behind because he thinks he can correct it before
anyone finds out. Another example is if an activity takes more effort than was
forecast but the duration is not impacted by this extra effort, a team member
may report that the original effort was sufficient. To avoid this type of
behavior, you need to have clear reporting expectations in your schedule
management plan.


        Schedule forecasts predict future performance based on past
     performance and knowledge about upcoming events and risks that could
     impact future performance. Forecasts may be substantiated by using EV
     calculations as well.


        The following honesty standards from the Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct relate to work performance measurements:
   We are truthful in our communications and in our conduct.
    We provide accurate information in a timely manner.
    We do not engage in or condone behavior that is designed to deceive
   others, including but not limited to, making misleading or false statements,
   stating half-truths, or providing information out of context or withholding
   information that, if known, would render our statements as misleading or
   incomplete.
                         Agile schedule control
If you are using an agile scheduling technique, you will take a different approach to controlling
the schedule. The PMP exam doesn't test on agile techniques to any great degree, but you
should have a basic knowledge of the concepts:
1. Compare the estimated work with the actual work delivered in a set time period (a sprint).
2. Based on stakeholder feedback, revise and update the backlog of work.
3. Conduct a retrospective review of the sprint to determine what worked and how to improve
    the process in the future.
4. Estimate the velocity of work for the iteration or time frame and compare it with the planned
    velocity.




Key Terms
 The majority of the scheduling terms can be found in Book III, Chapter 3,
 where I first discuss scheduling. Some of those terms are reiterated here, and
 a few additional terms are introduced.
      Schedule model
      Project schedule
      Schedule baseline
      Schedule management plan
      Schedule change
      Schedule revision
      Schedule update
      Crashing
      Fast-tracking
Chapter Summary
 This chapter covers the information you need to determine whether your
 schedule progress is acceptable or you need to take corrective or preventive
 actions to achieve your planned schedule performance.
    A great deal of your time with the schedule is spent managing and
    controlling it. You will need to revise the schedule, update the schedule,
    and maybe even change the schedule.
     Like the Control Scope and Control Cost processes, you will start by
    comparing work performance data against the baseline. You will perform a
    performance review to determine whether the schedule performance
    requires action. You can also use performance reviews to discuss schedule
    status with management. You might need to employ resource optimization
    techniques and modeling techniques to determine how best to revise the
    schedule. Fast-tracking, adjusting leads and lags, and crashing are options
    you can take to compress the schedule.
     Work performance information might indicate the need for a change
    request. And, of course, you will update the forecasts, organizational
    process assets, the project management plan, and project documents to
    document the progress to date.
                           Prep Test
                      Multiple Choice
1. Resequencing the order of activities on a path without
  impacting a milestone or key deliverable date is an example of
 A   A schedule revision
 B   A schedule update
 C   A schedule slip
 D   A schedule change

2. A specific version of the schedule model used to compare
  actual results with the plan to determine whether preventive or
  corrective action is needed to meet the project objectives is the
 A   Project schedule
 B   Performance measurement baseline
 C   Schedule baseline
 D   Schedule data

3. Many variables can have an impact on your ability to meet your
  schedule. Which of the following is not one of the common
  reasons for causing a schedule slip?
 A   Inaccurate duration estimates
 B   Scope creep
 C   Rate of work
 D   More costly resources

4. You are concerned that one of the resources on your team will
  be pulled off and put onto another project. Your project sponsor
  has asked you what the impact on the schedule would be if that
  occurred. What technique should you use to determine the
  impact?
  A   Variance analysis
  B   What-if scenario analysis
  C   Fast-tracking
  D   Resource leveling

5. Based on some schedule revisions you made, Joe is now
  working 65 hours during Week 1, 12 hours during Week 2, and
  30 hours during Week 3. What technique should you use to
  allocate Joe's time better?
  A   Crashing
  B   Fast-tracking
  C   What-if scenario analysis
  D   Resource optimization

6. You need to compress your schedule. You decide to test two
  software components at the same time instead of sequentially.
  In addition, you're changing the dependencies on some other
  tasks from a finish-to-start to a finish-to-finish with a lag. What
  type of technique are you using?
  A   Crashing
  B   Fast-tracking
  C   Resource leveling
  D   What-if scenario analysis

                            Scenario 1
Use the following information for the next four questions. Be warned,
though: Some of the information is the same as the example in the
crashing section of the chapter, but not all of it! Start from the
beginning and work the whole problem.
Assume you have a network path with five activities on it and the
following information about the network.
 Task Duration Predecessor


A       4             -

B       6        A
C       3        A
D       1        B

E       2        C


You also have the following information about the costs to crash each
activity:
  Task A costs $1,000.
  Task E costs $1,500.
  Task B is three times as expensive as Task A.
  Task C costs $2,400.
  Task D costs twice as much as Task A.
  To crash Task A and save 1 day, it will cost 50% more. It cannot be
 crashed more than 1 day.
  To crash Task B, it will cost $300 more per day, and it can be
 crashed up to 2 days.
  Task C can be crashed by 1 day for a cost of $600.
  Neither Task D nor E can be crashed.

1. What is the regular time for this path?
    A       8 days
    B       9 days
    C       10 days
    D       11 days

2. What is the crash time for this path?
    A       8 days
 B    9 days
 C    10 days
 D    11 days

3. What is the regular cost for this path?
 A    $11,600
 B    $11,000
 C    $9,900
 D    $9,000

4. What is the crash cost for this path?
 A    $11,600
 B    $11,000
 C    $9,900
 D    $9,000
                           Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. A. A schedule revision. Resequencing is a schedule revision.
  Review Control Schedule: Inputs.
2. C. Schedule baseline. The schedule baseline is used to compare
  the plan against the actual results. Look at Control Schedule.
3. D. More costly resources. More costly resources can cause a
  budget overrun, but not usually a schedule slip. Go over
  Performance reviews.
4. B. What-if scenario analysis. A what-if scenario analysis will show
  how the schedule will be affected by losing the resources. Check
  out Modeling techniques.
6. B. Fast-tracking. Doing activities in parallel instead of sequentially
  is an example of fast-tracking. Look over Fast-tracking.

                            Scenario 1
1. D. 11 days. The regular time is 11 days. The critical path is ABD.
  See Crashing.
2. A. 8 days. The crash time is 8 days. ABD can be crashed to only 8
  days. Even though ACE can be crashed to 7 days, ABD will still
  drive the duration. Check out Crashing.
3. C. $9,900. The regular cost with no crashing is $9,900. It is the
  sum of all the regular costs for the activities. Go over Crashing.
4. B. $11,000. The crash cost is $11,000. You shouldn't crash Task C
  because you can't get the schedule any shorter by spending the
  additional $600. Look at Crashing.
Book VIII

    Controlling Cost, Quality, and
                More




        Check out the article on earned value basics at
www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book VIII: Controlling Cost, Quality, and More

Book VIII: Chapter 1: Controlling Cost and Using Earned Value
   Control Costs

   Control Costs: Inputs

   Control Costs: Tools and Techniques

   Control Cost: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Chapter 2: Controlling Quality
   Quality Control Basics

   Control Quality: Inputs

   Control Quality: Tools and Techniques

   Control Quality: Outputs

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Chapter 3: Controlling Communications and Stakeholders
   Control Communications

   Control Stakeholder Engagement

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book VIII: Chapter 4: Managing Your Risks and Procurements
Control Risks: Inputs

Control Risks: Tools and Techniques

Control Risks: Outputs

Control Procurements

Key Terms

Chapter Summary
Chapter 1: Controlling Cost and
     Using Earned Value
Exam Objectives
    Measure project performance, identify and quantify variances, and
    determine appropriate preventive and corrective actions.
    Communicate status to stakeholders per the communications
    management plan.
    Ensure baseline integrity by updating the project management plan
    in response to approved changes and communicating those approved
    changes to the team.



 Like the Control Scope and Control Schedule processes, the exam objectives
 are concerned with measuring performance, correcting performance, and
 communicating that information. It also entails implementing only approved
 change requests.
 Estimating, developing, and controlling the project budget is one of the
 highest-visibility activities that you do as a project manager. All the higher-up
 people want to know how you're doing according to budget. Because people
 often estimate as if everything will work perfectly, staying within the budget
 can be quite challenging.
 When monitoring and controlling the budget, you need to make sure to
 compare the baseline cost for a deliverable or element of work with the actual
 cost. Don't fall into the trap of comparing how much you planned to spend to
 how much you have spent without taking into consideration what you got for
 what you spent! You have to monitor the performance to the money spent.
 Controlling costs also consists of managing expenditures to stay within
 funding limitations as well as recording actual costs as they are incurred.
 When you identify a cost variance, you should determine what caused it and
 what the appropriate response is. You might need to take corrective or
 preventive actions to stay within the cost threshold.
Finally, you need to update the budget to align with any changes to scope,
schedule, quality, human resources, risk, and procurements.
                Quick Assessment
1. The ______ ______ is the approved version of the time-phased
  project budget used to compare actual expenditures against
  planned expenditures to determine whether preventive or corrective
  action is needed to meet the project objectives.
2. The cost baseline is known as the ______ ______ ______ if you
  are using earned value techniques on your project.
3. Project funding requirements include funds for ______ and
  ______.
4. The sum of the planned value for all work packages is ______
  ______ ______.
5. An indicator of how efficient you are performing against the budget
  is the ______ ______ ______.
6. (True/False). A positive cost variance says you have spent less
  than was budgeted for the work.
7. A work package that is valued at $5,000 with a fixed formula
  measurement method of 25/75 would receive credit for ______
  after the work package is started.
8. EVM integrates ______, ______, and ______.
9. Which EVM measurement is used to forecast the remaining funds
  you need to complete the project?
10. The difference between the BAC and the EAC is the ______
  ______ ______.
                         Answers
1. Cost baseline. The cost baseline will be used to measure cost
  performance on the project. You will compare this with the actual
  results to determine whether preventive or corrective action is
  required. Read more in Control Costs.
2. Performance measurement baseline. The performance
  measurement baseline and cost baseline are essentially the same.
  See the information in Control Costs.
3. Expenditures, reserves. You will manage your team to the cost
  estimates it provided. However, you will also require funding for
  reserves to account for unforeseen events, such as risks. You can
  find more about project funding in Control Costs: Inputs.
4. Budget at completion. The budget at completion (BAC) is the total
  of all the estimates for the project. The BAC is defined in Earned
  Value Management.
5. Cost performance index. The cost performance index (CPI) is the
  single most relevant indicator of the project's cost efficiency. I
  discuss this in the section Variances and indexes.
6. True. A positive cost variance says you have spent less than was
  budgeted for the work. However, it doesn't say why. For example,
  you may have spent less because the original estimate was
  inflated. I will talk about this in Variances and indexes.
7. $1,250. The fixed formula states that 25% of the value of the work
  should be credited when the work begins. Therefore, $1,250 is
  credited. You can read about this in Control Costs: Inputs and Table
  1-1: Fixed Formula Measurement Method.
8. Scope, schedule, and cost. EVM gives you an integrated view of
  project progress by looking at scope, cost, and schedule
  performance. There is quite a bit of information on earned value in
  Earned Value Management.
 9. Estimate to complete (ETC). The ETC indicates the amount of
   funding you will need to finish the project. The equation is the BAC
   - AC. Check out Forecasting.
 10. Variance at completion. The variance at completion (VAC) tells
   you how much additional funding you will need to complete the
   project, over and above your budget at completion. For more
   information, check out Variance at completion.


Control Costs
 Cost overruns can be caused by so many different events. Here are some of
 the more common causes:
    Inaccurate estimating: The person estimating didn't know how to
    estimate, wasn't given enough time or information to develop a good
    estimate, or was asked to arbitrarily reduce the estimate.
    Inappropriate estimating methods: If you use cost estimates that are
    more than two to three years old, they won't be reliable. In addition, you
    need to select the correct estimating method, such as parametric,
    analogous, and so on. I cover estimating methods in Book IV, Chapter 1.
     Unplanned, in-scope, work: If you don't fully define your project and
    product scope, you might find work in there that you didn't identify during
    the planning process. You still have to do that work, but you don't have
    the budget for it.
     Scope creep: Adding or changing scope without taking into consideration
    that the cost impacts will cause you to go over budget.
    Quality issues: If you find a lot of defects and have more scrap and
    rework than planned, you will go over budget.
    Change in resources: If you plan resource rates at one amount and then
    get different resources that cost more, you will incur an overrun.
    Risk event occurring: Responding to identified risks, or developing a
    work-around for unidentified risks, can cost money that wasn't budgeted.
    Contractor overrun: A cost-reimbursable contract can require you to
    spend more than you had planned.
    Lack of change control process: If you don't have a process to identify,
    evaluate, vote on, and manage project changes, you will almost certainly
    go over budget because the scope will run amok, the schedule will never
    baseline, and people will tell you "it costs what it costs."
 Given all those reasons for cost overruns, you can see why this process can be
 challenging. Before I delve into the details, I start out with the process
 definition and a refresher of some of the terms encountered when planning
 and developing the project cost estimates and budget.


        Control Cost. Monitoring the status of the project to update the
     project costs and managing changes to the cost baseline.
 Cost Baseline. The approved version of the time-phased budget, excluding
 any management reserves, which can be changed only through formal change
 control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison against actual
 results.
 Performance Measurement Baseline. An approved integrated
 scope/schedule/cost plan for the project work against which project execution
 is compared to measure and manage performance. The PMB includes
 contingency reserve but excludes management reserve.
 Cost Management Plan. A component of the project or program
 management plan that describes how costs will be planned, structured, and
 controlled.


        The cost baseline is your commitment to the sponsor for project
     expenditures and reserves. The cost baseline should change only in
     response to a change request that has gone through the Perform
     Integrated Change Control process.
 The phrase "performance measurement baseline" is used when earned value
 (EV) techniques are employed on the project. I discuss EV shortly.

Control Costs: Inputs
Like Control Scope and Control Schedule, the inputs consist of the project
management plan, work performance data, and OPAs. In addition, the project
funding requirements are also an input. I summarize the inputs in the
following list:
   Project management plan: The two components you will use in this
   process are discussed in detail in Book IV, Chapter 1.
    * Cost baseline: Use this to compare planned expenditures against actual
      costs.
    * Cost management plan: The cost management plan should identify the
      acceptable variances for cost performance. For example, if you are over
      budget by 20% on a deliverable but under budget on the project overall,
      should you report the variance? Under what circumstances can you use
      reserve, and what process do you use to update the plan to show that?
      How do you measure cost performance for work that is in progress?
   Work performance data: This includes which activities have started and
   finished, which costs have been authorized, and which have been incurred.
   Work performance data is discussed in Book VI, Chapter 1.
    Project funding requirements: The periodic required funds for
   expenditures and reserves (see Book IV, Chapter 1).
    Organizational process assets (OPAs): Organizational policies,
   templates, and procedures you need to manage and report project costs.
One of the methods you use to determine how well you're performing is to
look at the work performance data to determine how much work has been
completed on work in progress. A common way of doing this is to ask the
appropriate team member what the percent complete is. However, there are
two problems with this approach: The first is that it's subjective and can be
abused; and the second is that for short-term activities, it's time consuming.
One way to reduce the time associated with recording progress is to set up a
fixed formula for short-term activities, short-term being defined as spanning
one to two reporting periods.
You select a ratio that adds up to 100%, such as 50/50, 25/75, or 20/80. When
an activity starts, the first percentage is credited. When the activity is done,
the remainder is credited. Using a 50/50 measure is the most aggressive, and
20/80 is the most conservative. Although percentage isn't a true measure of
 accomplishment -- after all, it's only short-term -- the overall performance
 equalizes quickly because of the short-term nature of the measurement
 method. Table 1-1 shows an example of each method.




 Some measurement methods are 0/100, meaning that no credit is allocated
 until the work is complete. However, using this method is appropriate only
 for small activities that span just one reporting period.

Control Costs: Tools and Techniques
 The first technique in the Control Cost process is earned value management
 (EVM). This is a whole discipline in itself, so I spend significant time
 explaining this technique before moving onto additional techniques.

 Earned value management

         The PMP exam scratches the surface of EVM, but nonetheless, you
      should expect five or so questions on this topic. After you understand the
      underlying concept, it is quite simple.
 EVM integrates scope, schedule, and cost in the planning, monitoring, and
 controlling disciplines. Although implementation of a full-scale EV system is
 quite complex, the following nine steps summarize what you need to know to
 understand the concept for the PMP.
 1. Plan the work by using a work breakdown structure (WBS).
 2. Identify resources and persons accountable for the work.
 3. Schedule the work.
 4. Estimate the costs.
 5. Develop a performance measurement baseline.
6. Monitor the work against the baseline to determine variances.
7. Control the work to keep the project on schedule and on budget.
8. Manage changes to maintain the baseline integrity.
9. Develop forecasts for future performance.
Note that all these steps are consistent with good project management. In fact,
there is a saying, "You can do good project management without using earned
value, but you can't do earned value without using good project
management."
Many terms are associated with EV as well as many abbreviations and
acronyms. I introduce these terms and acronyms in chunks as I explain the
concepts. And so you can really understand how this works and can be
applied, I show you an example that will help the pieces fall into place.


        Earned Value Management (EVM). A methodology that combines
     scope, schedule, and resource measurements to assess project
     performance and progress.
Planned value (PV). The authorized budget assigned to the scheduled work.
Earned value (EV). The measure of work performed expressed in terms of
the budget authorized for that work.
Actual cost (AC). The realized costs incurred for the work performed on an
activity during a specific time period.
Budget at Completion (BAC). The sum of all the budgets established for the
work to be performed.


        If you work for the federal (U.S.) government, or for a subcontractor
     for the government, you might be required to use EV on your projects.
     However, you might have heard different terms used. When the earned
     value technique was first used in the 1960s, the terms were "budgeted
     cost of work scheduled," "budgeted cost of work performed," and
     "actual cost of work performed." Since then, the terms "planned value,"
     "earned value," "and actual cost" have been substituted for those terms.
        However, there are still pockets in government agencies, the Department
        of Defense (DoD), and their subcontractors that use the old terms. The
        following table shows the correlation.

  Old Term                               Current Term

  Budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS) Planned value (PV)
  Budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) Earned value (EV)
  Actual cost of work performed (ACWP)   Actual cost (AC)



  Planning with EVM
  To demonstrate how you plan your project by using earned value techniques,
  I use a simple story based on my running childcare center example. Assume
  that you met with the parents, and as part of the curriculum, they wanted the
  children to learn about gardens and growing food. The parents were willing to
  give up some space dedicated to the sandbox, and the designer for the outside
  area said that you could use part of the outside area originally set aside for
  landscaping to fit in with the garden.
  The decision was made to have a low deck area that would have planter
  boxes for vegetables, fruit trees, and flowers. There will be some rock
  walkways and grassy areas along with a small fountain. This change in scope
  went through the change control process and was incorporated into the scope
  along with the budget. Because the change went in early in the process, there
  is no impact to the delivery date.
  The first step is to create a WBS for this new work. You can see this in Figure
  1-1.




Figure 1-1: The garden WBS.


  The schedule in Table 1-2 shows the activities, duration estimates, sequence
of events, and the resources.




The schedule shows that the deck work gets done first. On the last day of the
deck work, the vegetables, trees, and flowers are to be purchased. The
following two to three days, they will all be planted. After the vegetables are
  planted, the grass and rocks will be purchased. They will be planted, and the
  rock pathways will be laid over the next two days. To accomplish all the
  work, it should take three weeks. Figure 1-2 is another view of the schedule,
  using a bar chart, so you can see the flow of work.




Figure 1-2: Bar chart garden schedule.


  The next step is to estimate the costs. Figure 1-3 shows the costs for each
  WBS work package. The estimates are inclusive of materials, supplies, and
  labor. It also shows when the costs planned are to be incurred.




Figure 1-3: The garden budget.


  Notice that the cost per day is shown as well as the cumulative cost. This
  budget follows the schedule by showing that the deck will be done first, and
  then all the landscape and hardscape. The total cost estimate is $12,100. This
  total is the budget at completion (BAC).
  Figure 1-4 is another way of looking at the information with the dollar
  amounts filled into the schedule. This is sometimes referred to as a dollarized
  schedule.
Figure 1-4: Dollarized schedule.


  At this point, you can create a performance measurement baseline, as shown
  in Figure 1-5.
  The performance measurement baseline is also the planned value (PV) for the
  project. It integrates the scope, schedule, and cost. You will use this to
  compare your planned work against the work actually accomplished.




Figure 1-5: The garden performance measurement baseline.


  Monitoring with EVM
  After work on the project begins, you start tracking the work that was
  accomplished (EV) and the costs incurred to perform the work (AC). The
  earned value is the dollar value of the work actually accomplished, using the
  measurements set up with the planned value. In other words, the frame for the
  deck is valued at $2,400. If you're 50% complete, you've earned $1,200
  worth of value.
  Assume that at the end of Week 2, you're 100% complete with the frame and
  80% done with the planks. You haven't yet ordered plants or landscape
materials. Therefore, your EV numbers are as shown in Table 1-3.




Notice that you haven't indicated expenses for the work done -- only the PV
and the EV. The actual cost is determined by totaling the invoices to see what
has been paid. In this case, the invoices show that the frame cost $2,500, and
the planks cost $2,300 so far. Now you can add the actual costs, as shown in
Table 1-4.




The next thing to look at is how the results compare against the planned
results and to the costs. By looking at Table 1-4, you can intuitively figure out
that things are not going well. It is fairly obvious that the project is earning
less than planned and is also costing more than planned. With earned value
techniques, you can make some simple calculations to quantify the results.
Variances and indexes
You can use two types of measurements to quantify the results: variances and
indexes. A variance measures the difference between two amounts, and an
index measures an efficiency ratio. To determine the variances and the
indexes, compare numbers with the EV: in this case, $4,320. To measure the
schedule performance, compare the EV against the PV. To measure cost
performance, compare the EV against the AC.
Four equations will give you this information:
   Schedule variance: SV = EV - PV
   Cost variance: CV = EV - AC
   Schedule performance index: SPI = EV / PV
   Cost performance index: CPI = EV / AC
Here are the glossary definitions of those terms.


        Schedule variance (SV). A measure of schedule performance
     expressed as the difference between the earned value and the planned
     value.
Cost variance (CV). The amount of budget deficit or surplus at a given point
in time, expressed as the difference between earned value and actual cost.
Schedule performance index (SPI). A measure of schedule efficiency
expressed as the ratio of earned value to planned value.
Cost performance index (CPI). A measure of cost efficiency of budgeted
resources expressed as the ratio of earned value to actual cost.
The preceding four simple measurements give you a lot of objective
information about project performance. A negative schedule variance says
that you accomplished less work than planned. You might not be behind on
the critical path, but the accomplishment rate is less than expected. A positive
schedule variance says that you accomplished more than planned. Again, you
have to compare progress with your critical path to determine whether you're
ahead or behind schedule.
The negative cost variance says that you spent more than was budgeted for
the work accomplished. Conversely, a positive cost variance says that you
spent less than was budgeted for the work.
In a nutshell, when you look at a cost or schedule performance index, you're
looking to see how efficient you are. An SPI or CPI of less than 1.00
indicates underperformance; in other words, you are either behind in
accomplishing work or over budget. Conversely, an SPI or CPI greater than
1.00 indicates that you're performing well -- accomplishing more work than
planned or spending less to do it.


         The CPI is considered the single most reliable indicator of the health
     of the project.
Look at the variances and indexes for the garden project. The frame is
completed, so you earned everything you planned. Therefore, there will not
be a schedule variance, and the schedule performance index will be 1.0:
   EV - PV = SV2,400 - 2,400 = 0
   EV PV = SPI2,400 2,400 = 1.0

However, note these more-telling numbers for the cost information:
   EV - AC = CV2,400 - 2,500 = -100
   EV AC = CPI2,400 2,500 = .96

The preceding equations indicate that you spent $100 more than planned and
were 96% cost efficient. This means that for every dollar you spent, you
earned 96 cents.


        For index measurements, you should carry out to two decimal places.
You can try the same calculations for the planks before looking at the answers
in the sidebar "Plank EV calculations."


        The questions on the exam might ask you to calculate information for
     a specific work package or for the project as a whole. For the project as
     a whole, you sum the value of the work for PV, EV, and AC and then do
     your calculations, using the cumulative values.


        Earned value doesn't tell you what happened; it only points out that
     things aren't going according to plan.
  A common way to graph earned value information is to chart the EV and AC
  numbers against the performance measurement baseline (PMB), as shown in
  Figure 1-6.



                          Plank EV calculations
    SV: 1,920 - 2,400 = -480
    SPI: 1,920 / 2,400 = .80
    CV: 1,920 - 2,300 = -380
    CPI: 1,920 / 2,300 = .83
The work is $480 less than planned and 80% efficient on the schedule. The work cost $380
more than the value, which means that the cost efficiency is 83%. Another way of looking at
this is that for every dollar spent on the project, $0.83 is being earned. Not a good situation.




Figure 1-6: An earned value graph.




            A negative schedule variance or an SPI less than 1.0 does not
        necessarily mean that you're behind schedule. You have to check your
        critical path to determine your true schedule situation.


            When looking at variances, any negative variance indicates that your
     performance isn't going how you want. You're either accomplishing less
     or spending more than you planned.
And when looking at indexes, any index less than 1.00 indicates that your
performance isn't going how you want. A CPI of .90 indicates that for every
dollar you spend, you're getting only 90 cents of value.
Forecasting
One of the benefits of EV is that it gives you a quantifiable way to forecast
final budget results. Keep in mind, though, that a forecast using EV won't be
as accurate as a new, bottom-up forecast. However, it does take a lot less
time.
A forecast adds the actual cost of work thus far, and develops an estimate to
complete (ETC) the additional work. The new total of the AC + bottom-up
ETC is the estimate at completion (EAC).


        Estimate to complete. The expected cost to finish all the remaining
     project work.
Estimate at completion. The expected total cost of completing all work
expressed as the sum of the actual cost to date and the estimate to complete.
If you don't have time to complete a new, bottom-up ETC for the remaining
work, you can use any of the following formulas. Each formula represents a
different set of assumptions, so make sure you understand the scenario and
assumptions regarding future work before developing your EAC.
   EAC = BAC - EV + ACThis equation is used if the current cost variance
   is not expected to continue. It assumes that any existing variance is a one-
   time event. Most people don't consider this a valid way of calculating the
   EAC.
   EAC = ((BAC - EV) CPI) + ACThis equation has a shortcut: BACCPI.
   This is used if the current cost variance is expected to continue at the
   same rate. Some people consider this the best case scenario EAC.
   EAC = ((BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)) + ACThis equation is used if the
   schedule and cost are significant to project success, and their performance
   is expected to continue at the same rate. Some people consider this the
   most likely scenario; others, the worst case.

You can work through each of these equations, given the cumulative data for
the garden project. To make it a little easier, just use the deck information and
don't worry about the plants right now.
1. Figure the cumulative PV, EV, and AC.
    * PV = 4,800
    * EV = 4,320
    * AC = 4,800
2. Figure out the CPI and SPI.
  SPI = 4,320 / 4,800 = .90
  CPI = 4,320 / 4,800 = .90
3. Work the equations.
      EAC = BAC - EV + AC12,100 - 4,320 + 4,800 = 12,580
      EAC = ((BAC - EV) / CPI) + AC((12,100 - 4,320) / .90) + 4,800 =
      13,444
      EAC = ((BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)) + AC((12,100 - 4,320) / (.90 x
      .90)) + 4,800 = 14,405
Because the project is both over budget and behind schedule, you would
expect to see the EAC higher than the BAC when you take into consideration
the budget performance, and even more so when you take into consideration
the schedule performance.
At this point, the project is 50% complete. There is time to look for ways to
catch up on the schedule, but you probably won't be able to make up the
costs: What is spent is spent. To compensate, you'll probably need to either
reduce the number of plants you get or get less-expensive plants. However,
because the earned value numbers provide an early warning, you have time to
make proactive decisions rather than reaching the end of the project and
running out of money when you no longer have the opportunity to develop
corrective or preventive actions.
Variance at completion
You can use a formula called a variance at completion (VAC) to see the
difference between the original BAC and the current EAC. This tells you the
amount of additional funding you need to complete the project.


       Variance at Completion. A projection of the amount of budget
    deficit or surplus, expressed as the difference between the budget at
    completion and the estimate at completion.
   BAC - EAC = VAC

Using the various EACs calculated earlier in this example, you can see the
VACs.
   EAC = 12,580VAC = 12,100 - 12,580 = -480
   EAC = 13,444VAC = 12,100 - 13,444 = -1,344
   EAC = 14,450VAC = 12,100 - 14,405 = -2,305

To-complete performance index
You might encounter one more equation on the PMP exam. The to-complete
performance index (TCPI) indicates how efficiently you have to perform for
the rest of the project to meet your original BAC or your new EAC. It takes
the remaining work and divides it by the remaining funds.


       To-complete performance index (TCPI). A measure of the cost
    performance that is required to be achieved with the remaining resources
    in order to meet a specified management goal, expressed as the ratio of
    the cost to finish the outstanding work to the remaining budget.
Here are the formulas for TCPI:
   TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)
   TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC)

For the garden project, you would calculate the following with the BAC in
the denominator:
   (12,100 - 4,320) / (12,100 - 4,800) = 1.07

This means to achieve the BAC, for the remainder of the project, you need to
 get $1.07 worth of value for every dollar you spend. This is a great equation
 to see whether your expectations are realistic. Given that you are halfway
 done and also that you are thus far getting 90 cents for every dollar, it isn't
 likely that you will improve by 17 cents on the dollar from now on. However,
 future work is different from past work, so it's possible. The point is that this
 index lets you know how efficient you need to be to meet a budget objective.
 If you have a different EAC that you're working toward, use the EAC as the
 denominator. Here is the equation using the EAC of $13,444 in the
 denominator. In this example, I chose the EAC = BAC / CPI to indicate that I
 expect future work to continue at the same efficiency as past work.
      (12,100 - 4,320) / (13,444 - 4,800) = .90

 This example demonstrates that if future work continues at the same cost
 efficiency, and I am working toward an EAC that reflects that assumption,
 then I need to continue to perform at a .90 cost performance efficiency.


                  Earned value rules roundup
Here is everything about earned value you need to memorize for the exam.
   PV: Planned value; what you plan to spend to accomplish the work: in other words, the
   budget
   EV: Earned value; the value of what you got
   AC: Actual cost; what you spent for what you got
   BAC: Budget at completion; the total PV or the project
   ETC: Estimate to complete; the expected remaining cost of the project or WBS work
   element
   EAC: Estimate at completion; the expected total cost of the project or WBS element when
   the scope is completed
   VAC: Variance at completion; the difference between the BAC and the EAC
   TCPI: To-complete performance index; the efficiency ratio you have to achieve to meet a
   budget target (BAC or EAC)
Variances and indexes. Variances are good for specific information; indexes are good for
showing relative performance information.
   For variance and indexes: Always start with EV.
   When looking for information on schedule: Use PV.
   When looking for information on cost: Use AC.
For a variance, subtract:
   SV = EV - PV
   CV = EV - AC
   Remember: Negative is bad; positive is good.
For an index, divide:
   SPI = EV / PV
   CPI = EV / AC
   Remember: Less than 1.0 is bad; greater than 1.0 is good.
Three steps to EAC. The three easy steps to calculate an estimate at completion are
Step 1: Start with the work remaining: (BAC - EV).
Step 2: Divide by a factor:
   1.0 = (BAC - EV)
   CPI = (BAC - EV) / CPI
   CPI x SPI = (BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)
Step 3: Add the AC:
   1.0 = (BAC - EV) + AC
   CPI = ((BAC - EV) / CPI) + AC
   CPI x SPI = ((BAC - EV) / (CPI - SPI)) + AC
To-complete performance index. The work remaining divided by the budget remaining:
   Work remaining: BAC - EV
   Budget remaining: BAC - AC or EAC = AC
   (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)




 More cost control techniques
 I discuss performance reviews in the Control Schedule process in Book VII,
 Chapter 3. Regardless of whether your project uses formal earned value
 management methods, comparing the baseline costs to the actual incurred
 costs is still important.
 In a performance review, focus your attention on the outliers: specifically,
 those work packages with index factors that are outside the variance
 thresholds. For instance, if you have a threshold of a 10% cost variance, you
 would want to focus the review on those work packages that are close to or
 less than .90.
 For variances that are increasing, or outside the variance threshold, you will
 need to identify the cause of the variance so you can determine the
 appropriate preventive or corrective action.
 You would also want to look at trends in the numbers. For example, is the
 EAC getting farther away from the BAC? Are the schedule or cost
 performance indexes getting farther away from 1.0 or closer? This
 information lets you know whether you need to employ corrective or
 preventive actions to manage the schedule and budget.


         The monitoring and controlling knowledge and skills that you should
      expect to see tested for controlling costs and using earned value include:
    Project performance metrics focusing on costs
    Variance and trend analysis techniques
    Performance measurement techniques, specifically earned value
    Cost analysis techniques, including forecasting
 Reserve analysis is a technique used to compare the remaining reserve with
 the current project status. You can analyze both contingency reserve and
 management reserve. Review contingency reserve to assess reserves used to
 mitigate risks. If a risk event has passed without the risk occurring and there
 were contingency funds set aside for that risk, they can be released. If more
 risks have occurred than planned, you may find that the remaining reserves
 are insufficient.

Control Cost: Outputs
 The outcome of this process is the actual work performance information, such
 as the cumulative cost and schedule variances and the cumulative cost and
 schedule performance indexes. You will also have forecasts and the
 associated data to explain the assumptions you made for those forecasts.
 As needed, you will make change requests and update various project
management plan components, project documents, and organizational process
assets. The following list shows some of the more common elements you may
need to update:
  Cost management plan: If there are significant cost variances, you may
  need to revisit estimating techniques as well as levels of accuracy needed
  for estimating and reporting.
   Cost baseline: If changes have occurred or risk events have materialized,
  the baseline may be updated (but only after going through the formal
  change control process).
   Cost estimates: Cost estimates may be updated to reflect the most current
  information.
   Basis of estimates: As cost estimates are adjusted, the underlying basis of
  the estimates are also updated.
   Causes of variances: Make sure to also catalog the corrective actions
  taken to address the variances.
   Lessons learned: Record information that can be used later in the project
  and by other projects.
Figure 1-7 shows an example of an EV status report that shows the common
earned value measurements, the root cause of variances, and the impact on
key objectives.
Figure 1-7: An earned value status report form.


  Work performance information for the Control Cost process can be easily
  abused to hide cost variances. For example, if a project team lead takes
  delivery of a purchased item but the invoice has not yet been paid, the project
  could show the earned value of that purchase but not the incurred cost. If you
  take the credit for the EV without estimating the AC in your status report, you
  are not showing the true cost status. To avoid this type of behavior, you need
 to have clear reporting expectations in your cost management plan.


        The following honesty standards from the Code of Ethics and
     Professional Conduct relate to work performance measurements in
     schedule as well as cost:
    We are truthful in our communications and in our conduct.
     We provide accurate information in a timely manner.
     We do not engage in or condone behavior that is designed to deceive
    others, including but not limited to, making misleading or false statements,
    stating half-truths, providing information out of context, or withholding
    information that, if known, would render our statements as misleading or
    incomplete.

Key Terms
 The new terms in this chapter focus on earned value management. There are a
 lot of new terms here, and they have precise technical meanings, so make
 sure you have a solid understanding of all the terms before you take the exam.
    Cost baseline
    Performance measurement baseline
    Cost management plan
    Earned value management (EVM)
    Planned value (PV)
    Earned value (EV)
    Actual cost (AC)
    Budget at completion (BAC)
    Schedule variance (SV)
    Cost variance (CV)
    Schedule performance index (SPI)
    Cost performance index (CPI)
Estimate to complete (ETC)
Estimate at completion (EAC)
Variance at completion (VAC)
To-complete performance index (TCPI)
Chapter Summary
 The information in this chapter may show up on test questions as earned
 value calculations or as definitions. In addition, you may see some of the
 earned value equations discussed in this chapter on the exam in different
 knowledge areas. For example, you may see a test question that asks you
 about schedule variances, or the risk impacts of a performance index less than
 .90, or even when reviewing contractor status reports. Therefore, as you go
 over the information in this chapter, keep in mind how it could be used in
 other contexts.
    The Control Cost process compares the cost baseline and funding
    requirements against the work performance data. Using variance analysis
    and earned value techniques, you can determine the status of the budget
    and see whether corrective or preventive actions are required.
    Earned value management integrates scope, schedule, and budget
    performance to provide an objective overview of the project's
    performance. It uses planned value (PV), earned value (EV), and actual
    cost (AC) along with the budget at completion (BAC) to develop
    quantitative measures for variance and efficiency.
    You should know the following equations for the PMP exam:
    * SV = EV - PV
     * CV = EV - AC
     * SPI = EV / PV
     * CPI = EV / AC
     * EAC = BAC / CPI
     * TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC)
    In general, a negative variance and an index less than 1.0 indicate
    performance is less than expected. A positive variance and an index
    greater than 1.0 indicate that performance is favorable to plan.
    Forecasts add the AC to an estimate to complete (ETC) to determine an
    estimate at completion (EAC). The assumptions about the ETC can give
you varying EACs.
The VAC tells you the difference between your BAC and your EAC.
A TCPI tells you how efficient you have to perform to achieve the original
budget.
                        Prep Test
                     Multiple Choice
1. Which of the following is not a common cause of cost
  overruns?
 A   Inaccurate estimating
 B   Unplanned, in-scope work
 C   Contractor underrun
 D   A risk event occurring

2. The measure of work performed expressed in terms of the
  budget authorized for is known as
 A   Budget at completion
 B   Earned value
 C   Planned value
 D   Actual cost

3. The equation to determine the amount of work you planned to
  accomplish versus the amount of work you actually
  accomplished is
 A   EV - PV
 B   EV - AC
 C   PV - EV
 D   AC - EV

4. To demonstrate how efficiently you are performing to budget,
  which equation should you use?
 A   EV / PV
 B   PV / EV
 C   EV / AC
 D   AC / EV

5. If you want to develop a forecast that shows the impact of your
  cost and schedule performance, which EAC should you use?
 A   EAC = BAC - EV + AC
 B   EAC = ((BAC - EV) / CPI) + AC
 C   EAC = BAC / CPI
 D   EAC = ((BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)) + AC

6. The measurement that indicates how well you have to perform
  to meet a budget target is the
 A   Cost performance index
 B   To-complete performance index
 C   Schedule performance index
 D   Estimate at completion

                            Scenario 1
You have a project to build a brick enclosure with four walls that are 10
feet high. The planned value for each wall is $10,000, and you plan to
build one wall per week. At the end of the second week, you have
completed the first wall and have 6 feet of the second wall built. You
have spent $18,000 so far.

1. What is your earned value?
 A   $20,000
 B   $16,000
 C   $18,000
 D   $24,000

2. What is your cost variance?
 A   -2,000
 B   -4,000
 C   4,000
 D   2,000

3. What is your SPI?
 A   .90
 B   1.11
 C   .80
 D   1.25

4. Assuming that your cost performance remains the same for the
  rest of the project, what is your EAC?
 A   42,000
 B   44,000
 C   50,000
 D   44,444

5. What is the TCPI to meet the original BAC?
 A   1.05
 B   1.06
 C   1.09
 D   91
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Contractor underrun. A contractor underrun would be more of a
  cause of a project underrun, not overrun. Check out Control Costs.
2. B. Earned value. The measure of the work performed is the earned
  value. See Earned value management.
3. A. EV - PV. The schedule variance is the difference between the
  planned value and the earned value. Look at Variances and
  indexes.
4. C. EV / AC. You would use the cost performance index. Review
  Variances and indexes.
5. D. EAC = ((BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI)) + AC. Use the equation that
  includes the SPI and CPI in the denominator. Go over Forecasting.
6. B. To-complete performance index. The TCPI tells you how
  efficiently you need to perform to hit a budget target. I discuss this
  in To-complete performance index.

                            Scenario 1
1. B. $16,000. You earned $10,000 for the first wall and 60% x
  $10,000 ($6,000) for the second wall. Go over Monitoring with
  EVM.
2. A. -2,000. You earned $16,000 and paid $18,000 to earn it. Check
  out Variances and indexes.
3. C. .80. Your SPI is 16,000/20,000. See Variances and indexes.
4. D. 44,444. The EAC is BAC / CPI, 40,000/.90. Look over the
  information in Forecasting.
5. C. 1.09. The TCPI divides the work remaining by the funds
  remaining (BAC - EV) (BAC - AC), (40,000 - 16,000) (40,000 -
18,000). Go over To-complete performance index.
Chapter 2: Controlling Quality
Exam Objective
    Control quality and ensure that project deliverables align with the
    quality standards established in the project quality plan by using
    appropriate tools and techniques (such as testing, inspection, and
    control charts) to adhere to customer requirements.



 Just like the other quality processes, the Control Quality process focuses on
 product quality as well as project quality. Because much of the quality
 improvement and quality control work you do on projects comes from the
 factory floor, many tools and techniques are adopted to meet project needs.
 As I discuss in the chapter on controlling project scope (Book VII, Chapter
 2), a very close relationship exists between quality control and scope
 validation. Control Quality is concerned with comparing deliverables against
 the quality plan and quality metrics to ensure that the deliverables are correct
 and meet the requirements. After this is done, the verified deliverables go
 through the Validate Scope process for customer acceptance.
 Another aspect of this process is that here, the project manager checks that
 approved change requests were implemented as approved. This is one of the
 aspects of project scope that's analyzed and controlled.
 Note that some of the tools and techniques are discussed in Book IV, Chapter
 2, and Book VI, Chapter 1, where I go over planning project quality and
 assuring project quality, respectively. When planning for quality, the
 techniques from those chapters are used to plan measurements, tolerances,
 and procedures. In this process, you apply those measurements, tolerances,
 and procedures. The results from applying the measurements are inputs to the
 Perform Quality Assurance process.
                Quick Assessment
1. Deliverables come from the Direct and Manage Project Work
  process into the Control Quality process. From there, they go to the
  ______ ______ process for customer acceptance.
2. A key point to remember in all quality processes is "______ over
  inspection."
3. (True/False). Approved change requests are validated as having
  been implemented correctly as part of the Control Quality process.
4. ______ are a good way to identify where in the process problems
  could occur.
5. Where would you find the roles and responsibilities associated with
  the Control Quality process?
6. To determine whether a measurement meets a requirement, you
  should use ______ sampling.
7. If you want to rank defects by the number of times they occur, you
  should use a(n) ______ ______.
8. Which technique uses upper and lower specification limits?
9. If you are looking at a scatter diagram and notice that while one
  variable increases another decreases, what type of correlation do
  you have?
10. The results of quality control measurements go to the ______
  ______ ______ process.
                          Answers
1. Validate Scope. Deliverables come from the Direct and Manage
  Project Work process into the Control Quality process. From there,
  they go to the Validate Scope process for customer acceptance. I
  discuss this in Quality Control Basics.
2. Prevention. Preventing defects is more cost effective than finding
  them during inspection. Look over the information in Quality Control
  Basics.
3. True. One of the outputs of the Control Quality process is validated
  changes. Look over Validating change requests.
4. Flow charts. Flow charts show the steps in a process, which
  enables you to see where possible problems in the process could
  occur. See the information under Flow charts.
5. Quality management plan. The quality management plan describes
  how you will perform quality assurance and quality control on the
  project. It includes information on roles and responsibilities for all
  quality activities. For more information, check out Control Quality:
  Inputs.
6. Attribute. Attribute sampling indicates whether a result has been
  met; variable sampling indicates the degree to which a result has
  been met. Look over the information in Run charts and control
  charts.
7. Pareto chart. A Pareto chart is a histogram that ranks the defects
  by the number of times they occur, such as defect X shows up more
  than defect Y, which shows up more than defect Z. You can read
  more about Pareto charts in Histograms and Pareto charts.
8. Control chart. A control chart uses upper and lower control limits as
  well as upper and lower specification limits. Look over the
  information in Run charts and control charts.
9. Negative. A negative correlation means that an increase in one
    variable causes a decrease in a different variable. A positive
    correlation means that an increase in one variable causes an
    increase in a different variable. You can read about positive and
    negative correlations in Scatter diagrams.
 10. Perform Quality Assurance. In the Perform Quality Assurance
   process, the quality control results are reviewed to determine
   whether the quality processes are functioning appropriately. Read
   about this in Control Quality: Outputs.


Quality Control Basics
 I discuss the flow of deliverables in Book VII, Chapter 2. Deliverables go
 through four processes:
 1. Deliverables are created in the Direct and Manage Project Work process.
 2. They are verified as correct in the Control Quality process.
 3. Verified deliverables are ready for inspection and acceptance in the
   Validate Scope process.
 4. Accepted deliverables are ready for the Close Project or Phase process.
 In this chapter, I focus on Step 2, verifying that the deliverables are correct.


         Control Quality. Monitoring and recording results of executing the
      quality activities to assess performance and recommend necessary
      changes.
 Notice that the preceding definition notes results, not deliverables. Keep in
 mind that a good portion of quality control is associated with results, but
 another aspect assesses whether the project is performing well in addition to
 whether the processes are working correctly. I discuss some of this when
 talking about the Perform Quality Assurance process in Book VI, Chapter 1.


          Because this is a quality process, you always have to remember that
      prevention is preferred over inspection! Preventing a problem or defect
      in the design process is better than finding it after the deliverable is
      complete and having to repair it!


Control Quality: Inputs
 The first item you reference is the quality management plan (see Book IV,
 Chapter 2, for more information on the quality management plan), which is
 part of the project management plan. The quality management plan provides
 direction for the Control Quality process. For example, it can have the
 following information:
    Information for control charts includes the upper and lower control limits
    and the upper and lower specification limits.
    The number of items to sample if you use statistical sampling, the criteria
    you are sampling for, and the measurements for attribute and/or variable
    sampling. Statistical sampling is described in Book IV, Chapter 2.
    Flow charts of an existing process that you're looking to improve.
 Your quality management plan will also define the roles and responsibilities
 for quality control and identify the organizational process assets, such as any
 policies and procedures that need to be followed.
 Quality metrics are the specific measurements that need to be met for the
 results to meet the quality requirements. For my running example, the
 childcare center project, you could have the following metrics for schedule
 performance:
    90% of all activities must start within 3 days of their scheduled start.
    100% of all activities on the critical path must finish on or before their
    scheduled finish date.
    No activity on a path with float shall use more than 50% of the float.
 A quality checklist helps you make sure that all the proper steps are being
 followed to comply with policies, regulations, or processes. You can use a
 punch list (a fancy construction term for a list of unfinished matters that
 require attention) for the construction part of the childcare project to ensure
 all the construction requirements are met and that the center is ready to open.
 The information in the quality plan, metrics, and checklists is used with the
 work performance data and the deliverables. The work performance data
  come from the Direct and Manage Project Work process. The work
  performance data are usually used to determine whether the project
  performance is acceptable. The deliverables are used to determine whether
  the product performance is acceptable.

  Validating change requests
  I mention in the introduction of this chapter that the Control Quality process
  is where change requests are validated. In Book VII, Chapter 1, I talk about
  the Perform Integrated Change Control process, showing a flow chart of the
  change request, the change log, analysis, decision, document updates,
  communication, and implementation. Verification that the change was
  implemented correctly takes place in this process. The approved change
  requests are an input to Control Quality. The implementation of those change
  requests is reviewed; if the change requests are implemented as directed, they
  are validated. This process, shown in Figure 2-1, closes the loop on the
  change request process.




Figure 2-1: The change validation process.


  Following the change request through the Perform Integrated Change Control
  process and then validating that it was implemented correctly in the Control
  Quality process may not seem like such a big deal, but when you're
  implementing a scope change -- particularly a big scope change -- you need
  to spend sufficient time making sure you understand the requirements,
  deliverables, resources, and risks associated with that change. Additionally,
  the schedule and budget documents need to reflect the change. When
  validating the change in the Control Quality process, you make sure that the
  work breakdown structure (WBS), schedule, budget, resource requirements,
  and all other documentation are updated and consistently reflect the approved
  change.

  Example of validating change requests
  To bring life to this subject, I show you an example. When I discuss
  controlling scope (Book VII, Chapter 2), I talk about events that cause scope
 change. One of those was the customer seeing the product and wanting
 changes. Using a scenario from my running example of the childcare center,
 assume that the parents come to the center after it's framed but before any of
 the electric, plumbing, and HVAC work is done. Some of the parents think it
 would be a good idea to increase the size of the playroom and decrease the
 size of the eating area. The contractor is on site and says that could be done
 and that he can give an estimate for cost and schedule implications by the end
 of the week.
 Carry this scenario further and assume that the change control process was
 used, the schedule impact was only a week, and the budget impact was
 $12,000. The change control board (read about the CCB in Book VII, Chapter
 1) decides to accept this change. The decision is communicated to the
 parents, and the change is incorporated. As part of the quality control process,
 you want to look at the plans to see that they were changed as specified by
 the parents. You should check the schedule to make sure the new work
 doesn't have a schedule impact of greater than one week, and check the
 budget to ensure that the $12,000 is recorded -- but no more than that. You
 should also do a walk-through after the change is implemented to make sure
 the area was reconfigured correctly.

Control Quality: Tools and Techniques
 Many of the tools and techniques in this process are easiest to understand
 when you're applying them in a fixed, predictable, repetitive environment.
 The tools in the sections that follow originated in the world of manufacturing.
 To make the information in this section a little easier to absorb, I use a
 fictional case study, departing from the childcare center for a process
 improvement project for an IT help desk.



                     Seven basic quality tools
The following tools are known as the seven basic quality tools:
   Flow charts
   Cause-and-effect diagrams
   Checksheets
 Histograms
 Pareto charts
 Control charts
 Scatter diagrams



Every quarter, the support departments at Cynergy2, Inc., send a survey to
their customers (Cynergy2 employees) to see whether the department is
meeting the needs of its stakeholders. The support departments include
human resources, information technology, legal, maintenance, food services,
and security. For the past several quarters, the satisfaction with the IT
department has been on the decline. Now the Chief Operating Officer wants
something done about that. A relatively new hire, Karen, is assigned to this
process improvement project. Karen has a background in process
improvement and experience in statistics, quantitative analysis, and quality
improvement.

Flow charts
After initial review of the satisfaction surveys, Karen determines that the
greatest source of dissatisfaction centers around calls to the help desk, so she
decides to start her analysis there. The first thing she does is develop a flow
chart of the process that the caller goes through when calling the help desk.


        Flow charts are a good way to identify where in the process problems
     could occur.
Using the flow chart in Figure 2-2, Karen identifies two areas of concern:
    There are no assigned specialists for Internet connectivity issues. If the
   hardware or software specialists are busy, no one addresses the Internet
   calls. Not all hardware and software professionals have network expertise
   in connecting to the Internet.
    If the call is not answered in three minutes, callers are asked to leave a
   message for a callback. Customers do not want a callback; they want their
   problems solved immediately.
Figure 2-2: A process flow chart.


  Cause-and-effect diagrams
  The next step Karen decides to take is to create a cause-and-effect diagram to
  look at the factors that can lead to the low satisfaction rating for the help
  desk.
  A cause-and-effect diagram, which illustrates how one or more factors can
  lead to a problem or defect, can be very useful when you're performing a
  root-cause analysis of a problem or defect. By working backward from the
  defect, you ask How did that happen? or Why did that happen? These
  questions lead to the inputs to the process or the product that could be
  potential causes of defects. You can break each branch of the diagram into
  limbs and continue to decompose them until you have sufficient detail to
  identify the source of the problem. Figure 2-3 has a classic cause-and-effect
  diagram that lists six possible causes of a problem: time, equipment,
  personnel, energy, and so on.




Figure 2-3: A cause-and-effect diagram.




           A cause-and-effect diagram is also known as a fishbone diagram or
        an Ishikawa diagram. Expect to see any of these terms on the exam.
  Analyzing the cause-and-effect diagram, you can analyze how each of those
  variables could have an impact on the help desk.
     Time: The time of day can affect the number of people staffing the help
     desk and the number of people at work.
     Energy: There have been instances of the Automated Call Distribution
     (ACD) system spontaneously rebooting. No one has figured out what
     causes this to happen.
     Equipment: The ACD hardware and software itself could be causing
     some of the problems. The headsets that the employees are using are
     outdated, and sometimes cause static.
      Measurements: The measurements for the ACD metrics are measuring
     the call start from the time a person picks up the phone, not from the time
     the call goes into the ACD queue.
     Personnel: There is a high turnover for employees on the help desk. The
     average tenure is six months. Even though staff members might have the
   technical skills, they're not familiar with some of the legacy software or
   the policies and procedures at Cynergy2, Inc.
    Environment: The help desk staff doesn't have cubicles, and they sit near
   the break room, where people tend to congregate and chat. There is a lot of
   background noise.
Any of these factors could be broken down further. For example, the
personnel branch could be broken into orientation and training on legacy
systems, policies and procedures, and the basics of network troubleshooting.

Checksheets
Checksheets can be used to count the number of times that an event occurs or
to list the steps to perform a process correctly. In my example, Karen uses
checksheets to mark the number of times that the ACD system spontaneously
reboots and also the number of times employees indicate that their headsets
have static. This information will be transferred to the histograms and Pareto
charts that I discuss next.

Histograms and Pareto charts
The next thing Karen did was use the information from the IT department
survey to rank the reasons for dissatisfaction. She started out by creating a
histogram that uses bars to demonstrate the number of times each cause of
dissatisfaction was checked. Then she ranked these in order, using a Pareto
chart, which is a specific type of histogram ordered by frequency of
occurrence that shows how many results each identified cause generates.
Figure 2-4 shows Karen's histogram, and Figure 2-5 shows her Pareto chart.
Notice that the Pareto chart has a line that tracks the cumulative percentage of
defects. The left side vertical axis shows the number of defects. The right side
vertical axis shows the cumulative percent of defects.
Figure 2-4: A histogram.




Figure 2-5: A Pareto chart.




           A Pareto chart is sometimes referenced in conjunction with the
        "80/20 rule," which states that 80% of the problems come from 20% of
        the causes.
  Based on the histogram, it was clear that Karen needed to address the issue of
  people being on hold too long, and then look at improving the time for calling
people back. If she could improve those two issues, more than one-half of the
complaints would be addressed.

Run charts and control charts
The department metric for answering calls is that a person, not a machine,
answers 95% of all calls within three minutes. Karen decided to use a run
chart (as shown in Figure 2-6), which charts the history and pattern of
variation, to see whether certain times of day had longer average hold times
than others.
The ACD system can put out reports for any day that shows the volume of
calls and the average hold time. So that Karen didn't need to look at the data
for the last year, she used the principles of statistical sampling to select 20
random days in the past year.


        The concept of sampling is that you don't have to test every single
     item to infer quality. You can test a sample.
The fluctuation in the sample data shows common-cause variation. In other
words, you would expect the average hold time to vary because of the
variables in the process (people, time of day, amount of training). If Karen
noted any irregularities, she would look for a special cause, such as someone
being out sick, a software upgrade installation, a holiday, or some other
unusual event. Figure 2-6 shows Karen's sampling data in a run chart.
When Karen analyzed the data from the run chart, she found that the average
hold time was just longer than 2.5 minutes (152 seconds). The longest
average hold time was 7 minutes. The range of hold times is from 1 second to
10:43 (10 minutes, 43 seconds). There was a definite spike in the average
hold time when people first arrived at work. Hold time steadily decreased
until it spiked when people returned from lunch, and then it steadily declined
throughout the afternoon until employees went home.
Figure 2-6: A run chart.


  Karen decided to put the run chart data on a control chart (see Figure 2-7). A
  control chart is a graphic display of process data over time and against
  established control limits, and that has a centerline that assists in detecting a
  trend of plotted values toward either control limit. It's like a run chart, but it
  shows control limits, and it can show specification limits as well.
  I define control limits and specification limits in Book IV, Chapter 2, but here
  are the definitions again.


           Control limit. The area composed of three standard deviations (SD)
        on either side of the centerline, or mean, of a normal distribution of data
        plotted on a control chart that reflects the expected variation in the data.
  Specification limit. The area, on either side of the centerline, or mean, of
  data plotted on a control chart that meets the customer's requirements for a
  product or service. This area may be greater than or less than the area defined
  by the control limits.
  For Karen, showing the control limits didn't make sense because the process
  is clearly out of control. Instead, she decided to show the upper specification
  limit and the average hold time. Figure 2-7, plotting the run chart with the
  average hold times against the upper specification limit (that is, the metric),
  illustrates the average hold time is significantly greater than the metric.
Figure 2-7: A control chart.


  From 8 a.m. to 10:59 a.m., the average hold time is greater than the upper
  specification; from 1 p.m. to 1:59 p.m., hold times are greater than the upper
  specification, too.


           When you're testing, you might have some situations where you're
        determining whether a result meets the requirement. This is attribute
        sampling. Other times, you might be determining the degree to which a
        result meets a requirement. That is variable sampling.
  Using the concepts of attribute and variable sampling, Karen can select any
  period and determine whether the average hold time meets the upper
  specification limit. She can also use attribute sampling to randomly select a
  number of calls throughout the day to see whether each call is within the
  specification limit. Simply put, the metric is met or not met. Karen can also
  perform variable sampling to determine the degree to which a result
  conforms. In other words, by looking at the individual hold time
  measurements for a call, she can determine the degree to which it is
  compliant with the metric. Because the metric has an upper specification limit
  of 180 seconds, a call that is answered at 210 seconds is 117% of the limit, or
  17% over the limit.


           You might hear about the Rule of Seven when talking about control
        charts. The Rule of Seven states that seven data points trending in one
        direction (up or down) or seven data points on one side of the mean
        indicate that the process isn't random. This means that you should check
        the measurement to determine whether something is influencing the
        process. This would be a special cause variation because it's highly
        unlikely that in a random process, you would find this type of behavior.

  Scatter diagrams
  Before devising an action plan, Karen wanted to see whether any particular
  variables had an impact on either the hold time or the customer satisfaction.
  She used a scatter diagram (see Figure 2-8) because that shows the
  relationship between two variables. The first thing she measured was the
  relationship between the number of help desk staff and the percent of time the
  help desk was within the upper specification limit. As expected, there was a
  positive correlation, which means that as one variable increases, the other
  increases. A perfect 1:1 correlation gives you a straight diagonal line.




Figure 2-8: Scatter diagram with a positive correlation.


  The next thing Karen measured is the relationship between the hold time and
  the customer satisfaction rating. This result showed a negative correlation
  (see Figure 2-9), where an increase in the hold time leads to a decrease in the
  satisfaction.
  Karen was curious whether there was any relationship between the day of the
  week and the hold time. As it turns out, there was a curvilinear correlation,
  which means the ends of the measurements are relatively even and there is an
  increase or decrease in the mid measurements. Figure 2-10 shows that hold
  time was less Monday and Friday than Tuesday through Thursday.




Figure 2-9: A negative correlation.




Figure 2-10: A curvilinear correlation.


  Finally, she wanted to see whether the weather and temperature had any
  bearing on hold time. She thought that maybe more people skipped work
  when it was nice outside. The results (see Figure 2-11) were random,
  however, indicating no correlation.
  Based on Karen's research and analysis, she can make some
  recommendations for changes to the process, including some corrective
  actions, to bring the results in line with expectations.
Figure 2-11: No correlation.


  The final technique is inspection. I discuss inspection at length in the Validate
  Scope process (see Book VII, Chapter 2). Inspection can be used to determine
  whether the results comply with the requirements, much like in the Validate
  Scope process. It can also be used to validate defect repairs and other
  approved changes.
  You need to be familiar with these quality definitions for the exam.


           Control chart. A graphic display of process data over time and
        against established control limits, and that has a centerline that assists in
        detecting a trend of plotted values toward either control limit.
  Flow chart. The depiction in a diagram format of the inputs, process actions,
  and outputs of one or more processes within a system.
  Pareto chart. A histogram, ordered by frequency of occurrence, that shows
  how many results were generated by each identified cause.
  Inspection. Examining or measuring to verify whether an activity,
  component, product, result, or service conforms to specified requirements.
  The following definitions are not from the PMBOK Guide, but you should
  know them for the exam.
        Attribute sampling. A statistical sampling method that indicates
      whether the result conforms to the target measurement
 Variable sampling. A statistical sampling method that indicates the degree to
 which the result conforms as rated on a continuous scale
 Tolerance. Indicates that the result is acceptable if it falls within a specified
 range
 Cause-and-effect diagram. Diagrams that define the inputs to a process or
 product to identify potential causes of defects
 Histogram. A bar chart showing a distribution of variables
 Run chart. Shows trends in the variation of a process over time -- often used
 in conjunction with control charts
 Scatter diagram. Shows the relationship between two variables


         The knowledge and skills you will be tested on from this chapter
      include
    Project control limits, such as variances, tolerances, and thresholds for
    project performance
    Project performance metrics
    Variance and trend analysis techniques
    Problem-solving techniques: in particular, the tools you can use to
    determine root cause analysis

Control Quality: Outputs
 The results of the Control Quality process are what you would expect:
    The quality measurements are recorded as indicated in the Plan Quality
    Management process. The measurements go to the Perform Quality
    Assurance process.
    Deliverables and results are verified, or a change request is submitted to
     bring them into compliance.
      Changes are validated as appropriate.
     Work performance information is generated, such as the number and
     cause of defects.
      Documentation is updated:
      * The project management plan. The quality management plan and the
        process improvement plan
      * Project documents. Metrics and quality standards
      * Organizational process assets. Lessons learned and quality checklists


           The following responsibility standards from the Code of Ethics and
        Professional Conduct are demonstrated in the "Ethics and quality
        control" sidebar and are applicable to all aspects of the project.
     Report unethical or illegal conduct to appropriate management and, if
     necessary, to those affected by the conduct.
     Bring violations of the code of Ethics and Professional Conduct to the
     attention of the appropriate body for resolution.
     File ethics complaints only when they are substantiated by facts.
     Pursue disciplinary action against an individual who retaliates against a
     person raising ethics concerns.



                      Ethics and quality control
Reporting the facts about quality control measurements is critical to delivering a product that
meets stakeholder needs. It is also a matter of ethics. The following fictional example
demonstrates the relationship between ethics and quality.
You are reviewing a control chart for part failures from a vendor who is manufacturing a
component for you. You notice several instances over the past three months where the
number of defects is greater than the upper control limit. You visit the plant and discover that
the vendor is using parts that are not the quality agreed upon in the firm fixed price contract.
You review the contract and it clearly states that the vendor will use "premium parts." The
parts in the component are lower grade "standard parts."
You report the situation to your program manager and to the vendor's project manager, Victor.
Victor says the "premium parts" are not necessary and the product will work just as well with
the "standard parts." You state that your organization agreed to a higher price contract
because of the "premium parts." You inform Victor that you are going to write up this situation,
and you expect Victor to rework all the components that already have "standard parts." In
addition, there should not be any delivery delays. You advise Victor that if the situation is not
resolved immediately, you will be compelled to file an ethics violation with the appropriate
bodies.
Several hours later, you receive a call from Bob, a team member from Victor's project team.
Bob informs you that he was aware of the situation involving using lesser-quality parts and
that when he raised the concern with Victor, Victor told Bob that if Bob didn't like what was
happening, he could find another job. You thank Bob for calling and add the information Bob
gave you to the report.




Key Terms
 You may be familiar with these terms from the Plan Quality process (Book
 IV, Chapter 2) or the Perform Quality Assurance process (Book VI, Chapter
 1). As you review the terms in the Control Quality process, think about how
 they are used to control project and product quality.
      Flow charts
      Cause-and-effect diagrams
      Fishbone diagrams
      Ishikawa diagrams
      Checksheets
      Histograms
      Pareto charts
      Run charts
      Scatter diagrams
      Control charts
      Upper control limit
      Lower control limit
      Upper specification limit
Lower specification limit
Common cause
Random cause
Special cause
Attribute sampling
Variable sampling
Rule of Seven
Positive correlation
Negative correlation
Curvilinear correlation
Inspection
Tolerance
Chapter Summary
 You need to be familiar with the many techniques of the Control Quality
 process for the exam. The measurements that result from this process become
 inputs to the Perform Quality Assurance process.
    Quality control is all about making sure that project and product results
    are consistent with the quality management plan. You can apply many
    different techniques to measure and ensure the quality requirements are
    met for both the project and the product.
     The quality plan, quality metrics, and quality checklists are used with the
    work performance measurements and deliverables to determine whether
    the work is done correctly.
    Control Quality also validates that approved changes are implemented
    correctly.
    The Seven Basic Quality Tools are used to measure conformance to
    quality requirements. These tools include
     * Flow charts: Find places in a process where errors could occur.
    * Cause-and-effect diagrams: Find the variables that cause defects.
    * Checksheets: Count the number of times an event occurs, or provide
      steps to follow when performing work.
    * Histograms: Count the number of defects by their cause.
    * Pareto charts: Rank order defects by their cause.
    * Control charts: Provide oversight to a process over time to determine
      whether it is in control; uses upper and lower control limits and the
      process mean. Can be used with run charts.
    * Scatter diagrams: Show the relationship between two variables.
    You can use statistical sampling techniques rather than test every
    deliverable. While sampling, you can perform attribute and variable
    sampling.
    Inspection is used to examine or measure a deliverable for compliance.
The output will be verified deliverables or a change request. The project
management plan, project documents, and organizational process assets
will be updated as appropriate.
                             Prep Test
1. What input do you use to make sure all the proper steps are
  being followed to comply with a process or a policy?
 A    Work performance measurement
 B    Quality metrics
 C    Organizational process assets
 D    Quality checklist

2. Which tool is used to identify and decompose the factors that
  can lead to a defect or a problem?
 A    Fishbone diagram
 B    Run chart
 C    Statistical sampling
 D    Pareto chart

3. As a result of looking at reasons why your organization's
  projects come in late, you identify seven main causes that
  explain 95% of late deliveries. You created a bar chart that ranks
  them in order of occurrence. What tool did you use to do this?
 A    Histogram
 B    Checksheet
 C    Pareto chart
 D    Scatter diagram

4. Normal variation in a process is called
 A    Special cause
 B    Common cause
 C    Variable cause
 D    Attributable cause
5. You look at last week's timecards for your project team. You
  have a control chart to plot how long team members spend on
  your project. Last week, all numbers were significantly down
  from team members in Wisconsin because the plant was closed
  for 2 days for a massive snowstorm. This is an example of
 A    Bad luck
 B    Variable attribute
 C    Special cause
 D    Common cause

6. Which tool has upper and lower specification limits?
 A    Histogram
 B    Control chart
 C    Checksheet
 D    Scatter diagram

7. How is the upper control limit set on a control chart?
 A    Wherever the customer wants it
 B    2 SD above the mean
 C    1 SD above the mean
 D    3 SD above the mean

8. The specification limits relate to the requirements of the
 A    Process
 B    Project
 C    Sponsor
 D    Customer

9. If you have seven data points below the mean, you should be
  concerned that the process is not random. This is known as
 A    Statistical sampling
 B   Normal variance
 C   The Rule of Seven
 D   Special cause

10. You create a chart that shows a strong correlation between
  adding staff and increased customer satisfaction. This is an
  example of
 A   Positive correlation
 B   Random correlation
 C   Negative correlation
 D   Curvilinear correlation

11. You asked your team members to turn in their status reports
  every Thursday. You get 40% of them first thing in the morning,
  about 20% throughout the day, and the other 40% at the close of
  business. What kind of correlation is this?
 A   Positive correlation
 B   Random correlation
 C   Negative correlation
 D   Curvilinear correlation
                          Answers
1. D. Quality checklist. A quality checklist tells you the steps you need
  to follow to comply with a process or policy. Go over Control
  Quality: Inputs.
2. A. Fishbone diagram. A fishbone diagram -- also known as an
  Ishikawa diagram or a cause-and-effect diagram -- shows the
  factors that can lead to problems or defects. Review Cause-and-
  effect diagrams.
3. C. Pareto chart. A rank-ordered bar chart that shows the causes of
  defects is a Pareto diagram. If you did not put the bars in order, it
  would be a histogram. Check out Histograms and Pareto charts.
4. B. Common cause. Normal variation in a process is a common
  cause. An unusual event that causes a variation in a process is a
  special cause. See Run charts and control charts.
5. C. Special cause. The snowstorm caused a variation in the results;
  this was a special cause. Look at Run charts and control charts.
6. B. Control chart. A control chart has upper and lower control limits
  and upper and lower specification limits. Read Run charts and
  control charts.
7. D. 3 SD above the mean. The control limits are 3 standard
  deviations from the mean. Go over Run charts and control charts.
8. D. Customer. The specification limits are the voice of the customer.
  The control limits are the voice of the process. Review the
  information in Run charts and control charts.
9. C. The Rule of Seven. Seven points in a row or seven data points
  on either side of the mean indicate a process is not random. This is
  called the Rule of Seven. Check out Run charts and control charts.
10. A. Positive correlation. Positive correlation means that as one
  variable increases, the other variable increases. See Scatter
  diagrams.
11. D. Curvilinear correlation. A curvilinear correlation starts and ends
  around the same level, and the points in between are either higher
  or lower than the end points. Read Scatter diagrams.
Chapter 3: Controlling Communications and
Stakeholders
Exam Objectives
    Communicate project status and continue to ensure the project is aligned
    with business needs.
    Minimize the impact of issues with the project schedule, cost, and
    resources by using the issue register to manage issues and assign
    corrective actions.



 Controlling Communications and Controlling Stakeholder Engagement are
 similar. In fact, you will notice that the only difference in the inputs, tools and
 techniques, and outputs is that Control Communications includes project
 communications as an input.
 This similarity between the two processes is not surprising given that
 communication is the main vehicle you use when working with stakeholders.
 The main distinction between the two processes is that Controlling
 Communications is concerned with ensuring that the communications
 management plan is effective, and Controlling Stakeholder Engagement is
 concerned with ensuring that the stakeholder management plan is effective.
 The information in these two processes can seem pretty generic, so to make
 the information relevant, think about situations on current and past projects
 that you can relate to.
                Quick Assessment
1. The process of monitoring and controlling communications through
  the entire project life cycle to ensure the information needs of the
  project stakeholders are met is ______ ______.
2. Ignoring cultural differences and having preconceptions about the
  audience are examples of ______ ______.
3. (True/False). Lessons learned are considered project
  communications.
4. ______ is a communication blocker that assumes certain groups of
  people think or act in a similar way.
5. Hearing only the information you want to hear is a communication
  blocker referred to as ______ ______.
6. The process of monitoring overall project stakeholder relationships
  and adjusting strategies and plans for reengaging stakeholders is
  ______ ______ ______.
7. A stakeholder who is actively against your project is ______.
8. Where would a dispute between stakeholders be recorded?
9. To hold productive meetings, would you have weekly meetings,
  publish the issue log, or manage conflict?
10. Which two project documents are likely to be updated as part of
  the Control Communications process?
                          Answers
1. Control Communications. Control Communications ensures that
  the communications management plan is effective. To see the
  definition, go to the Control Communications section.
2. Communication blockers. There are many ways to inhibit good
  communication -- you can see a list in the Communication blockers
  section.
3. True. Lessons learned are one of the many communications you
  will record, index, and distribute on a project. Read more in the
  Control Communications: Outputs section.
4. Stereotyping. Stereotyping can occur when you assume people
  with specific skills sets, ethnicity, age, or other generalization think
  or act the same. Read more about it in the Communication blockers
  section.
5. Selective listening. Focusing on what you want to hear (say, the
  project schedule is currently doing well) instead of not listening to
  other information (say, there is a trend toward overrunning the
  budget) is an example of selective listening. See the
  Communication blockers section.
6. Control Stakeholder Engagement. Ensuring that stakeholders are
  participating effectively on your project is part of controlling their
  engagement. See the "Control Stakeholder Engagement" section.
7. Resistant. Stakeholders who are aware of your project but don't
  support it are resistant. You can read about them in the Control
  Stakeholder Engagement: Inputs section.
8. Issue log. An issue log is used to document and monitor elements
  under discussion or in dispute between project stakeholders. For
  more information on this topic, read the Control Stakeholder
  Engagement: Inputs section.
9. Manage conflict. If conflict occurs in your meeting, you need to
    effectively manage it so that it stays professional and productive.
    Go over the information in the Holding productive meetings section.
 10. Stakeholder register and issue log. There may be additional
   documents you update, but you should expect to update at least
   these two. See information in the "Control Stakeholder
   Engagement: Outputs" section.

Control Communications
 Control Communications ensures that the communications management plan
 is effective. The communications management plan may evolve and be
 updated throughout the project as new stakeholders enter the project, new
 information needs are identified, and communications requirements change.


         Control Communications. Monitoring and controlling
      communications throughout the entire project life cycle to ensure that
      the information needs of the project stakeholders are met.

 Control Communications: Inputs
 As with all main controlling processes in a knowledge area, you start with the
 relevant project management plan elements, the actual results, work
 performance data, and organizational process assets (OPAs).
 The elements of the project management plan that you will use are the
 communications management plan and the stakeholder management plan.
 Compare the information in those plans with the communications that were
 actually delivered as well as the associated work performance data, such as
    When information was distributed
    Whom information was delivered to
    Additional information requests
    Feedback on the information, timeliness, or medium



         Project communications includes status reports, performance reports,
     forecasts, presentations, updated project documents and project
     management plan elements, lessons learned, correspondence, minutes,
     and so forth.
You may use the issue log to identify any issues that need to be
communicated. For example, the sponsor or PMO may want to be notified
about any issues that have high impacts or would negatively affect key
stakeholders.

Control Communications: Tools and Techniques
When comparing the results of the communications process, you may engage
experts in meetings to help determine whether the process is working
effectively -- and if not, how to improve it. Sometimes it's a matter of
changing how information is presented. You can use information
management systems to improve the usability and readability of information
by putting data in charts, tables, and graphic formats (such as a dashboard or
story board).
Communication blockers
If effective communication is an issue, you can check whether any of the
following common communication blockers are the culprit. As you can well
intuit, communication blockers are things people do that inhibit good
communication. The following list highlights common communication
blockers along with an example or a brief explanation.
    Using the wrong communication media: You wouldn't send a corrective
   action notification via e-mail. You would have that kind of communication
   in person, one-on-one.
    Making erroneous assumptions about your audience: For example,
   sometimes we make the mistake of assuming that people already know
   what we know. If you leave out what you consider introductory
   information and only address more specific issues, your audience might
   not understand your message. Having a lack of common understanding
   leads to ineffective communication.
   A receiver in an area with a lot of background activity: The
   background activity can reduce the recipient's ability to hear your message
   or focus on your message because she is distracted.
 Withholding information: Sometimes team members withhold
performance issues or challenges until it's too late to do anything about
them. Another example is if your sponsor knows that a reorganization is
going to impact your project but withholds that information, blocking the
flow of communication.
Ignoring cultural differences: Different organizations have different
cultures with regards to work hours, quality of work, accountability, and
so on. If you assume that a contractor has the same culture as your
organization, you will have issues.
 Stereotyping: Assuming that all technical people think in a certain way or
that all senior management will act in a certain manner reduces your
ability to really hear what someone from one of those groups is saying.
Having preconceptions about the audience: Similar to stereotyping, if
you're at a meeting and you have preconceptions about how your audience
will behave, you may miss cues about what your audience is thinking, or
you might not deliver the information the audience is interested in.
 Displaying emotions and reactive behavior: Part of being professional
is not letting your emotions get in the way of your communication.
Communicating with a person acting emotionally is difficult.
Employing selective listening: Selective listening means that someone is
hearing only the parts of the message he wants to hear. For example, say
you're presenting a status report to your sponsor. You state that for the
most part, the project is on track, but there are a few areas of concern with
regards to the schedule. However, the sponsor hears only the part about
how things are on track and ignores or avoids the information about the
schedule concerns.
Engaging in power games: Making decisions and taking actions based
on political gain, or trying to dominate a situation based on your power,
can inhibit open and honest communication.
 Management by memo: There are times when an e-mail or a memo is
appropriate; however, you can't manage a project via memo, and you can't
deliver critical information via e-mail. You have to have face-to-face
interaction.
 Sending mixed messages: An example of a mixed message is when a
    team member states she understands what you want, but her facial
    expression seems confused, or she's disorganized and asks the same
    questions again.

 Control Communications: Outputs
 The outputs from this process are the standard outputs:
     Work performance information: Information about the effectiveness of
    the communications process, such as the timeliness of reports, the
    effectiveness of presentations, and so forth.
     Change requests: Corrective or preventive action needed to bring
    performance into alignment with the plan, or to meet changing stakeholder
    information requirements.
    Project management plan updates: The communications management
    plan is the most likely document you will update, although the stakeholder
    management plan may also require updates as well.
     Project documents updates: Performance reports, forecasts, and issue
    logs are the most likely documents that will need updating.
     Organizational process assets updates: All project documentation,
    including lessons learned, outcomes of issue resolution, and corrective
    actions.


Control Stakeholder Engagement
 When you're first initiating and planning your project, you should spend time
 identifying your stakeholders and determining how to best leverage them for
 the good of your project. When you first identify stakeholders for your
 project, you may have created a Power/Support grid (see Book II, Chapter 3,
 for a sample) to analyze stakeholder involvement in your project. During
 planning, you may have created a stakeholder engagement assessment matrix
 to show a stakeholder's initial support for your project and the desired level
 of support for your project. See upcoming Table 3-1 for an example of a
 stakeholder engagement assessment matrix.
 The power/support grid and stakeholder assessment matrix are key
 components that help you develop your stakeholder management plan. In this
 process, you will revisit the stakeholder management plan to determine
whether it's having the intended effect or you need to revisit the plan and find
more effective ways to engage the project stakeholders.


        Control Stakeholder Engagement. Monitoring overall project
     stakeholder relationships and adjusting strategies and plans for
     reengaging stakeholders.

Control Stakeholder Engagement: Inputs
The project management plan contains the stakeholder management plan and
the communications management plan that provide information on how to
engage and communicate with stakeholders. The power/support grid and
stakeholder assessment matrix are key components of the stakeholder
management plan that help develop the stakeholder management plan. In this
process, you will revisit the stakeholder management plan and compare it
with work performance data to determine whether it's having the intended
effect or you need to find more effective ways to engage the project
stakeholders.
Table 3-1, which I also show in Book V, Chapter 3, demonstrates the process,
building on my running example of a childcare center.




Assume that your issue log has an entry that indicates that Manny (the
community affairs liaison in HR) was interested in having an auditorium
space at Cynergy, Inc., to communicate with large groups of people from the
community. In the beginning of the childcare center project, it looked like
both projects were viable. However, Morgan Cuthbert (the sponsor) has just
told Manny that because of lower than projected sales, she is forced to choose
between the auditorium and the childcare center, and she has chosen to put
the auditorium on hold. At this point, you're concerned that Manny will no
longer be such a strong supporter of your project. In fact, he may even
become a resistor.
You look over the minutes from the last three meetings and notice that even
though Manny was invited, he did not show up. Further research reveals that
he was supposed to have attended a grand opening for Baby Gap as a way of
showing community outreach and talking about the childcare center at
Cynergy, Inc. You have found out that he cancelled at the last minute. This
type of work performance data and project documentation help you to build a
clearer picture of Manny's current engagement level in the project. He has
gone from unaware, to supportive, to at the very best neutral, but possibly
even resistant.
To control Manny's engagement level, you will want to meet with him -- and
possibly other stakeholders -- to determine his state of support and see how
you can get him actively engaged in the project again.

Control Stakeholder Engagement: Tools and
Techniques
Another example that demonstrates how stakeholder engagement can be
controlled involves the city inspector. In the following scenario, you will see
how a stakeholder's engagement (the city inspector) has a potential to affect
the project and also how the project team uses information management
systems, expert judgment, and meetings.
Inspector issue and impact
On November 8, the following issue was entered in the issue log:
   Rick Johnson is new building inspector; he was hired by the city on
   October 10. He is scheduled to do his inspection on the childcare center
   on December 1. At a local builder's association meeting, the general
   contractor for the childcare center heard that Rick has not approved
   buildings that didn't have their documentation complete and indexed per
   the instructions Rick sent 10 days prior to his visit. This has caused a
   delay in the approval for several buildings in the city.

Fast-forward two days to November 10. You have not received the
documentation request from Rick, and the contractors do not work the week
of Thanksgiving.
You meet with the general contractor, several of the subcontractors, and the
facilities manager to determine the impact and then brainstorm solutions. The
group determines the following impacts:
   Scope impact: There may be additional unplanned work to provide all the
   documentation in a specific presentation style.
   Schedule impact: If the inspector doesn't sign off on the childcare build-
   out on December 1, it will cause a day-for-day slip in the schedule. The
   childcare center may open late, especially with the winter holidays
   reducing the number of work hours in the month.
   Cost impact: If contractors are willing to work overtime in December to
   get the paperwork and documentation indexed correctly, it will lead to a
   schedule overrun.
The group decides to consult with J.J. Shoals, a contractor who successfully
passed the city inspection, in order to minimize the risk of not passing the
inspection. They set up a meeting with the J.J. three days later and develop a
work plan to gather, organize, and present the information in the format that
worked for J.J. previously.
Holding productive meetings
Meetings are a common method of sharing communication and engaging
stakeholders in projects. Project managers spend considerable time leading
meetings. Some are informal meetings involving a few team members, some
are project team meetings, and some are formal presentations to management
and other key stakeholders. Some of the key guidelines to effective meetings
are
   Have meetings only when necessary.
   Make the purpose of each meeting clear.
   Prepare, distribute, and follow an agenda.
   Make sure the right people are at the meeting and also that only people
   who need to be present are invited.
   Encourage participation.
   Manage conflict if and when it occurs.
   Issue minutes.
   Follow up on action items.
 When distributing information, you can use hard copy or electronic
 information. You can push out the information, you can have people pull it as
 needed, or you can deliver it interactively. I discuss push and pull
 communication methods in Book IV, Chapter 4.

 Control Stakeholder Engagement: Outputs
 The outputs from this process are similar to the outputs from the Control
 Communications process:
     Work performance information: Information about the effectiveness of
    the stakeholder engagement process, such as the level of support and
    participation in the project.
    Change requests: Corrective or preventive action needed to bring
    engagement into alignment with the plan, or to meet changing stakeholder
    engagement levels.
     Project management plan updates: The stakeholder management plan is
    the most likely document you will update, although the communications
    management plan and the human resource management plans may also
    require updates as well.
     Project documents updates. The stakeholder register and issue logs are
    the most likely documents that will need updating.
     Organizational process assets updates: All project documentation,
    including lessons learned, outcomes of issue resolution, and corrective
    actions.


Key Terms
 There are no new key terms in this chapter.
Chapter Summary
 In this chapter, I talk about controlling communications and stakeholder
 engagement.
    To be successful, you need to follow effective communication techniques
    and avoid communication blockers.
    Evaluate the effectiveness of the communications management plan.
    Have meetings only when necessary, and follow the guidelines for
    effective meetings.
    Assess the level of participation and engagement of project stakeholders
    and take corrective or preventive actions to optimize engagement levels.
                        Prep Test
                     Multiple Choice
1. Which input is an example of a communication?
 A   A pending issue
 B   A performance report
 C   The communications management plan
 D   The stakeholder register

2. Work performance data for Control Communications includes
 A   The number of tasks started
 B   The number of change requests
 C   When information was distributed
 D   The level of stakeholder engagement

3. When a project includes stakeholders from multiple
  organizations, you have a higher risk of
 A   Using the wrong communicating media
 B   Withholding information
 C   Ignoring cultural differences
 D   Engaging in power games

4. A functional manager isn't providing the resource support she
  promised. You are noting that she indicated support for the
  project, but it appears that she's somewhat resistant. You need
  to take actions to get her to support your project. What process
  are you involved in?
 A   Manage Communications
 B   Control Communications
 C   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
 D   Control Stakeholder Engagement

5. Because the portfolio review committee has to review dozens of
  reports each meeting, the committee has asked for a simpler
  way to review information rather than a table. You develop a
  stop light chart for them. This is part of which process?
 A   Manage Communications
 B   Control Communications
 C   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
 D   Control Stakeholder Engagement

6. A grid that shows current versus desired stakeholder
  engagement is part of which input to the Control Stakeholder
  Engagement process?
 A   Communications management plan
 B   Organizational process assets
 C   Stakeholder management plan
 D   Stakeholder register

7. To hold effective meetings, you should
 A   Manage conflict.
 B   Lead by example.
 C   Release the agenda two hours prior to the meeting.
 D   Discourage participation so you get through the agenda.

                           Scenario 1
You give a presentation for upper management that highlights your
project's achievements from the previous quarter. At the end, you hear
the Director of Finance state that he didn't see the value in the
presentation because he wasn't very familiar with the project.

1. What type of communication blocker occurred?
 A   A receiver with a lot of background activity
 B   Withholding information
 C   Stereotyping
 D   Making erroneous assumptions about the audience

2. What guideline for productive meeting management was not
  followed?
 A   Make sure only the people who need to be there are invited.
 B   Encourage participation.
 C   Make the purpose of each meeting clear.
 D   Issue minutes.

                           Scenario 2
After completing the requirements gathering and concept development
phase of your project, you're moving into the design phase. In the prior
phase, you used in-house expertise, but now you'll be using
contracted architects and engineers. You heard that the architect often
delivers late and makes changes without fully documenting them.

1. This is an example of where you need to
 A   Control stakeholder engagement.
 B   Control communications.
 C   Manage the budget.
 D   Manage integration.
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. B. A performance report. Performance reports, minutes, status
  reports, and presentations are all examples of project
  communications. Go over Control Communications: Inputs.
2. C. When information was distributed. You can also track whom
  information was delivered to and also feedback about the
  communication. Review Control Communications: Inputs.
3. C. Ignoring cultural differences. Organizations have different
  internal cultures. The more organizations you have on a project, the
  greater likelihood that cultural differences will be overlooked. Check
  out Control Communications: Inputs.
4. D. Control Stakeholder Engagement. Checking stakeholders' level
  of engagement and taking action to encourage them to have the
  desired level of engagement is part of controlling their engagement.
  Check out Control Stakeholder Engagement.
5. B. Control Communications. Making sure communications meet
  the needs of the stakeholders is part of controlling communications.
  Look over Control Communications.
6. C. Stakeholder management plan. A stakeholder engagement
  assessment matrix can be part of the stakeholder management
  plan. See the information in Control Stakeholder Engagement:
  Inputs.
7. A. Manage conflict. Keeping conflict productive is important. If
  conflict becomes negative or nonproductive, you need to step in
  and manage it. You can find this in Holding productive meetings.

                           Scenario 1
1. D. Making erroneous assumptions about the audience. You
  assumed that the Director of Finance was informed and interested
  in the presentation. Go over the information in Communication
  blockers.
2. A. Make sure only the people who need to be there are invited.
  The Director of Finance did not need to be there and did not find
  value in the presentation. Look at Holding productive meetings.

                          Scenario 2
1. A. Control stakeholder engagement. You will need to closely
  monitor the architect and continue to adjust your strategy to ensure
  he does not disrupt the project. Review the information in Control
  Stakeholder Engagement.
Chapter 4: Managing Your Risks
      and Procurements
Exam Objectives
    Actively employ risk management techniques as documented in the
    risk management plan to minimize the impact of risk on the project.
    Conduct risk reassessment on a regular basis and implement
    response strategies as indicated in the risk register.
     Administer contracts and measure contractor performance.
    Identify and quantify variances and determine appropriate
    preventive and corrective actions.



 Monitoring and controlling risks is a complex process -- and, when done
 well, ensures that you're practicing good project management principles. By
 practicing risk management, your project will be a lot smoother and have a
 greater probability of meeting its objectives.
 In Book V, Chapter 1, I spend quite a bit of time talking about planning for
 risks. This juncture is where you use all that knowledge gained in identifying,
 prioritizing, quantifying, and developing responses to risk. In Control Risks,
 you will spend time assessing the effectiveness of the risk management
 process overall as well as determining whether it is being used: in other
 words, a risk audit.
 Managing contracts includes monitoring the contractors' performance as well
 as making sure that the terms and conditions of the contract are followed.
 Contract administration includes managing payments, changes, performance
 reviews, and the day-to-day interaction with the contractor. All these
 activities need to be conducted while integrating the contractor work with in-
 house work or with the work of other contractors. The more contractors you
 have, the more complex it becomes.
                 Quick Assessment
1. ______ ______ identifies new risks, analyzes existing risks, and
  closes outdated risks.
2. To identify where performance could go over a performance
  threshold in the future, you should employ a(n) ______ ______.
3. Comparing accomplishments against a schedule of technical
  achievements is called ______ ______ ______.
4. A contested change where the buyer and seller cannot agree on
  compensation is a(n) ______, a(n) _____, or a(n) ______.
5. (True/False). Contract administration may be handled by a
  department that is entirely separate from the project.
6. Which input provides information on schedule variances, forecasts,
  and funds expended?
7. To review the risk management process and the individual risk
  responses, you should conduct a(n) ______ ______.
8. If you want to indicate that failure to deliver on time constitutes a
  breach of contract, which clause should you include in a contract?
9. What are two types of alternative dispute resolution?
10. An event that is the result of elements of nature, or "an act of
  God," is referred to in contractual language as ______ ______.
                          Answers
1. Risk reassessment. Risk reassessment occurs after the initial in-
  depth identification, analysis, and response to risks. It occurs
  throughout the project. Read up on Risk reassessment.
2. Variance and trend analysis. A trend analysis will indicate whether
  there is a likelihood of breaching a performance threshold if current
  performance trends continue. Go over the information in Variance
  and trend analysis.
3. Technical performance measurement. Technical performance
  measurement compares planned technical achievements with
  actual technical achievements. You can read more about this in
  Technical performance measurement.
4. Claim, dispute, appeal. Claims, disputes, and appeals are all terms
  that are used to describe a situation where the buyer and seller
  cannot agree on compensation. You can read about this in Claims
  and disputes.
5. True. Contract administration is often handled by a legal
  department, contracts department, or procurement department, not
  the project. For more information, see Contract administration.
6. Work performance reports. Work performance reports contain
  information on the status of the project, including technical
  achievements, schedule status, and budget information. Check out
  Table 4-1, which talks about risk-monitoring inputs.
7. Risk audit. A risk audit assesses individual risk responses for
  effectiveness, and it reviews the entire risk management process to
  determine whether it's being followed and whether it's appropriate
  for the project. Read up on this in Risk audit.
8. Time is of the Essence. When a Time is of the Essence clause is in
  a contract, it means that on-time delivery is so important that failure
  to deliver on time is considered a breach of contract. Read more
  about this in Control Procurements.
  9. Mediation and arbitration. Both mediation and arbitration are less
    formal and less costly than litigation. See Claims and disputes for
    more information.
  10. Force majeure. Force majeure events allow a delay in
    performance due to circumstances beyond one's control. I define
    force majeure in the section on Force majeure and liquidated
    damages.


Control Risks: Inputs
 To effectively monitor and manage risks, you need to have a 24/7, 360-degree
 view on what's happening with your project. In Control Risks, you continue
 the cycle of identifying, analyzing, and responding to risks.


             Control Risks. Implementing risk response plans, tracking identified
         risks, monitoring residual risks, identifying new risks, and evaluating the
         risk process effectiveness throughout the project.
 You will be monitoring risks and identifying new risks throughout the entire
 life of the project. While executing the plan, you will have additional
 information: namely, performance information. Every time you get a status
 report from the team members, and every time you prepare a performance
 report for your sponsor, you should be looking at the work performance
 measurements and work performance information to determine whether new
 risks are on the horizon that you should put through the risk planning cycle.
 You should be familiar with the content in the inputs by now, but because
 they are so critical to effectively identifying and responding to risks, Table 4-
 1 lists them, with the input on the left, and the content from the input on the
 right.

 Table 4-1 Risk Monitoring Inputs
 Input        Content

 Project
            Risk management plan, including: Approach for allocating reserves Reporting formats Timing
 Management
            and frequency for risk reassessment Risk audit approach
 Plan
 Risk register Risk IDRisk statementProbabilityImpact by objectiveRisk scoreResponseRevised probability,
               impact, and scoreRisk ownerActionsStatusRisk triggersWatch list
             Status of deliverablesPercent of work actually completedTechnical achievementsActual start
 Work
             and finish dates of schedule activitiesRemaining work to be done on in-progress workCosts
 Performance
             committedCosts incurredStatus of the implementation of change requestsCorrective actions
 Data
             takenPreventive actions takenStatus of defect repairs
             Percent complete of work in progressSchedule varianceSchedule performance indexCost
             varianceCost performance indexWork completed in the current periodWork planned for
 Work        completion but not complete, along with the reasons whyFunds expended during the current
 performance periodAny variance in the funds expended, along with the reasons whyStatus of existing
 reports     risks and issuesAny new risks or issuesForecast for future schedule performanceForecast
             for future cost performanceResource utilization variancesSummary of changes requested
             and changes implementedAny quality findingsNew and resolved assumptions

 Other        Assumption LogIssue log


 You can see that there is quite a bit of information you need to gather and
 synthesize to effectively manage your risks.

Control Risks: Tools and Techniques
 To effectively manage risks on your project, you should reassess existing
 risks on a regular basis as well as identify new risks. You should also analyze
 project performance, forecasts, trends, and reserve utilization. A risk audit
 will help ensure that the risk management process is working effectively.
 These techniques are discussed in more detail in the following sections.

 Risk reassessment
 Much of the work in Monitor and Control Risks takes place in reassessing the
 risks that you already identified and documented in the risk register. For a
 refresher on all the information in the risk register, review Book V, Chapter 1.
 You should take some time at every team meeting to identify new risks and
 discuss active risks. At the points in time documented in the risk management
 plan, you should do a really thorough review of the entire register. This is
 often done at the close of one phase and the start of another. Common actions
 in risk reassessment include
     Identifying new risks, analyzing the probability and impact, and
     developing a risk response plan
     Identifying any risk triggers that have occurred to tell you whether you
     need to implement a response plan or a contingency plan
   Determining whether any risk events have become active, indicating that
   you need to implement the response strategy
   Determining whether any events occurred that you didn't plan for -- and
   need a workaround for
   Assessing whether the probability or impact for any risks has changed
   Assessing whether the risk response strategy is still appropriate, or
   whether you need to take a different approach
   Determining whether residual risks have grown and whether you need to
   develop more robust responses
    Identifying any secondary risks that have emerged and putting them
   through the risk planning cycle
    Determining whether events have evolved to the point where you should
   take preventive or corrective actions for any new or existing risks
   Reviewing your watch list to see whether any risk events should be
   escalated up to the active risk list
   Reassessing the risk tolerance levels of the sponsor, performing
   organization, and other stakeholders to determine if they have shifted
   Identifying any risk events that have passed so that you can close them
Keeping the risk register up to date can take some time, but you can see that
if you ask these questions, perform the assessments, and continue toidentify
new events, your project will perform much better than if you just did risk
management at the beginning of the project or once every few months.

Analysis
Comparing the planned work against the actual work and also the planned
costs against the actual costs generates good performance information. To
really understand what's happening on your project, though, you need to
compare information across documents. A quality issue in one deliverable
could result in a cost or schedule risk down the line. This type of risk analysis
helps you stay on top of your project.
Variance and trend analysis
After you begin generating performance reports, reviewing the reports and
monitoring and controlling risks will go hand in hand. Whenever you see a
variance outside the threshold, you should investigate the cause of the
variance and determine whether it poses a risk to the project. If it does, you
will move immediately to identifying that as a risk and developing a response
to it.
A trend analysis is a method you can use to determine whether project
performance is at risk. If your CPI is trending from .95 to .93 to .91, you
know to take action soon, or you will be outside the threshold established in
the project management plan (covered Book V, Chapter 3).
Technical performance measurement
Technical performance measurement is another way to determine whether
your progress is on track. You might have a plan in place promising certain
functionality by a point in time, but you haven't achieved that functionality.
Or you might have planned to have a specific number of bugs or defects fixed
by a certain date, but that didn't happen. This should be considered a risk.


        Reviewing the risk log is a good idea, but go over the Assumption
     Log (see Book III, Chapter 1) as well. You should be looking for new
     assumptions, if the existing assumptions are valid, whether they
     changed, or finding any can be closed out. And while you're at it, do the
     same thing for the issue log.
Reserve analysis
When developing risk responses, you set aside time and money for
contingency reserve to reduce the risk of time and cost overruns. As you
progress through the project, you will allocate some of the schedule reserve
as needed, and you will need to use some of the budget reserve either for
contingency funds for identified risks or for unforeseen expenditures. At the
same time, as you progress through the project, the amount of uncertainty --
and, therefore, risk -- is reduced.
Reserve analysis looks at the amount of risk on the project and the amount of
schedule and budget reserve to determine whether the reserve is sufficient for
the remaining risk. You can expect to spend a certain percentage in each
phase of the life cycle, or you might allocate it by milestone. If appropriate,
you might be able to release some project reserve from the project, or you
might need to ask for more, depending on how the project is going.

Risk audit
A risk audit looks at the risk management process overall as well as the
responses to individual risks. The audit can be relatively informal and
conducted during a team meeting, or it might be formal and conducted by an
outside risk management expert. The purpose of a risk audit is to evaluate the
effectiveness of the risk management process. Some of the items that a risk
audit addresses are
   Was the risk management planning sufficient?
   Did the team do a good job in identifying risks?
   Were the probability and impact (PxI) tables appropriate for the project?
   Were the correct quantitative analysis techniques used?
   How effective were the risk responses?
   Are the risks being monitored and managed appropriately?
A risk audit also considers the effectiveness of risk responses by answering
questions, such as
   Was the selected strategy effective?
   Did the risk event occur as expected?
   Did the response affect the risk event as expected?
   Were other options available that would have been more effective?
   What actions can be taken to increase the effectiveness of the response?
The risk audit can be used for lessons learned. You can document areas for
improvement as well as areas that worked well that you can share with other
project teams. The Risk Audit form shown in Figure 4-1 is a generic example
of what you can expect to see during a risk audit.
Figure 4-1: A Risk Audit form.



Control Risks: Outputs
  You will update the risk register based on the risk reassessment. You add new
  risks as well as their analysis and response strategy. Existing risks will be
  updated as needed, and some risks will be closed out. The register should also
 indicate which responses were enacted and how effective they were.
 The risk management plan, and any of the other subsidiary management plans
 and baselines from the project management plan, might require updating
 depending upon the results of this process. Assumption Logs (Book III,
 Chapter 1) and other appropriate project documents should be updated to
 reflect the outcome of this process as well. Organizational process assets are
 updated with information from risk audits, such as lessons learned. If your
 organization has a risk database, you should make sure that's kept up to date
 as part of your risk management activities.
 Many times, risk management entails corrective and preventive actions.
 These need to go through the change management process in the form of a
 change request.


         Monitor and Control Project Risk is the primary process that will be
      used to test knowledge and skills on risk identification and analysis
      techniques and risk response techniques.


Control Procurements
 Much like how the majority of your time managing the project is reflected in
 the Direct and Manage Project Work process, the majority of your time
 managing contracts is reflected in the Control Procurements process.


          Control Procurements. Managing procurement relationships,
      monitoring contract performance, and making changes and corrections
      to contracts as needed.
 During this process, the seller must meet the procurement requirements, and
 the buyer must perform according to the terms of the contract. This includes
 appropriate and timely payments and also contract change management.
 Thus, you can see that both the buyer and the seller will work with the
 procurement agreement to ensure that both parties are fulfilling their
 contractual commitments.
 This process requires significant integration across the project. Here are some
examples of integration. There are, of course, others, depending upon the
nature of the project:
   Scope: You need to verify and control the contractor scope. You should
   recall that verifying scope is the process of formally accepting the result.
   As a buyer, you want to make sure the contractor is delivering all the
   scope and only the scope that was promised. You also need to ensure that
   no one in your organization is making "constructive" changes to the
   contract.


            Constructive change: When a contractor performs work beyond
   the contract requirements, without a formal order under the changes
   clause, either due to an informal order from, or through the fault of, the
   buyer.
   Schedule: The contractors' deliverables need to be coordinated with other
   deliverables. Many contracts have milestone payments based on
   deliveries, and some have incentives based on timely or early delivery. In
   addition, some contracts have a clause that indicates that late delivery is
   considered a material breach.


            Time is of the Essence is a contract clause that indicates that on-
   time delivery is mandatory, and therefore, contractually binding. Failure to
   act or deliver within the stated time frame constitutes a breach of contract.
    Cost: You need to ensure that the contractor is paid only for work that's
   verified and accepted. If interim payments are scheduled, make sure that
   you're approving payments consistent with the results. In other words, if
   the contractor is scheduled to be 50% complete, yet only 25% of the work
   is done, make sure that you're paying 25% of the contract and not 50%.
   Quality: You use the same quality control techniques on contractor results
   as you do for in-house work. This ensures that the deliverables meet the
   requirements and specifications.
    Communication: The contractor needs to submit status reports that you
   will reference when developing your project performance reports. Many
   times, contracts will specify the format and timing of the reports.
   Risk: Information in the contractors risk log should be integrated with the
   project risk log. Additionally, there may be risks associated with
   contracting that you should manage throughout the project.
Obviously, the more contractors you have on a project, the more work this
entails. For complex procurements, or for projects with multiple vendors, you
might have a procurement administrator or a contracting officer's
representative to provide oversight to the contractor and manage much of this
work. This is particularly true when the organization has a centralized
contracting department.

Control Procurements: Inputs
The procurement management plan (part of the project management plan)
provides guidance on who will manage various aspects of the procurement as
well as how to go about it. This includes information on how to use the
payment systems, contract change control system, and performance reviews.
You use the baselines in the project management plan and compare them
against the work performance reports and work performance data provided by
the contractor. You should also compare the performance reports against the
actual agreements and the procurement documents.
Change requests can include a change to the statement of work (SOW) for the
contract, or to the contract itself.

Control Procurements: Tools and Techniques
The fundamental aspects of controlling procurements are analyzing
performance, managing disputes, and administering the contract. I discuss
each separately.
Analyzing performance
To analyze the contractor's performance, review his performance reports.
This can be as simple as looking at a contractor status report. Or, for complex
procurements, this review includes all-day performance reviews, on-site
inspections, and contract audits. The contractor status report can include the
same type of information you gather from your in-house team members.
To discuss performance reviews, on-site inspections, and audits, consider this
scenario. Assume that you just took over managing an aerospace project. The
design, development, and manufacturing for a jet engine are outsourced to
  Speed of Sound (SOS) Jets. You are reviewing the performance reports,
  including the following summary graphic shown in Figure 4-2.




Figure 4-2: Contractor status summary.


  The contractor status graph in the figure shows you that the actual results are
  less than (behind) your baseline, and that your costs are greater than your
  baseline. In other words, the contractor is behind and over budget.
  Procurement performance review
  Based on the contractor status report, you decide that you need to go to the
  contractor's location and have a meeting. You convene with your contracting
  officer, the SOS representative assigned to this contract, your technical lead,
  and your quality assurance team lead. You ask the SOS contractor to have his
  project manager, technical lead, contract administrator, and any key suppliers
  he deems appropriate present for the meeting. You also tell SOS that you
  want all technical drawings and documentation available and that you would
  like a tour of the facilities where the work is being done.
  At the meeting, you begin by introducing yourself and asking the SOS project
  manager, Kevin, to bring you up to date on the past 18 months of work.
  Kevin states that SOS is 90% done with design and 65% done with
  development, but hasn't started manufacturing. He states that SOS had
  problems with the thrust on the first prototype and had to go back and
  redesign some parts. The redesign, retooling, and machining put SOS behind
schedule and over budget. The second prototype, which just entered the
testing phase, is meeting the requirements and specifications so far.
Your technical expert is reviewing the drawings and concurs with the project
manager's explanation. You ask Kevin to discuss ways to get the schedule
back on track and look for ways to minimize the overrun while the technical
lead and QA team member tour the facility and look at the new prototype.
Inspection and audit
In addition to touring the facility and checking out the new prototype, the
quality assurance team member and technical lead validate the progress as
reported and also verify that the work done so far is acceptable. They are also
looking at the processes for material checkin, usage, and reporting to make
sure that your company is charged only for material used on your project.
Your contracting officer and the SOS contract administrator are going through
the contract and reviewing the terms to make sure that everyone has a clear
understanding of the implications of the cost and schedule overruns. SOS
believes there have been some constructive changes to the original design.
The two contracts people are discussing this issue. If they can't come to a
resolution about the situation, it might turn into a claim that will need to be
settled per the contractual language.
Claims and disputes
As I mention, the contract team members are reviewing the contract and
discussing claims, disputes, and constructive changes. (I define constructive
changes earlier in the section Control Procurements.) Take a look at the
claims and dispute resolution options.


        The information in this section should not be construed as legal
     advice. For specific legal consultation, you should consult with the
     appropriate council.


        Claim. A request, demand, or assertion of rights by a seller against a
     buyer, or vice versa, for consideration, compensation, or payment under
     the terms of a legally binding contract, such as for a disputed change.
Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR). A means to settle claims or disputes
without litigation. The two primary means of ADR are Arbitration and
Mediation.
Mediation. A method of ADR used to settle claims and disputes informally.
An independent party aids in settling the claim or dispute between the parties.
Arbitration. A method of ADR used to settle claims and disputes without
litigation. An impartial third party, usually a professional arbitrator, hears the
testimony and reviews evidence from both sides. Both parties agree that
arbitration will be binding, meaning that the arbitrator's award is final.
A claim can also be called a dispute or an appeal. A claim can occur when the
parties can't agree whether there has been a change, or the appropriate
compensation for a change. Here's a snippet of a conversation between the
buyer's QA lead and the seller's technical lead:
   QA: I would like to see the results of the XYZ performance integration
   test.
   TL: We didn't do the performance integration test; it wasn't in the
   contract.
   QA: You need to do that test. Otherwise, how can you prove that the
   engine integrates with the XYZ?

This could be a situation where the QA lead is introducing a change. On the
other hand, the performance integration test may be in-scope work,
depending on how the contract is written. Assuming that the performance
integration test is not in scope, but the contractor performs the test based on
the QA person saying the contractor needs to perform the test, there could be
a dispute on the charges associated with running the test.
The contract will have a section describing how disputes and claims should
be handled. The preferred method of handling disputes is to first try and
negotiate a settlement. If the two parties can't come to an agreement, they
will have to use some form of ADR.
The first ADR method to try is mediation, which is less formal and less costly
than arbitration. Mediators are professionals who work with both parties to
try and come to a negotiated settlement. If mediation isn't successful, the
parties can use arbitration. Arbitration is more formal than mediation --
because there is a licensed arbitrator -- but is less formal and less costly than
litigation. Arbitration includes testimony and evidence from both sides and is
legally binding.
Force majeure and liquidated damages
Two additional contractual terms that you should be familiar with for the
exam are force majeure and liquidated damages.
Force majeure is usually associated with natural disasters or "acts of God." It
allows the seller a delay for delivery.


         Force Majeure. An event that is the result of elements of nature;
     sometimes also referred to as "acts of God." A force majeure event
     allows a party to delay its contractual obligations because of
     circumstances beyond its control, such as unusually bad weather, natural
     disasters, political uprisings, strikes, and so on.


        Liquidated Damages. A contract provision that establishes a
     predetermined award if a party fails to perform as promised. Liquidated
     damages can only be compensatory damages -- to make the injured
     party whole again. If they are disproportionately large, they are
     unenforceable.
Liquidated damages are damages that are reimbursed on a set value. For
example, say that SOS had a penalty of $1,000 per day for late delivery. If a
supplier delivered material to SOS eight days late and caused SOS to be late
and have an $8,000 penalty, SOS could go after the supplier for the $8,000 --
but no more. An amount higher than $8,000 would be considered punitive
damages. Punitive damages are damages that are meant to punish the offender
for egregious behavior. They are not normally awarded in contract law.
Contract administration
The contract administration function is about using the internal systems to
maintain contract compliance. For example, all changes to the scope of work,
the schedule, or contractual terms must follow the contractually stipulated
terms and conditions. If specific forms need to be filled out, or if only
specific people can sign an amendment, then those procedures need to be
followed.
The payment system is used to match up a contract number, the SOW,
invoices, and accounts payable categories. All invoices need to be matched to
an SOW on an active contract. In some instances, the project manager may
need to sign off before an invoice is paid.
A records management system keeps all correspondence associated with a
contract in order. The system includes procedures, software, and processes
needed to maintain the contract information throughout the life of the
contract.


        The monitoring and controlling knowledge and skills that apply to
    managing your own project also apply to managing a contractor. Expect
    to see test questions regarding administering procurements that deal with
    the following knowledge and skills:
   Project performance metrics (cost, duration, effort)
   Controlling performance against the project management plan
   Variance and trend analysis techniques
   Change management techniques
   Integrated change control techniques
   Cost analysis techniques
   Problem-solving techniques, including root cause analysis
   Risk identification and analysis techniques
   Risk response techniques
   Performance measurement and tracking techniques, including CPM,
   PERT, and EVM
   Reporting procedures

Control Procurements: Outputs
Work performance information includes cost, schedule, and technical
performance information from the vendor. This information will be integrated
with the in-house performance information to create work performance
 reports in the Monitor and Control Project Work process. In addition,
 performance information about the vendor should be collected. This includes
 information about potential issues that could result in claims or disputes.
 The organizational process assets and the procurement documentation are
 kept up to date via the records management system. Examples of
 documentation include
     Schedules
     Payment records
     Change requests
     Performance reports
     Audit results
     Letters, memos, and meeting minutes
     Technical documentation
     Formal acceptance of deliverables
 Throughout the contract performance period, change requests will likely be
 needed. These need to follow the change process outlined in the contract and
 go through the project Integrated Change Control process. The buyer is
 concerned only with those changes that affect the contractual terms. If the
 seller is making changes that are transparent to the buyer and don't affect any
 contractual obligations, those changes are not documented in the buyer's
 change control system.



          Monitoring and Controlling summary
Books VII and VIII describe the processes in the Monitoring and Controlling process group.
The information in these two books makes up 25% of the exam: in other words, 50 questions.
To do well on those 50 questions, you need to know the tools, techniques, and outputs
associated with the processes as well as have proficiency in the skills and knowledge
associated with analyzing performance against the project management plan and taking
appropriate action. Many of the questions will integrate the Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct. Expect to see questions that require knowledge and skills associated with the
following:

      Project control limits variance, thresholds,
                                                     Book VII, Chapter 1 Book VIII, Chapter 2
      tolerance
   Project performance metrics                   Book VII, Chapter 1 Book VII, Chapter 3 Book VIII,
                                                 Chapter 1 Book VIII, Chapter 2

   Controlling performance against the project
                                                 Book VII, Chapter 1 Book VII, Chapter 2
   management plan

                                                 Book VII, Chapter 1 Book VII, Chapter 2 Book VII,
   Variance and trend analysis techniques
                                                 Chapter 3 Book VIII, Chapter 1 Book VIII, Chapter 2

   Change management techniques                  Book VII, Chapter 1

   Integrated change control techniques          Book VII, Chapter 1

   Cost analysis techniques                      Book VIII, Chapter 1

   Problem solving techniques, including root
                                                 Book VIII, Chapter 2
   cause analysis

   Risk identification, analysis techniques, and
                                                 Book VIII, Chapter 4
   risk response techniques

   Performance measurement and tracking
                                            Book VII, Chapter 3Book VIII, Chapter 1
   techniques, including CPM, PERT, and EVM

   Reporting procedures                          Book VII, Chapter 1




As in all control processes, the project team updates project management plan
components and project documents to maintain accurate and current records.


       There are numerous ways that contracts and contractual relationships
    can be abused. The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct addresses
    opportunities for misconduct in the standards on responsibility and
    honesty. Be prepared for procurement administration questions to
    address both ethical as well as technical issues on the exam. Specific
    standards that are likely to be included in procurement questions include
    the following:
    We protect proprietary or confidential information that has been entrusted
   to us.
   We respect the property rights of others.
   We make commitments and promises, implied or explicit, in good faith.
   We do not engage in dishonest behavior with the intention of personal
   gain or at the expense of another.
Key Terms
 Terms having to do with procurements are mostly legal in nature. It seems
 like a different language sometimes. However, it's important to understand
 how these terms apply to contracts and procurements in a project. This
 chapter is one of the few chapters with key terms not defined in the PMBOK
 Guide.
    Constructive changes
    Time is of the Essence
    Claims
    Negotiation
    Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR)
    Mediation
    Arbitration
    Force majeure
    Liquidated damages
Chapter Summary
 Control Risk is a process you will engage in throughout the project. This
 chapter described the activities necessary to continuously manage risk on
 your project. I also discussed the day-to-day management and administration
 of contracts.
    Controlling risks uses information from work in progress, work
    performance reports, and risk reassessment to identify new risks, check the
    status of existing risks, and close out old risks.
    All new risks identified need to go through the entire risk analysis and
    response cycle.
    Risk reassessment looks at the status of risks to see whether the analysis
    has changed, any risk triggers have occurred, the responses are effective,
    and residual risk is still acceptable.
     You should review work performance reports to look for variance or
    trends that indicate a need for corrective or preventive action.
    Comparing the amount of reserve remaining against the amount of risk
    remaining is a way to determine whether you have sufficient reserve.
    A risk audit reviews the effectiveness of the risk management processes
    and risk responses.
    Controlling procurements is concerned with monitoring seller
    performance and following the terms and conditions in the contract.
    Keeping all the vendor(s) work aligned and integrated with in-house
    project work is important.
     You can use work performance reports, performance reviews, inspections,
    and audits to assess the seller progress.
     Contract changes need to go through the contract change control system.
    Constructive changes can lead to disputes or claims. If the change, the
    timing of the change, or the payment for the change is not agreed to, you
    need to use negotiation, mediation, or arbitration to come to a resolution.
                          Prep Test
                      Multiple Choice
1. Which technique would you employ to do all of the following?

* Assess whether the risk response strategy is still appropriate.
  You may need to take a different approach.

* Determine whether the residual risks have grown. If so, you may
  need to develop more robust responses.

* Identify any secondary risks that have emerged and put them
   through the risk planning cycle.
 A    Technical performance measurement
 B    Risk reanalysis
 C    Risk reassessment
 D    Reserve analysis

2. If you want late deliveries to indicate a breach of contract, you
  should
 A    Include a force majeure clause in the contract.
 B    Include a Time is of the Essence clause in the contract.
 C    Make sure that liquidated damages are included in the contract.
 D    Perform an audit and inspection on the seller's premises.

3. Visiting the seller's location to see whether processes and
  procedures are being followed and also to assess the quality of
  the work is
 A    Inspection and audit
 B    Performance reporting
 C   Procurement performance review
 D   Contract administration

4. Which is the least preferred method of settling claims?
 A   Litigation
 B   Mediation
 C   Negotiation
 D   Arbitration

5. Damages that are compensatory in nature and paid at a
  previously agreed upon rate are
 A   Punitive damages
 B   Constructive damages
 C   Liquidated damages
 D   Real damages

                            Scenario 1
When looking at performance reports, you notice that over the past
four weeks, a work package has continued to get further and further
behind. The work package isn't on the critical path, but if things
continue this way, it is likely to become the new critical path and cause
the project to be late.

1. This assessment is an example of
 A   Risk reassessment
 B   Trend analysis
 C   Reserve analysis
 D   Performance measurement

                            Scenario 2
Based on your experience in software development, you expected to
have 100 defects after the first build. You estimated that you could
have 40 cleared by the first week, 65 by the second week, 90 by the
third week, and all 100 cleared by the fourth week. At the end of the
second week, you see that you have cleared 67 defects.

1. This is an example of
 A   Risk reassessment
 B   Trend analysis
 C   Reserve analysis
 D   Technical performance measurement

                           Scenario 3
In a performance review, you state that your project is 60% done.
You've applied $75,000 of the $100,000 allocated for cost reserves
and 8 of the 12 weeks of schedule reserves.

1. Which risk monitoring technique would you use, and which
  status would it indicate?
 A Reserve analysis shows that you are on schedule and over
 budget.
 B Reserve analysis shows that you are at risk of going over budget
 and beyond your scheduled due date.
 C Trend analysis shows that your CPI and SPI will be greater than
 1.0 at the end of the project.
 D Trend analysis shows that your CPI and SPI will be less than 1.0
 at the end of the project.

                           Scenario 4
A number of risk events have occurred on the project lately. You put
together a team to discover why. The team finds that the risk analysis
process wasn't being followed correctly. Many of the risks that
occurred were on the watch list, but they should have had a higher
probability and impact score. You are concerned about more misuse of
the risk management process.
1. To help you determine whether people are using the processes
  correctly, you conduct
 A   A risk audit
 B   A risk reassessment
 C   A trend analysis
 D   A status meeting

                            Scenario 5
Your supplier notifies you that his delivery will be a week late because
a tornado destroyed part of his warehouse, including some of the
materials that were about to be shipped to you.

1. You can't hold the supplier at fault because your contract has
  what kind of clause?
 A   Liquidated damages
 B   Force majeure
 C   Constructive change
 D   ADR
                           Answers
                       Multiple Choice
1. C. Risk reassessment. Risk reassessment accomplishes all these
  actions. Look into Risk reassessment.
2. B. Include Time is of the Essence in the contract. If a Time is of the
  Essence clause is in a contract, late delivery is considered a breach
  of contract. Look over Control Procurements.
3. A. Inspection and audit. Walking around the seller site is an
  example of inspection and audit. Check out Analyzing performance.
4. A. Litigation. Litigation is the least preferred method of settling
  claims because it takes the most time and is the most costly.
  Negotiation, mediation, and arbitration are all better options, if
  possible. Go to Claims and disputes.
5. C. Liquidated damages. Liquidated damages reimburse damages
  at an agreed-upon stipulated rate. See information in Force
  majeure and liquidated damages.

                            Scenario 1
1. B. Trend analysis. Trend analysis looks at past performance for
  trends that put the project performance at risk. See Variance and
  trend analysis.

                            Scenario 2
1. D. Technical performance measurement. Technical performance
  measurement can measure the number of defects fixed. Go over
  Variance and trend analysis.

                            Scenario 3
1. B. Reserve analysis shows that you're at risk of going over budget
  and beyond your scheduled due date. The reserve analysis shows
  that a greater percent of budget and schedule reserve has been
  used than the percent of scope that has been accomplished. Check
  out Reserve analysis.

                           Scenario 4
1. A. A risk audit. A risk audit can tell you whether risk processes are
  being followed correctly. Look at the information in Risk audit.

                           Scenario 5
1. B. Force majeure. Force majeure gives an obligated party an
  excuse not to perform if circumstances arise beyond its control.
  Review Force majeure and liquidated damages.
Book IX

  Closing Your Project and the
 Code of Ethics and Professional
            Conduct
        For more, read the article on closing knowledge and skills at
www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio.
Contents at a Glance
Book IX: Closing Your Project and the Code of Ethics
 and Professional Conduct

Book IX: Chapter 1: Closing Your Contracts and Your Project
   Knowledge and Skills for the Closing Processes

   Closing Your Procurements

   Close Project or Phase

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary


Book IX: Chapter 2: The PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
 Conduct
   About the Code

   Responsibility

   Respect

   Fairness

   Honesty

   Key Terms

   Chapter Summary
       Chapter 1: Closing Your
      Contracts and Your Project
Exam Objectives
    Confirm that the project scope and deliverables are complete by
    attaining final acceptance by the project sponsor and customer.
    Facilitate project closure by transferring ownership and management
    of project deliverables.
    Formally close the project and all contracts by obtaining legal,
    financial, and administrative closure, thus eliminating further
    liability.
    Write the final project report that communicates final project
    performance, including any variances and project issues. Distribute
    to appropriate stakeholders.
    Conduct a thorough project review to collect and document lessons
    learned and contribute them to the organization's knowledge base.
    Collect, organize, and archive project and contract documents and
    records to comply with regulatory requirements, retain for future
    projects, and be available for audit purposes.
    Gain customer and stakeholder feedback to determine satisfaction
    level, enhance relationships, and provide constructive project
    evaluation.



 There are a lot of exam objectives for the Closing process group even though
 it only has two processes: Close Project or Phase and Close Procurements. In
 this chapter, you see that the actions needed to conduct an effective close-out
 are similar regardless of whether you are closing a procurement, a phase, or a
 project.


         Closure does not occur only at the end of the project. You can
conduct closure activities at any time in the project. Keep in mind that
one of the processes is Close Project or Phase. You will be closing out
some phases of the project early in the project life cycle. In addition, you
will perform close-out activities on procurements as they are completed
instead of waiting until the end of the project to close out procurements.
                 Quick Assessment
1. (True/False). Contracts are closed only at the close of the project.
2. Terminating a contract early because of a change in marketplace
  conditions is known as ______ ______ ______.
3. Mediation is a type of ______ ______ _______.
4. What technique would you use to determine what worked well on a
  procurement and what can be improved?
5. Identifying best practices that can be passed on and understanding
  the source of poor performance is documented in a(n) ______
  ______ report.
6. Which document should you measure project completion against?
7. (True/False). Close-out activities begin after the product has
  undergone final acceptance.
8. A contract that is terminated because one of the parties is about to
  default is said to be terminated for ______.
9. Two very important stakeholders you should approach for
  information about your project are your ______ and your ______.
10. (True/False). If a project is terminated early or put on hold, you
  should conduct project closure activities.
                           Answers
1. False. Contracts can be closed out at any point in the project. See
  Closing Your Procurements.
2. Termination for convenience. Terminating a contract for
  convenience does not imply fault for either party; it indicates that
  there is no longer a need for the project or that circumstances have
  changed. Look at the information in Terminating for convenience.
3. Alternative Dispute Resolution. Mediation and arbitration are both
  types of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). Check out Dispute
  resolution.
4. Procurement audit. A procurement audit is used to determine what
  worked well on a procurement and what can be improved so future
  procurements are managed better. Read the information in
  Procurement audits.
5. Lessons learned. A lessons learned report documents information
  you want to pass on for future projects, both good and bad. Go over
  Learning from projects.
6. Project management plan. You measure project completion against
  the project management plan, which contains the scope statement,
  baselines, and other relevant project information. Go over the
  information in Close Project or Phase: Inputs.
7. False. Close-out activities should be conducted throughout the
  project. You should close each phase in the project life cycle as well
  as collect lessons learned throughout the project. See the section
  Close Project or Phase: Inputs.
8. Cause. If either party defaults or is about to default, the other party
  can terminate the contract for cause. See Termination for cause.
9. Sponsor, customer. You should always determine your customer's
  level of satisfaction with the product and the project. After all, your
  customer is the reason why the project exists. Your sponsor can
    give you a strategic perspective of how well you met your project
    objectives. See Whom to talk to.
 10. True. If a project is terminated early, you should document the
   scope that was completed, the scope that is in progress, and any
   lessons learned from the project. Look at Close Project or Phase:
   Tools and Techniques.

Knowledge and Skills for the Closing
Processes
 Closing processes don't just happen at the end of a project. They happen
 whenever you close a procurement or a phase. Keep the following list of
 cross-cutting skills in mind as you read through the information in this
 chapter.
    Information management tools, techniques, and methods
    Targeting communications to intended audiences



         Questions in the Closing process group account for 8% of the exam.
      You should expect 16 questions on the two processes in this process
      group.

Closing Your Procurements
 Close Procurements is one of the two closing processes. This process
 supports the Close Project or Phase process but doesn't necessarily happen at
 the same time. However, to close the project, all procurements must be
 closed. The exception to this is if you have open claims or appeals. Open
 claims are handled by the legal department.
 Because contracts are legal documents, the project manager does not usually
 have the authority to close them out. Generally, the project manager will
 inform a contract administrator that the contract project work has been
 completed. It is then up to the contract administrator to formally close out the
 contract.
        Close Procurements. Completing each procurement.
To close out a procurement, you use the procurement management plan for
the details and guidelines associated with contract closure. All procurement
documents need to be indexed for lessons learned and future reference.
Procurement documents include performance reports, invoices, and
contractual change documentation. Your organization may use information
from contractor performance reports and documentation to evaluate
contractors for future work.

Terminating a contract
Contracts can be terminated for a variety of reasons, such as termination by
mutual agreement, termination for cause, and termination for convenience.
Terminating a contract by mutual agreement is self-explanatory. If both
parties agree that the contract should be cancelled, they need to follow the
requirements in the termination clause of the contract. Termination for cause
and termination for convenience have different contractual obligations
associated with them, so look at both of those methods of termination a little
closer.
Termination for cause
Termination for cause occurs when either party has breached or is about to
breach the contract. This is also known as defaulting on the contract.
Here are two examples of seller default:
   The seller can't deliver the quality of work promised, and there is no
   evidence that the seller will be able to.
   The clause Time is of the Essence is in the contract, and it's abundantly
   clear that the seller can't meet the delivery date. (Read more about Time is
   of the Essence in Book VIII, Chapter 3.)
The following are examples of buyer default:
   The buyer is in significant arrears for payment, and it's obvious that the
   buyer can't catch up on back payments and make future payments.
   The buyer is obligated to provide some element or component of the
   deliverable for the seller to be able to complete the contract. If the buyer
   doesn't deliver the element, the buyer is defaulting on its part of the
   contract.

Terminating for convenience
Many contracts have a clause that allows the buyer to terminate the contract
at its convenience. Examples of reasons to terminate for convenience include
the following:
   Another project takes higher priority, and the company decides to cancel
   or delay the current project.
   The market changes, and there is no longer a need for the project.
   Because of a reorganization, new leadership has other priorities.
   Financial landscape has shifted. A company's quarterly earnings were
   worse than expected, and the organization has decided to cut costs based
   on projected earnings.



        A contract terminated for convenience doesn't reflect poorly on either
     party. It just means there is no longer a need for the contracted goods.
Compensation
Depending on the reason for termination (cause or convenience), there is a
difference in the compensation due to the seller. If a contract is terminated for
cause, the buyer need only reimburse the seller for the accepted work.
However, if the contract is terminated for convenience, the buyer must
reimburse the seller for accepted work and any preparations for work and any
partially completed work. Here's a scenario from my running childcare center
example.
You get a call from the sponsor, Morgan Cuthbert, to come to her office right
away. When you get there, Morgan informs you that she has great news. The
cafeteria vendor has informed her that it can reorganize the kitchen area and
make room for a separate food storage and food prep area for the childcare
center. The cafeteria is adjacent to the childcare center, so by building a
simple doorway, you will have plenty of kitchen space. This is great news
because you can use the planned kitchen space for other activities for the
childcare center.
Although this is good news, you realize that the kitchen contractor, Kit's
Kitchens, has already drawn up plans for the kitchen, laid in the rough
plumbing, and preordered some cabinets. You understand that you have to
terminate Kit's contract and pay for any work in progress. Upon returning to
your desk, you call the kitchen contractor and set up a meeting.
At the meeting, you explain the situation to Kit and assure her that you have
every intention of paying for completed work, work in progress, and any
preparation for future work.
The following week you meet with Kit again. She tallied expenses for work
in progress for the electrician, plumber, and carpenter. You think the expenses
are fair and agree to them. There is a $500 cancellation fee for the cabinets.
You talk with the general contractor to see whether the cabinets can be used
anywhere else in the childcare center so you don't have to count the $500 as a
total loss. It turns out that you can use the cabinets for art supplies and
sleeping mats. Therefore, you decide to keep the cabinet order as is.
At the end of the meeting, you agree to provide all the documentation to the
contract administrator and get the invoices through the system. You assure
Kit that you will move ahead with contract closure and get her payment as
soon as possible.
In this scenario, the contract termination was in no way a reflection of the
work that Kit provided. The contract will go through the termination process,
the buyer will compensate the seller fairly, and the contract will be closed.


        The roles and responsibilities associated with early contract
     termination should be clearly documented in the contract.

Close Procurements: Tools and Techniques
When closing contracts, you need to make sure all claims are resolved. You
should also review the entire procurement process so you can learn from the
current procurement to improve future procurements. I talk about both
techniques in the following sections.
Dispute resolution
In the event of a disagreement that the contracted parties can't resolve via
negotiation, they need to follow the dispute resolution clause in the contract.
Most contracts require the parties to enter into some type of mediation or
arbitration. Some contracts require the issue be resolved by using one of these
forms of ADR, and others require that ADR be tried before the least
appealing alternative of litigation. (Read more about ADR, mediation, and
arbitration in Book VIII, Chapter 4.)
When the issue or claim can't be resolved while the project is active, the
claim may remain open even though the project has been closed.
Procurement audits
A procurement audit is a formal review of the procurement process on a
single procurement, or for the procurement process used on the project as a
whole. The purpose is to review each process in the procurement to identify
those areas that worked well as well as those areas that can be improved in
the future.
The audit begins by looking at the procurement planning process:
   Was the make-or-buy analysis complete?
   Was the contract type appropriate?
   How effective was the procurement management plan?
    Did the statement of work (SOW) accurately reflect the work that needed
   to be done without saying how it should be done?
   Were the procurement bid documents complete?
   Were the source selection criteria appropriate?
The procurement audit should also review the following information for
conducting procurements:
   Were a sufficient number of qualified sellers identified?
   Did the bidder conference go smoothly and answer all bidder questions?
   (See Book VI, Chapter 3.)
   Did the procurement negotiations end up with a win-win situation?
   Was the contract developed and signed in a timely manner?
   Was the contract complete without requiring numerous changes and
   revisions?
   Was the contract sufficiently clear so as not to result in numerous disputes
   and misunderstandings?
While administering the contract, the procurement audit will assess the
following:
   How well contract changes were handled
   Performance reports and performance reviews
   How well inspections at the seller location went
   The effectiveness of the payment system
   The completeness and organization of the project records
   How well disputes and issues were handled



        When auditing vendors, you want to record areas that worked well
     and areas that should be improved the next time. This information can be
     used the next time a similar procurement is needed.
A sample procurement audit form is shown in Figure 1-1. The form is
generic, but it shows the type of information that you would gather for a
procurement audit.
Figure 1-1: A Procurement Audit form.


  Close Procurements: Outputs
  A key part of closing a contract is reviewing the SOW and ensuring that all
  elements are complete and accepted. You should go through the deliverables
  list to make sure that all the deliverables meet the contractual requirements,
  all procedures and contract clauses were followed, and also that all the
technical and other contract documentation is available.


         It's a good practice to formally accept deliverables throughout the life
     of the contract, especially for large contracts. Closing the contract should
     merely formalize all the accepted work that has been delivered. After
     you accept all the work, you notify the contract administrator that the
     terms of the contract have been met. The contract administrator can then
     take the necessary steps to formally close out the contract.


         Because a contract is a legal document, it's important to collect and
     archive all procurement documentation and correspondence. The
     following is a partial list of information that you need to collect, index,
     and archive:
   Schedules
   Invoices and payment history
   Performance reports
   Technical documentation
   Contract change requests
   Corrective action reports
   Contract disputes and their resolutions
   Inspections
   Audits
   Performance evaluations
The contract documentation is a part of the overall project documentation that
you need to archive prior to project closure. The following sections take a
look at that final process.


       Procurements need to be closed out from the legal, financial, and
     administrative perspectives. Legally, you need to make sure the
      statement of work is complete and also that all deliverables have been
      formally accepted. Administratively, you want to make sure that all the
      terms and conditions of the contract have been followed and also that the
      procurement documentation has been appropriately archived.
      Financially, you need to make sure all the payments have been made,
      including award fees, incentive fees, and fixed fees as appropriate.


Close Project or Phase
 The Close Project or Phase process marks the culmination of a phase in the
 project life cycle or the completion of the entire project.


        Close Project or Phase. Finalizing all activities across all Project
      Management process groups to formally complete the project or phase.

 Close Project or Phase: Inputs
 To formally close a phase in the project life cycle or the entire project, you
 need to compare the accepted deliverables to the information in the project
 management plan. Remember: "Accepted deliverables" are an output from
 the Validate Scope process (see Book VII, Chapter 2).
 Accepted deliverables
 At the end of a phase, you should get formal approval and acceptance for any
 completed deliverables. At the end of the project, you have all accepted
 deliverables, the approvals for each deliverable, and the final approval and
 acceptance for the final product.
 The project management plan
 The project management plan documents the project life cycle and has
 instructions on how to close out a project phase. Each phase has specific
 deliverables that need to be complete and accepted before it can be
 considered closed. Oftentimes, additional criteria need to be met before
 considering a phase closed. Some examples are identified in the following
 section.
 Organizational process assets
 Your organizational process assets (OPAs) describe phase and project closure
guidelines. Examples of phase closure criteria include
   Performance reviews: At the end of the phase, the project sponsor and/or
   customer along with the project management team discuss the
   performance metrics for the phase and the project overall. They look at the
   risk events that occurred during the current phase, the status of issues, and
   any corrective actions that need to be taken.
   Project management plan updates: The end of a phase is a good time to
   make sure that all the elements of the project management plan are
   accurate and up to date. Some project managers wait for a phase gate to
   update the plans with the latest version.
    Project document updates: If you have an iterative life cycle, you can
   collect information for the next iteration during the Close Project or Phase
   process. You can also go through the assumption and risk logs and close
   out any out-of-date items, and update the remaining items. Some project
   managers collect new requirements, changes, assumptions, and risks when
   they formally initiate the new phase.
    Lessons learned: It's a good practice to collect lessons learned as you go
   through the project. At the end of each phase, formalizing the lessons
   learned for the phase and integrating those lessons into the next phase
   helps ensure that you don't repeat the same mistakes. I discuss lessons
   learned in greater detail shortly.

Close Project or Phase: Tools and Techniques
You'll use your team expertise and customer feedback to measure
deliverables against elements in the project management plan to determine
whether the project is complete. The project scope statement documents
product scope, product acceptance criteria, and project deliverables. You
should review the project scope statement; requirements documentation;
baselines for scope, schedule and cost; and any other relevant information in
the project management plan to make sure that you successfully met all the
project and product completion requirements.
Analytical techniques are used to record final project performance
measurements for technical, schedule, and budget performance. The causes of
any variances should be identified and recorded in a lessons learned
document.
        Conduct a lessons learned meeting at least at the end of every phase
     because you often have different resources in different phases. Make
     sure to get stakeholder input from those people who leave the project
     before it's complete.
In the event that the project terminates before completion, you will conduct
the formal closure process with the existing information. You want to
document the progress that was made, the work that remains unfinished, and
the reason for project termination. Oftentimes, a project is restarted months or
even years later, so having good records of the project's status when it was
closed is helpful.

Close Project or Phase: Outputs
The results of the Close Project or Phase process include a project review
with lessons learned and a final report that you will distribute to appropriate
stakeholders. You also need to formally transition project resources (team
members) and the final product and then organize the project archives.
A project review accomplishes two outcomes: the lessons learned document
and the final project report. You will use interviewing and feedback
techniques similar to those you used when you were first identifying
requirements and defining scope (see Book III, Chapter 1) to collect and
compile feedback. First I discuss gathering information for lessons learned
and then move into discussing the final report.
Learning from projects
To make sure it will benefit future projects, conducting a meaningful lessons
learned exercise takes time and effort. Notice I said meaningful. Lessons
learned is different from documenting all the reasons why a project wasn't
successful. It takes discipline to identify the root cause of good as well as not-
so-good results. In addition, you need to document them in a way that they
can be used and useful for future projects.
Here are some quick examples of not-so-great documentation and then some
better documentation. Although each scenario might be relevant to your
project, the not-so-great examples aren't productive information to pass
along. Consider my alternatives.
   Not so great
   Don't expect Jim to work on weekends because he has kids in soccer
   practice.
   Better
   Document in the Team Operating Agreement people's availability to work
   overtime so they can fit it into their schedule if needed.

   Not so great
   Make sure you ask Jennifer from Marketing whether she has anything to
   add before you baseline your budget.
   Better
   Do a full stakeholder analysis to identify all stakeholders who will have
   requirements for the project.

Whom to talk to
Here are some ways you can conduct a lessons learned exercise. You could
all stakeholders to come together and share what worked and what they
would do differently next time. Another approach is to interview people one-
on-one or in small groups to get more specific and perhaps sensitive
information. You should include suppliers and vendors in your lessons
learned. You can take the information from a contract close-out report and a
procurement audit, or you can interview the contractor about his experience
working on the project. The point is that you want a broad spectrum of input
for the lessons learned document.


       Don't wait until the end of the project to collect your lessons learned
    information. At the minimum, you should gather this info at the end of
    each phase -- especially for long projects! By the end of a long project,
    some team members will have moved on, and most team members will
    have forgotten events that occurred in the beginning phases.
For those topics that you think can help improve the performance of projects
in the future, you should share the results with management, the Project
Management Office (PMO), and other project managers. The same is true for
sharing events that went poorly on your project so others don't find
themselves in the same situation.
Two very important stakeholders you should approach for information about
your project are your sponsor and your customer. In addition to identifying
areas for improvement and those areas that worked well, conduct a
satisfaction survey. This can be informal, such as asking how you can do a
better job of satisfying them in the future, or you can send an electronic
survey. Ask open-ended questions when asking them how the project went
from their perspective. This will help maintain and improve your working
relationship.


        An important part of closing a phase and the project is to measure
     stakeholder satisfaction. The obvious stakeholder you want to check
     with is the customer. However, don't forget other stakeholders, such as
     your team members and the sponsor. If something you're doing isn't
     working for team members, you want to know about the issue so you
     can address it.
What to talk about
When collecting information about the project, have specific and general
questions designed to get people talking. You might want to gather
information about specific areas of the project, such as
   Effectiveness of requirements gathering
   How well scope was controlled
   The quality of the schedule
   How well communication worked
   Effectiveness of risk management
The lessons learned form in Figure 1-2 is a starting place for some of the
relevant areas you can inquire about when collecting lessons learned.
Figure 1-2: The Lessons Learned form.




          Your lessons learned become part of the organization's knowledge
       base, which means that they will be OPAs for the next project.
  The final report and archiving information
Your final project reports should include information on the project objectives
and how you met them, and also explain any variances from the success
criteria. A key component in the final report is a final financial accounting
and analysis. You should compare the final total expenditures with the
original budget and identify the causes of variances. For complex multiyear
projects, you'll want to show the information based on the organization's
fiscal year and compare that with the original funding requirements.
Additional accounting information that may be required includes
   A comparison of the financial metrics, such as NPV, FV, and so forth, that
   were used to justify the project in the first place. (See Book II, Chapter 1.)
   Final earned value (EV) numbers and metrics if EVM is being used. (See
   Book VIII, Chapter 1, for EVM metrics.)
   A description of the work packages that had significant variances and a
   root cause analysis on the variance.
    Significant variances.
    Validation or explanation of assumptions about cost estimates, including
   the "cost of money." (See Book II, Chapter 1.)



       The final report will be sent to all key stakeholders identified in the
     communication management plan.
Hopefully, you collected and organized your project documentation
throughout the project. That ongoing effort makes it a lot easier when you
have to archive information at the end. How you archive information depends
on the nature of the project. For some projects, you may want to have a box
of files or set of notebooks organized alphabetically, chronologically, or by
topic. In other situations, all your archives will be electronic and posted to an
intranet. Some of the information you archive may be sensitive and can be
stored only in a secure facility.
Personally, if I manage a one-year project, I take about four weeks to
complete the transition, conduct a lessons learned session, write the final
report, and organize and archive the project records. You should archive at
least
   The charter, project management plan, and project documents --
   especially all signed documents with approvals
   Baselines, performance reports, variance analysis, and final results
   Written communications, presentations, and reports
   Stakeholder satisfaction surveys and lessons learned
   Assumption, risk, and issue logs
   Procurement documentation and records
   Technical documentation
Archiving information is usually the last activity on a project. Frequently, the
project manager is the only person still active at this point. The archived
information is helpful for future projects. In many cases, regulations require
that you maintain records and documentation for a specified amount of time:
for example, warranty information, changes that involve regulations, and
project information that could be audited for taxes or legal compliance or
used in contractual legal disputes and lawsuits.
Transitioning the product and resources
Having a few loose ends at the end of the project is not uncommon. Usually,
new projects require your attention, so you need to make sure you take any
open items and assign them to someone for follow-up and closure. When
transitioning a product or service to either a customer or to operations, you
need to train the recipients on how to work the new product and how to
support and maintain it. If there isn't formal documentation and training for
this purpose, make sure you spend sufficient time transferring your
knowledge to whoever will be maintaining the product or service.
After the lessons learned and the project documentation is collected and
organized, you can begin to release your resources. For team members, write
up a performance assessment. This can be formal or informal. You should
identify the behaviors and actions that contributed to the project's success as
well as any areas for improvement. If your organization doesn't have policies
about this type of action, use your discretion on how you approach this. Most
people want to improve, but you need to be sensitive and not hand out
unsolicited advice!
An important part of releasing resources is having a celebration or some kind
 of event to acknowledge what the team has accomplished and thank the
 members for their contributions and participation. For large projects, this can
 be a nice event or dinner with awards, certificates, and speeches by senior
 management. Or, you could go as casual as having a potluck. Whatever the
 case, make sure you take the time to thank people and leave them with a
 feeling of closure.



                  Closing processes summary
The information in this chapter will account for 16 questions on the PMP exam. To do well on
those 16 questions, you will need to have proficiency in the skills and knowledge associated
with closing contracts, closing phases and the project, conducting a project review with
lessons learned, archiving information, and transitioning the final product to the customer or
operations. The following list identifies the knowledge and skills you will need as well as the
section in this chapter that discusses the relevant information.




      Contract closure
                                     "Closing Your Procurements"
      requirements
      Basic project accounting
                                     "The final report and archiving information"
      principles
      Close-out procedures           "Close Project or Phase"
      Feedback techniques            "Learning from projects"
      Project review techniques "The project review"
      Archiving techniques and
                               "The final report and archiving information"
      statutes
      Compliance with relevant "The final report and archiving information"and
      statutes                 organizational policies
      Transition planning
                                     "Transitioning the product and resources"
      techniques

 If your project was at a work site, make sure that all the equipment is in better
 shape than when you found it, the supplies are stocked appropriately, and the
 area is neat and clean.


Key Terms
There aren't too many new terms in this chapter. By the time you reach the
Closing processes, you already have come across most of the relevant terms.
   Termination for cause
   Termination for convenience
   Procurement audit
Chapter Summary
 This chapter discusses the two processes that have to do with closing
 activities: Close Project or Phase and Close Procurements. Both processes
 entail collecting, organizing, and archiving information as well as
 documenting areas that went well and areas that didn't go so well.
    You will close out each project procurement when the contract is
    complete. Contracts can be considered complete when the statement of
    work (SOW) is complete and all contractual obligations have been
    fulfilled.
    Sometimes, procurements are closed before they are complete. In some
    situations, both parties agree to terminate the contract early. In other
    situations, contracts are terminated early for cause, or for convenience.
    The amount of compensation is different, depending on whether the
    contract is terminated for cause or convenience.
    Before the contract can be closed, all open invoices need to be paid, and
    all disputes need to be resolved via negotiation, mediation, arbitration --
    or, in the worst case scenario, litigation.
    When contractual obligations have been met, you notify the contract
    administrator, who formally closes the contract.
    A procurement audit assesses the effectiveness of the procurement
    processes and the specific vendor or contractor for future reference.
    All procurement documentation and records need to be indexed and
    archived. This information becomes part of the overall project close-out.
    You should close out each phase of the project. The phase deliverables
    should be formally accepted and signed off. In addition, you should update
    all documentation and conduct a lessons learned exercise from the phase.
    If the project is closed before completion, you should document the
    reasons why.
    Doing a good lessons learned exercise entails a 360-degree interview and
    discussion with stakeholders. You should ask general and specific
    questions. The lessons learned will become part of the project close-out
documentation. It should also record areas that can be used for other
projects to increase their probability for success and reduce the probability
of failure.
After the project is complete, you release team members and other project
resources, such as locations, equipment, and material.
Make sure that the product or result is properly transitioned to the
customer or the operational division that will maintain it.
                         Prep Test
                     Multiple Choice
1. Which is not a reason for early contract termination?
 A   For convenience
 B   For cause
 C   Force majeure
 D   Mutual agreement

2. Under which conditions will you have to reimburse a vendor for
  expenses incurred for preparing to do work for you?
 A   If you don't deliver a key component needed to start the work
 B   If there is a Time is of the Essence clause
 C   If the vendor can't meet the deliverable requirements
 D   If you change your mind about doing the project

3. If you want to review the procurement processes to determine
  the extent they were followed and how well they worked, you
  should conduct a(n)
 A   Inspection
 B   Walk-through
 C   Procurement validation
 D   Procurement audit

4. When is the best time to formally accept contract deliverables?
 A   At the end of a phase
 B   At the end of the project
 C   During quality control
 D   At the beginning of a phase
5. Completion of the project is measured against the
  A   Project scope statement
  B   Requirements documentation
  C   Project management plan
  D   Scope baseline

6. Which information is not relevant for a lessons learned
  document?
  A   Which team members received bonuses
  B   Methods to improve requirements gathering
  C   An effective technique for team building
  D   A risk response that worked well

7. Writing a performance assessment for the lead engineer is part
  of which closing activity?
  A   Archiving documentation
  B   Conducting lessons learned
  C   Accepting all deliverables
  D   Releasing project resources

8. The final activity on the project is
  A   Sending out a survey to assess stakeholder satisfaction
  B   Archiving project information
  C   Closing out a contract
  D   Transitioning the product or service to operations or the customer

                            Scenario 1
The electrician on your project hasn't showed up for work the past two
days. You drove by his place of business, and it was abandoned.

1. This is an example of termination for
 A    Convenience
 B    Default
 C    Completion
 D    Untimely delivery

                             Scenario 2
You're ready to close out a contract for the design and development of
a secure network in your new location. The contractor sends you an
invoice that includes $35,000 worth of work you don't think you should
be billed for. You're fine with the majority of the bill, but you think that
the $35,000 is the contractor's responsibility. After discussing this with
the contractor, you're not able to come to a negotiated settlement, so
you have to find a more formal way of resolving the issue.

1. Of the following, which is the least preferable way to resolve
  this dispute?
 A    Litigation
 B    Mediation
 C    Arbitration
 D    Binding arbitration

2. Which of the following is the most informal way to resolve the
  dispute?
 A    Litigation
 B    Mediation
 C    Arbitration
 D    Binding arbitration
                          Answers
                      Multiple Choice
1. C. Force majeure. Force majeure allows the obligated party to
  delay or not perform contractual duties. It isn't a reason for early
  contract termination. See "Terminating a contract." For more
  information on force majeure, you can look over Book VIII, Chapter
  4.
2. D. If you change your mind about doing the project. If you change
  your mind about doing a project, you're terminating for
  convenience. You must pay the seller for accepted goods and
  preparation expenses for any work not yet delivered. Look at
  Compensation.
3. D. Procurement audit. A procurement audit reviews the processes
  and the performance on a procurement or on the procurement
  process as a whole. Go to Procurement audits.
4. A. At the end of a phase. You should accept deliverables as they
  are complete, but at the very least, at the end of each phase. See
  the information in Close Procurements: Outputs.
5. C. Project management plan. Project completion is measured
  against the project management plan. Review The project
  management plan.
6. A. Which team members received bonuses. Information on team
  member performance, bonuses, or feedback is not part of the
  lessons learned document. Go over Learning from projects.
7. D. Releasing project resources. Part of releasing project resources
  is providing feedback to team members. Check out Transitioning
  the product and resources.
8. B. Archiving project information. Archiving project information is
  usually the last activity performed on a project. See The final report
  and archiving information.
                            Scenario 1
1. B. Default. The electrician is out of business. He has breached his
  contract by not finishing the work. Check out Termination for cause.

                            Scenario 2
1. A. Litigation. Litigation is costly and time consuming. As such, it is
  the least desirable method to resolve conflict. Review Dispute
  resolution.
2. B. Mediation. Mediation can be as informal as having a third party
  review the situation and make a decision. Go over the information
  in Dispute resolution.
   Chapter 2: The PMI Code of
Ethics and Professional Conduct
PMI has developed and published a Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
("the Code") that describes the expectations of project management
practitioners. The Code articulates the ideals that we (as project managers)
should aspire to, and those behaviors that are considered mandatory. The
purpose of the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is to instill
confidence in the project management profession and to help an individual
become a better practitioner.
Because there aren't any questions that are solely based on the Code, I have
been sprinkling the standards throughout the text of all the minibooks. In this
chapter, I present the standards in one place to give you further understanding
of how they might be integrated into exam questions.
There are no exam objectives associated with the information in this chapter.
Rather, you will see questions that incorporate situations that would require
you to apply standards from the Code along with the technical information
from the process groups and knowledge areas.
The Code focuses on four areas: responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty.
In this chapter, I look at each of these four elements and how they apply to
projects and the PMP exam.
                 Quick Assessment
1. The four values in the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
  are responsibility, ______, fairness, and ______.
2. The two types of standards in the Code of Ethics are ______ and
  ______.
3. (True/False). You are not bound by the Code of Ethics until after
  you earn your PMP credential.
4. ______ is our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and
  the resources entrusted to us. Resources entrusted to us may
  include people, money, reputation, the safety of others, and natural
  or environmental resources.
5. A person's legal or moral responsibility to promote the best interest
  of an organization or other person with whom she is affiliated is
  known as ______ ______ ______.
6. You applied for a job as a project manager with Ajax Contractors,
  Inc., but you didn't get the job. A month later, you heard that Ajax
  hired the nephew of the CEO, who is less qualified than you are.
  Which standard does this violate?
7. Making decisions based on the best interests of society, public
  safety, and the environment is part of which standard?
8. Ethics complaints fall under which standard?
9. Which section of the Code addresses assessing our own
  impartiality and objectivity?
10. Developing project status reports that are consistent with the
  Code requires that we provide accurate information in a timely
  manner. Which standard articulates the need to provide accurate
  information in a timely manner?
                          Answers
1. Respect, honesty. The four values in the Code of Ethics and
  Professional Conduct are responsibility, respect, fairness, and
  honesty. Look over About the Code.
2. Aspirational, mandatory. Aspirational standards are those we
  should strive to meet. Mandatory standards are those we have to
  meet. See information in About the Code.
3. False. You are bound by the Code of Ethics as soon as you apply
  for your PMP credential, if you are a member of PMI, or if you
  volunteer for PMI. This information is in About the Code.
4. Respect. Respect is defined by the Code as our duty to show a
  high regard for ourselves, others, and the resources entrusted to
  us. Resources entrusted to us may include people, money,
  reputation, the safety of others, and natural or environmental
  resources. Check out the section on Respect.
5. Duty of loyalty. Duty of loyalty is defined as a person's legal or
  moral responsibility to promote the best interest of an organization
  or other person with whom she is affiliated. Duty of loyalty is
  defined in the section on Fairness mandatory standards.
6 Fairness. The Fairness standard doesn't allow the organization to
  discriminate against others based on nepotism. Review Fairness
  mandatory standards.
7. Responsibility. We have a responsibility to make decisions and
  take actions based on the best interests of our stakeholders,
  including the public, the environment, and society as a whole. You
  will see this standard in the section Responsibility aspirational
  standards.
8. Responsibility. The responsibility standard includes information on
  reporting violations of the Code and ethics complaints. Check out
  Responsibility mandatory standards.
 9. Fairness. Part of being fair is making sure we can be objective and
   that we don't have a conflict of interest in any given situation. See
   Fairness aspirational standards.
 10. Honesty. The honesty aspirational standard states that we provide
   accurate information in a timely manner. You will find this statement
   in the section on Honesty aspirational standards.

About the Code
 The Code describes the ideals for project management and the appropriate
 behaviors in our roles as project managers. It can also be used as a reference
 to guide our behavior when we are faced with difficult situations. The Code
 applies to the following groups of people:
    All PMI members
    Anyone who holds a PMI certification (including the PMP)
    Anyone applying for a certification
    Anyone who volunteers with PMI
 The Code was developed when PMI asked practitioners from around the
 globe to identify those values that were most important in decision making
 and guiding their project management actions. Based on the feedback from
 the global community, the four values that the Code is based on were
 identified as
    Responsibility
    Respect
    Fairness
    Honesty
 There are two aspects to each value: aspirational standards and mandatory
 standards. And the standards are not mutually exclusive. An act or omission
 can be both aspirational and mandatory.
    Aspirational standards: Those standards that describe the conduct we
    should strive to uphold as project management practitioners.
    Mandatory standards: Those standards that are firm requirements. They
    may limit or prohibit behavior.
 Practitioners whose conduct is not in accordance with the mandatory
 standards are subject to disciplinary procedures before the PMI Ethics
 Review Committee.
 You can find the Code at the PMI website. A copy is also integrated into the
 PMP Exam Handbook, also found on the PMI website. You can go to PMI
 online at www.pmi.org and type Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
 into the Search box.
 The Code is not copyrighted. Throughout this chapter, I quote the description
 of the value and the aspirational and mandatory standards verbatim.

Responsibility
 The responsibility standards are about taking ownership for our actions,
 decisions, and the consequences that result from them. Here is the definition
 of responsibility from the Code.


         Responsibility is our duty to take ownership for the decisions we
      make or fail to make, the actions we take or fail to take, and the
      consequences that result.

 Responsibility aspirational standards
 The following are the six aspirational standards under responsibility.
 Remember that aspirational standards are standards we strive to uphold. The
 following is from the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct:
 1. We make decisions and take actions based on the best interests of society,
   public safety, and the environment.
 2. We accept only those assignments that are consistent with our background,
   experience, skills, and qualifications.
 3. We fulfill the commitments that we undertake -- we do what we say we
   will do.
 4. When we make errors or omissions, we take ownership and make
  corrections promptly. When we discover errors or omissions caused by
  others, we communicate them to the appropriate body as soon they are
  discovered. We accept accountability for any issues resulting from our
  errors or omissions and any resulting consequences.
5. We protect proprietary or confidential information that has been entrusted
  to us.
6. We uphold this Code and hold each other accountable to it.

Discussion
As you look at the standards here, see whether you can think of the type of
questions you would see on the exam. For example, you might see questions
that ask what you should do if what is in the best interest of the project
schedule is to move forward without another round of testing even though the
safety director has recommended it. In this situation, you are looking at the
good of the project schedule and probably some stakeholder satisfaction
issues and weighing them against the need for public safety.


        Regardless of what you would do in real life, for these questions, you
     want to stick with the Code and select the answer that indicates that if
     safety issues were at stake, you would run the extra round of testing.
Another area you need to watch in this section is not taking on projects that
you're not qualified to manage. If there is a project with a type of technology,
or regulations that you're not familiar with, you're probably not qualified to
manage that project. At the very least, you're obligated to disclose your
concerns over your lack of experience.
The standard about not disclosing proprietary and confidential information is
a pretty black-and-white issue. You shouldn't have any problem with those
questions. A more difficult question is what to do if you see someone else not
behaving in concert with the Code. It can be very hard to "make waves" if
you see someone behaving inconsistently with this Code. However, if that
person is a PMP and not in alignment with the values, you are required to
hold him accountable to the Code.

Responsibility mandatory standards
The two types of mandatory standards for responsibility are regulations and
legal requirements, and ethics complaints.
Regulations and legal requirements
There are two mandatory standards for regulations and legal requirements.
Remember: Mandatory requirements are not negotiable! The following is
from the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct:
1. We inform ourselves and uphold the policies, rules, regulations, and laws
  that govern our work, professional, and volunteer activities.
2. We report unethical or illegal conduct to appropriate management and, if
  necessary, to those affected by the conduct.

Ethics complaints
The ethics complaint standards have to do with violating the Code and
reporting violations by others. The following is from the Code of Ethics and
Professional Conduct:
3. We bring violations of this Code to the attention of the appropriate body
  for resolution.
4. We only file ethics complaints when they are substantiated by facts.
5. We pursue disciplinary action against an individual who retaliates against a
  person raising ethics concerns.

Discussion
For regulations and legal requirements, make sure that you understand the
policies, regulations, and rules associated with the work you're doing. In
addition, if you see someone behaving unethically or illegally, you are
required to report her.
The section on ethics complaints will govern your relationship with PMI after
you apply to take the exam. If you see a violation of this Code, you must
report it to the Ethics Review Committee. However, make sure that you can
substantiate the facts of the case. Bringing an ethics violation to the
committee is a serious undertaking. People can have their memberships and
their certifications revoked if their behavior is egregious enough. In the event
of an investigation, you have the responsibility to cooperate with PMI in
obtaining the facts about the case.
Respect

         Respect is our duty to show a high regard for ourselves, others, and
      the resources entrusted to us. Resources entrusted to us may include
      people, money, reputation, the safety of others, and natural or
      environmental resources.
 An environment of respect engenders trust, confidence, and performance
 excellence by fostering mutual cooperation -- an environment where diverse
 perspectives and views are encouraged and valued.

 Respect aspirational standards
 The respect aspirational standards are about appreciating diversity in culture,
 opinion, and points of view. They also address the professionalism with
 which we conduct ourselves. The following is from the Code of Ethics and
 Professional Conduct:
 1. We inform ourselves about the norms and customs of others and avoid
   engaging in behaviors they might consider disrespectful.
 2. We listen to others' points of view, seeking to understand them.
 3. We approach directly those persons with whom we have a conflict or
   disagreement.
 4. We conduct ourselves in a professional manner, even when it is not
   reciprocated.

 Discussion
 When the exam asks questions about culture, many times we think about
 different cultures as representing people from different countries -- but that
 isn't the only scenario in which we experience diverse cultures. Here are
 some other examples:
    Differences in ages or generations can mean different means of
    communication and different work ethics.
    If you change jobs and go to a different company, or even just a new
    department, the work rules and norms may be different.
    Different geographical areas, even if they are in the same country, have
   different work styles.



        You might see the term ethnocentrism on the exam. This term means
     the tendency to see the world from one's own ethnic perspective and not
     understand that there are alternative world views. The majority of the
     questions having to do with different cultures can be correctly answered
     by embracing diversity and having an open mind and tolerance for
     different points of view.
You might see questions on the exam that provide a scenario wherein a team
member complains about your management style. The proper response is to
approach that person directly and seek to understand what is causing the
conflict. However, sometimes, we shy away from direct contact, or we are
inclined to complain about the team member to others. For this section of the
exam, you have to aspire to be more communicative and direct than you are
accustomed to.
Regarding professionalism, I know that when someone is treating me
disrespectfully or unprofessionally, I have a hard time responding
professionally. For me, this is something I need to keep aspiring to! This
includes gossip! Not only do you have an ethical obligation to not participate
in gossip, but you should also actively discourage others from this behavior.

Respect mandatory standards
The following mandatory respect standards have to do with power, influence,
and behavior. The following is from the Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct:
1. We negotiate in good faith.
2. We do not exercise the power of our expertise or position to influence the
  decisions or actions of others in order to benefit personally at their expense.
3. We do not act in an abusive manner toward others.
4. We respect the property rights of others.

Discussion
          You might see some questions about contracts and procurements that
      talk about negotiating in good faith. Some of these questions might even
      state that the person with whom you're negotiating has adopted a win-
      lose attitude to the negotiation. Regardless, you're required to negotiate
      in good faith and mutual cooperation.
 Contracts aren't the only place where you need to negotiate on your project.
 Sometimes you need to negotiate the competing constraints, or negotiate with
 functional managers for resources. In these situations, you have to assume
 that the person you are negotiating with is doing his best, and approach the
 situation from a win-win perspective.
 Other standards in this area require that you influence with integrity, and not
 with power or to the detriment of others. I think it's pretty obvious treating
 others unfairly, disrespectfully, or abusively is not okay. Nor is it okay to
 disrespect the personal, intellectual, or real property of others. By the way,
 this includes copyrighted material. It is against the Code to copy and use
 others' work without their express permission.


          Many of the questions about respect will be situational. You will have
      to assume you are in the position of the project manager and select the
      appropriate response.

Fairness

         Fairness is our duty to make decisions and act impartially and
      objectively. Our conduct must be free from competing self-interest,
      prejudice, and favoritism.

 Fairness aspirational standards
 The aspirational fairness standards are concerned with making sure that all
 relevant parties have equal opportunities. This will be especially prevalent in
 procurement questions. The aspirational standards also address impartiality
and transparency in decision making. The following is from the Code of
Ethics and Professional Conduct.
1. We demonstrate transparency in our decision-making process.
2. We constantly reexamine our impartiality and objectivity, taking corrective
  action as appropriate.
3. We provide equal access to information to those who are authorized to
  have that information.
4. We make opportunities equally available to qualified candidates.

Discussion
One way to demonstrate transparency in decision making is to develop a
decision-making process and establish decision-making criteria. In the
procurement chapters (see Book V, Chapter 2, and Book VI, Chapter 3), you
can see this as developing and applying source selection criteria. This can
apply to other types of decisions as well.
The other standards in this section can be easily applied to procurements and
hiring or promoting team members.

Fairness mandatory standards
The mandatory fairness standards address objectivity, conflicts of interest,
favoritism, and discrimination. The following is from the Code of Ethics and
Professional Conduct:
1. We proactively and fully disclose any real or potential conflicts of interest
  to the appropriate stakeholders.
2. When we realize that we have a real or potential conflict of interest, we
  refrain from engaging in the decision-making process or otherwise
  attempting to influence outcomes, unless or until
    * We have made full disclosure to the affected stakeholders.
    * We have an approved mitigation plan.
    * We have obtained the consent of the stakeholders to proceed.
3. We do not hire or fire, reward or punish, or award or deny contracts based
  on personal considerations, including but not limited to, favoritism,
  nepotism, or bribery.
4. We do not discriminate against others based on, but not limited to, gender,
  race, age, religion, disability, nationality, or sexual orientation.
5. We apply the rules of the organization (employer, Project Management
  Institute, or other group) without favoritism or prejudice.

Discussion
The Code has two key definitions in the first mandatory standard.


        Conflict of Interest. A situation that arises when a practitioner of
     project management is faced with making a decision or doing some act
     that will benefit the practitioner or another person or organization to
     which the practitioner owes a duty of loyalty, and at the same time will
     harm another person or organization to which the practitioner owes a
     similar duty of loyalty. The only way practitioners can resolve
     conflicting duties is to disclose the conflict to those affected and allow
     them to make the decision about how the practitioner should proceed.
Duty of Loyalty. A person's responsibility, legal or moral, to promote the
best interest of an organization or other person with whom she is affiliated.
The rules about conflicts of interest apply to actual and perceived conflicts.
Here's an example: Say that you're an officer in a PMI chapter, you happen to
provide training, and the board is looking at offering a training course. You
should excuse yourself from the discussion because you could be perceived
as having a conflict of interest even if you didn't promote yourself at the
expense of others.


        For conflict of interest situations, be as conservative as possible by
     disclosing information even if you think it not relevant to the situation.
     Better to over-disclose than be accused of conflict of interest.


        The remaining standards are about not showing favoritism and not
     discriminating in any way, shape, or form. Exam questions that address
     these standards are fairly easy to spot -- and as long as you choose the
     answer that shows the high moral ground, you will do fine on these
     questions.
Honesty
 The Code defines honesty as our duty to understand the truth and act in a
 truthful manner both in our communications and in our conduct.

 Honesty aspirational standards
 The aspirational honest standards are about keeping our word and fully
 disclosing all relevant information. The following is from the Code of Ethics
 and Professional Conduct:
 1. We earnestly seek to understand the truth.
 2. We are truthful in our communications and in our conduct.
 3. We provide accurate information in a timely manner.
 4. We make commitments and promises, implied or explicit, in good faith.
 5. We strive to create an environment in which others feel safe to tell the
   truth.

 Discussion
 Think about your performance reports or your status reports. You want to put
 the best information forward. You want to talk about the good things that
 have happened on the project. After all, not many people want to discuss risks
 and challenges, especially if you think you can correct them before someone
 finds out, or if you have a plan to make things right again. However, this
 behavior goes against the honesty standards. In addition, if a team member
 gives you information you believe might not be wholly true, you have a duty
 to find out the truth. You also need to make sure to not penalize team
 members for coming to you with risks or challenges. You need to create an
 environment where people can tell you the truth without fear of abusive
 responses. These standards are probably some of the same rules you had
 growing up: Tell the truth, be on time, and keep your promises.

 Honesty mandatory standards
 The mandatory honesty standards take the aspirational standards one step
 further by stating that we must not engage in deceptive or dishonest behavior.
 The following is from the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct:
 1. We do not engage in or condone behavior that is designed to deceive
   others, including but not limited to, making misleading or false statements,
   stating half-truths, providing information out of context or withholding
   information that, if known, would render our statements as misleading or
   incomplete.
 2. We do not engage in dishonest behavior with the intention of personal gain
   or at the expense of another.

 Discussion
 These mandatory standards carry over from the aspirational standards. In
 addition to telling the truth, you can't commit the sin of omission or
 misleading someone, or not speaking up if someone misinterprets what you
 told her. It can be difficult to confess that your projects are in trouble,
 especially if you expect a punitive response. However, you have a duty and
 an obligation to disclose the whole truth.
 This concept applies to estimating and planning as well. If you're given an
 unrealistic deadline from your sponsor, you have an obligation to inform her
 that the deadline is unrealistic -- and tell her why it is unrealistic. If your
 team members are giving you optimistic estimates and you know about it,
 you have an obligation to discuss the situation with them and get more
 realistic estimates.


          Some of these standards might be easier than others to apply, but they
      all represent the high moral ground. Keep that in mind when you come
      across these questions on the exam.

Key Terms
 Although you may not see the majority of these terms on the exam, you may
 see ethnocentrism, conflict of interest, and duty of loyalty on the exam.
 However, you need to be familiar with all the terminology in the context of
 behaving ethically and in accordance with the Code.
    Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
    Responsibility
    Respect
Fairness
Honesty
Aspirational standards
Mandatory standards
Ethnocentrism
Conflict of interest
Duty of loyalty
Chapter Summary
 The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct will not be overtly tested, but
 the concepts in the Code will be included in the questions. Therefore, you
 need to be familiar with the expectations of how we, as project managers,
 behave.
    The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct describes the ideals for
    project management and the appropriate behaviors in your role as project
    manager. The Code applies to the following groups of people:
     * All PMI members
    * Anyone who holds a PMI certification (including the PMP)
    * Anyone applying for a certification
    * Anyone who volunteers with PMI
    The four values on which the standards are based are responsibility,
    respect, fairness, and honesty. Each has aspirational standards and
    mandatory standards. Aspirational standards describe the conduct you
    should strive to uphold as a project management practitioner. Mandatory
    standards are firm requirements. They may limit or prohibit behavior.
     Responsibility is your duty to take ownership for the decisions you make
    or fail to make, the actions you take or fail to take, and the consequences
    that result.
    Respect is your duty to show a high regard for yourself, others, and the
    resources entrusted to you, including people, money, reputation, the safety
    of others, and natural or environmental resources.
    Fairness is your duty to make decisions and act impartially and
    objectively. Your conduct must be free from competing self-interest,
    prejudice, and favoritism.
    Honesty is your duty to understand the truth and act in a truthful manner
    both in your communications and in your conduct.
                         Prep Test
1. Your organization is bidding on a contract to do an extensive
  home remodeling job for a well-known celebrity. You will be the
  project manager on the job. Part of the job entails custom glass
  mosaic work. Your organization is planning on using Gabe to do
  the mosaic work. Gabe is a good worker and has worked with
  tile for five years. His customers are always happy with the work
  he does. You are concerned, though, that he may not be
  qualified to do the mosaic work because of the intricate design
  and detailed cuts needed. What is the best approach to this
  situation?
 A Ask Gabe whether he thinks he can do high-quality work on the
 job.
 B Tell your company that there isn't anyone qualified to do the
 work. If your company chooses to put Gabe in as a resource, the
 company should indicate that his experience is with tile.
 C Call the customer and discuss your concerns.
 D Do nothing. As long as you are qualified to do your job, that is all
 you have to worry about.

2. Your boss called you into the office and told you that the
  company was going to be downsizing shortly. You are being
  promoted to a supervisory role, but several of your colleagues
  will be let go. Later that day, Sandra approaches you in tears,
  saying that she heard there were going to be layoffs, and she
  was scared she was going to be let go. She asks you whether
  you know anything. How should you respond?
 A Tell her not to worry: You are sure she will have a job after the
 reorganization.
 B Help her brush up her resume and tell her about a job placement
 service you know about.
 C Tell her information like that is all rumor or gossip until proven
 otherwise.
 D Tell your boss that Sandra is crying and spreading rumors
 around the office.

3. Your PMP exam is scheduled for two weeks from now. You're
  trying to balance work, family, and studying. When you get into
  work, you have a voice mail from PMI, which is investigating an
  ethics complaint about your co-worker Matt. It appears that he
  has been inappropriately disclosing confidential information
  about the CAPM exam. The person on the Ethics Committee has
  asked you to call her back. What should you do?
 A Call her back. You are required to cooperate in ethics
 investigations.
 B Avoid her calls. You are not a PMP yet, and hopefully, you can
 take your test without getting in the middle of an investigation.
 C Tell Matt he better clean up his act because he is under
 investigation.
 D Call the Ethics Committee person back and tell her you don't
 know Matt.

4. You're managing a project to develop and deploy a project
  management methodology for your organization. You were
  blind-copied on an e-mail in which three team members were
  discussing ways to undermine your work and get a proprietary
  methodology implemented instead. The e-mails were derogatory
  and belittling to you, and you are hurt and annoyed that these
  team members are working toward their own agenda. How
  should you handle this?
 A Inform their manager that they are behaving unprofessionally
 and that you want them pulled from the team.
 B Send their e-mail to other team members as an example of the
 type of behavior you are not going to tolerate.
 C Report them to PMI for an ethics violation.
 D Call a meeting and ask them their reasons for wanting a
 proprietary methodology.

5. As a consultant, you've worked with a number of different
  companies. You just got off an assignment where people worked
  at home, answered e-mails on weekends, and seemed to sleep
  with their e-mail open. You just started a new assignment. You
  sent out an e-mail Friday around 4:30 p.m., asking the team to
  let you know about meeting Monday at 10 a.m. It's now Sunday,
  and you haven't heard a peep. What standard should you apply
  to keep the relationship with the client in good standing?
 A Listen to others and seek to understand them.
 B Inform yourself about the norms and customs of others and avoid
 engaging in behaviors they might consider disrespectful.
 C Conduct yourself in a professional manner, even when it's not
 reciprocated.
 D Make decisions and take actions based on the best interests of
 the company.

6. Your responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) shows that you're
  supposed to have Kyle as a resource for the entire month of
  April. It's April 12, and so far, Kyle has been around for only 30
  hours. He claims that a lot of problems are happening in his
  department right now, and he's trying to take care of everything
  at once. You realize you need to meet with his manager. How
  should you approach this?
 A Talk to his manager to see whether you can work out a situation
 where you can have Kyle but still make sure that the functional
 manager's department isn't left short-handed.
 B Escalate the issue to the project sponsor.
 C Approach Kyle's boss and tell him that he isn't living up to his
 word.
 D Tell Kyle that he needs to give you 40 hours per week. He can
 deal with the issues in his department after the work on your project
 is done.
7. You have various options how to test a specific component.
  Your team operating agreement says that for decisions, you will
  ask all team members to state their opinions in less than three
  minutes, and then you will call a vote. The largest voting block
  will carry the decision. Which value does this demonstrate?
 A   Providing equal access to information
 B   Examining your impartiality
 C   Demonstrating transparency in the decision-making process
 D   Disclosure of perceived conflicts of interest

8. You're an independent contractor, and you've been asked to be
  a team member for a company you worked with before on a
  large project for the local parks and recreation agency. However,
  you're not comfortable taking the assignment because you
  know someone on the selection committee. What values should
  you look to when making your decision?
 A You're okay because the selection committee can't discriminate
 in its selection process.
 B You're okay if you disclose your relationship with all affected
 stakeholders and have their consent to proceed.
 C You can't take the assignment. Your friendship with someone on
 the selection committee is a conflict of interest.
 D You should decline because it puts your friend in a situation of
 having a conflict of interest.

9. A new employee just gave you an estimate that seems
  aggressive. What should you do first?
 A Seek to understand how he came up with the estimate.
 B Let him know that you're not interested in aggressive estimates
 but in realistic estimates.
 C Let his boss know that she should review his estimates before
 they are forwarded to you.
 D Go with the estimate he gave you but hold him to it.
10. Carrie just came to your office and let you know that she can't
  make the deadline she promised you. There are some problems
  with the component she is working on, and she needs more
  time. You problem-solve with her to help come up with various
  solutions while letting her know you appreciate her advance
  warning and honesty. Which value are you demonstrating?
 A   Providing accurate information in a timely manner
 B   Creating an environment where others feel safe to tell the truth
 C   Seeking to understand the truth
 D   Not engaging in dishonest behavior

11. Last month, you missed a milestone by two weeks. When you
  reported this to the steering committee, you were severely
  chastised in front of 15 executives and 6 of your peers. You have
  to report to the same committee tomorrow. You just found out
  that one of the deliverables is having a problem passing the
  validation review, which could cause a schedule slip of up to
  four days. How should you address this?
 A Report the progress on your overall project to date and report on
 the existing risks, including the potential schedule slip.
 B Report the progress to date. The schedule hasn't slipped yet, so
 you don't need to address this tomorrow.
 C Tell the team it needs to do whatever it takes to get back on
 schedule because you don't want a replay of last week.
 D Make sure the team lead for the deliverable is in the meeting to
 experience what happens when she misses a deadline.
                          Answers
1. B. The Responsibility standard states that you accept only those
  assignments that are consistent with your background, experience,
  skills, and qualifications. See Responsibility aspirational standards.
2. C. The Responsibility standard states that you protect proprietary
  or confidential information that has been entrusted to you. Look
  over Responsibility aspirational standards.
3. A. The Responsibility standard requires that you cooperate in
  ethics investigations. See Responsibility mandatory standards.
4. D. This scenario demonstrates approaching those persons with
  whom you have a conflict with directly and conducting yourself in a
  professional manner. See Respect aspirational standards.
5. B. Your new assignment clearly has different norms about work
  hours. You should inform yourself about the company culture and
  practices. Read Respect aspirational standards.
6. A. You should negotiate in good faith so the functional area is
  taken care of and your project needs are met. Go to Respect
  mandatory standards.
7. C. This demonstrates transparency in decision making. Go over
  Fairness aspirational standards.
8. B. You should disclose your relationship. If everyone agrees to a
  solution that allows the parks and recreation agency to make a fair
  and impartial selection, you can still be part of the team. You can
  read about this in Fairness mandatory standards.
9. A. First, you should understand the estimating method that the
  employee used. Maybe he knows a way to get the work done faster
  than you've seen in the past. Check out Honesty aspirational
  standards.
10. B. By problem-solving and generating options, you're providing a
  safe environment where she can be honest about what's going on.
  Go to Honesty aspirational standards.
11. A. You need to report current status and the risk of missing a
  deadline. To not report this is misleading the steering committee
  and withholding relevant information. Look at Honesty mandatory
  standards.
Appendix A: What's on the
        Website
In This Appendix
   System requirements
   Accessing the prep exam on the website
   What you'll find on the website
   Troubleshooting
System Requirements
 Make sure that your computer meets the minimum system requirements
 shown in the following list. If your computer doesn't match up to most of
 these requirements, you may have problems using the software and files on
 the website. For the latest and greatest information, please refer to the
 ReadMe file located on the website.
    A PC running Microsoft Windows 98, Windows 2000, Windows NT4
    (with SP4 or later), Windows Me, Windows XP, Windows Vista, Windows
    7, or Windows 8
    A Macintosh running Apple OS X or later
    A PC running a version of Linux with kernel 2.4 or greater
    An Internet connection
 If you need more information on the basics, check out these Wiley books:
 PCs For Dummies, by Dan Gookin; Macs For Dummies, by Edward C. Baig;
 Windows Vista For Dummies, Windows 7 For Dummies, and Windows 8 For
 Dummies, all by Andy Rathbone.

Accessing the Prep Exam on the
Website
 Fire up your Internet browser and enter
 http://www.dummies.com/extras/pmpcertificationaio in the Address field.
 Click the link for the prep exam, and then follow these steps to access the free
 downloadable prep exam file.
 1. Click the Register or Login Now link to register or login.
   If you have never accessed the prep exam on the book's web page before,
   you will need to set up an account by registering. In the future if you want
   to download the exam again for some reason, you will only have to login.
 2. After you have registered, you will be taken to the PMP Certification
   All-in-One For Dummies, Second Edition web page. Click the
   Downloads tab and download the prep exam file to your computer.
   Make sure you can remember where you've saved the file.
 3. Unzip the downloaded file on your Windows computer.
   Note that the interface will not function properly unless you first unzip the
   file.
 4. Click start.exe to open the interface.
 5. Read through the license agreement, and then click the Accept button
   to browse the contents.
 6. If you experience trouble with the start.exe file or interface, please
   refer to the product ReadMe.txt file.


What You'll Find on the Website
 The prep exam on the website is designed to simulate the actual PMP exam:
 each question has multiple choice answers. The online prep exam is not
 adaptive, though, and it is not timed, so you might want to time yourself to
 gauge your speed.
 With each question, you find out whether you answered the question correctly
 by clicking on the Explanation button. If you answered incorrectly, you are
 told the correct answer with a brief explanation of why it's correct.
 The prep exam contains the prep test questions from the end of each chapter
 in the book. If you perform well on the prep exam, you're probably ready to
 tackle the real thing.
Troubleshooting
 I tried my best to compile programs that work on most computers with the
 minimum system requirements. Alas, your computer may differ, and some
 programs may not work properly for some reason.
 The two likeliest problems are that you don't have enough memory (RAM)
 for the programs you want to use, or you have other programs running that
 are affecting installation or running of a program. If you get an error message
 such as Not enough memory or Setup cannot continue, try one or more of
 the following suggestions and then try using the software again:
     Turn off any antivirus software running on your computer. Installation
    programs sometimes mimic virus activity and may make your computer
    incorrectly believe that it's being infected by a virus.
     Close all running programs. The more programs you have running, the
    less memory is available to other programs. Installation programs typically
    update files and programs, so if you keep other programs running,
    installation may not work properly.
     Have your local computer store add more RAM to your computer.
    This is, admittedly, a drastic and somewhat expensive step. However,
    adding more memory can really help the speed of your computer and
    allow more programs to run at the same time.
Customer Care
If you have trouble with the Prep Test, please call the Wiley Product
Technical Support phone number at (800) 762-2974. Outside the United
States, call 1(317) 572-3994. You can also contact Wiley Product Technical
Support at http://support.wiley.com. John Wiley & Sons will provide
technical support only for installation and other general quality control items.
For technical support on the applications themselves, consult the program's
vendor or author.
To place additional orders or to request information about other Wiley
products, please call (877) 762-2974.
      Appendix B: Practice Test
1. Assume that your project evaluates risk impacts as Low,
  Moderate, and High as follows: Low 0.1 - 0.2, Moderate 0.3 - 0.4,
  High 0.5 - 0.9. These ratings A Are wrong. They must be linear.
 B   Cannot sum to 1.0 because 1.0 would reflect a case of certainty.
 C   Must be the same for every project in your department's portfolio.
 D   Demonstrate a degree of risk aversion.

2. Which stakeholder looks at the financial return from a group of
  projects and programs?
 A The project manager B The PMO manager C The portfolio
 manager D The program manager 3. You performed a quantitative
 risk analysis on your project. The output of this analysis A Shows
 the probability of achieving your project's schedule and cost
 objectives.
 B Shows the probability of achieving your project risk objectives.
 C Lists risks that require responses in the near term.
 D Identifies trends in qualitative risk analysis results.

4. Tone and inflection is what component of communication?
 A Verbal B Nonverbal C Para language D Linguistics 5. You
 work at a multinational organization. Your latest project includes
 people in four time zones, people who work from their homes, and
 technical experts from around the globe. This is an example of A A
 virtual team B Cultural diversity C A reduced travel budget D
 Geographical dispersion 6. The process most concerned with
 maintaining the integrity of project baselines is A Control Costs B
 Monitor and Control Project Work C Perform Integrated Change
 Control D Control Scope 7. Verified deliverables are an input to
 which process?
 A Close Project or Phase B Close Procurements C Validate
 Scope D Control Scope 8. Which stakeholder provides the funding
 for the project?
 A Senior management B The finance department C The
 portfolio steering committee D The sponsor 9. Before closing the
 project, project scope is measured against A The project
 management plan B The work breakdown structure (WBS) C The
 earned value (EV) D The cost plus incentive fee 10. A vendor who
 failed to attend the bidder conference because of illness asks for a
 repeat. To minimize the burden on the contracting organization, the
 vendor offers the use of its conference room to serve breakfast and
 lunch. What should you do?
 A Escalate this matter to your sponsor for guidance.
 B You can repeat the conference, but only in the same facilities and
 under the same conditions as everyone else.
 C If the vendor provides evidence of the claimed illness, go ahead.
 D You cannot present a private bidder conference for one client.

11. In a communication model, the sender is responsible for the
  following: A Understanding the information correctly B
  Making sure the information is received in its entirety C
  Decoding the message contents D Making the content clear
  and complete 12. Developing the project management plan
  entails A Documenting the actions necessary to define,
  prepare, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary plans B
  Carrying out the project by performing the activities included
  therein C Coordinating changes across the entire project D
  Integrating and coordinating all project documents and
  stakeholder expectations 13. You're meeting with your team to
  focus efforts on accomplishing the project objectives and
  working as a team. This is an example of A Negotiation skills B
     Leadership C Influencing D Listening 14. To be successful,
  you need to manage stakeholder engagement. The skills you will
  need to do this successfully include all the following except A
  Negotiating B Presenting C Public speaking D Controlling
  change 15. One of your resources has been transferred to a
  more critical project in the organization. You're looking to see
 the best way to spread her work among the remaining team
 members until you can find a replacement. What tool should you
 use to accomplish this?
 A Variance analysis B Resource analysis C Schedule
 compression D Resource optimization 16. Validate Scope is the
 process of A Obtaining formal acceptance of the project scope by
 the project management team B Obtaining all appropriate sign-offs
 from the project team C Formalizing acceptance of the completed
 project deliverables D Documenting the scope for the project
 stakeholders 17. A procurement audit is a structured review of the
 procurement process starting from the A Plan Procurement
 Management process B Close Procurements process C Litigation
 pre-trial discovery process D Mediation and arbitration result 18.
 Some of your colleagues started up a project management training
 business. It appears from their flyers that they are members of PMI,
 but you know that's false. What should you do about it?
 A Steer clear; they are misrepresenting themselves.
 B Send them a registered letter asking who they are.
 C Report them to the Better Business Bureau.
 D Inform PMI.

19. The project charter is an input to which of the following
  processes?
 A Collect Requirements B Create WBS
 C Validate Scope D Control Scope 20. Projects are typically
 authorized for one or more of the following reasons except A
 Market demand B Employee request C Legal requirements D
 Technological advance 21. The scope statement identifies the A
 Project manager B Business case for the project C Assumptions
 and exclusions D Team responsible for project delivery 22. What is
 the difference between decomposition in activity definition and in
 scope definition?
 A The final outputs are deliverables in activity definition.
 B The final outputs are activities in activity definition.
 C   There is no difference.
 D   The output is a network diagram in activity definition.

23. Which process is the most dependent upon the nature of the
  deliverables being created and the work being performed?
 A Create WBS
 B Define Scope C Direct and Manage Project Work D Monitor
 and Control Project Work 24. Which of the following is true about
 quality management?
 A The product quality management processes are the same,
 regardless of the project.
 B The project quality management processes are the same,
 regardless of the product.
 C Quality management is concerned with the product. Integrated
 change control is concerned with the project.
 D Customer satisfaction and quality are essentially the same.

25. You're conducting a performance review from the last several
  reporting periods. You notice that the TCPI has gone from 1.04
  to 1.05 to 1.07. What's going on in your project?
 A   Your cost performance is improving.
 B   Your schedule performance is improving.
 C   Your forecast is improving.
 D   Your cost performance is deteriorating.

26. You're trying to figure out how an error was introduced into a
  product. You look at all the inputs that could have led to the
  defect. The appropriate technique to chart this type of analysis
  is the A Pareto chart B Run diagram C Scatter diagram D
  Ishikawa diagram 27. As the project manager, you're involved in
  administrative activities, such as finalizing open claims,
  updating records, making sure all payments are finalized, and
  archiving the information for future use. These activities occur A
    At the end of the project B When a contract is complete C
 During the monitoring and controlling process D During the
 executing process 28. Your organization is looking at teaming
 up with another organization to respond to a very lucrative long-
 term RFP. However, you have grave misgivings about the other
 organization. The committee in charge of assessing the teaming
 arrangement must have a unanimous decision to move forward.
 Everyone else on the Executive Committee is for it. You really
 don't want to rock the boat, but you feel compelled to vote
 against the decision. What's the best way to approach the
 committee with this information?
 A Arrange for a third party to enter the negotiations and muddy the
 water.
 B Send an anonymous letter to the Executive Committee.
 C Send an anonymous letter to your proposed partner.
 D Prepare your facts and make your case to the Executive
 Committee.

29. Project objectives should include all the following except A
  Date by which the project should be completed B Budget C
  Quality parameters D Risk assessment 30. To shift the risk to
  the seller, which type of contract should you use?
 A   Time and materials B Firm fixed price C Cost plus fixed fee D
   Fixed price incentive 31. The primary advantage of the bottom-up
 estimate is the increased accuracy in the estimates. What is a
 consideration that the project team must keep in mind?
 A The relationship of the data to other variables B The additional
 cost associated with this level of detail C The size of the project D
 The level of experience of the estimator 32. The management style
 used by a project manager who makes decisions without considering
 input by other team members is A Laissez-faire B Judgmental C
   Autocratic D Bureaucratic 33. You're negotiating an FPIF contract
 with a vendor. The target cost is $400,000. The target profit is 10%.
 The incentive split is 70/30. These are all part of the contract
 payment terms and incentive structure. If actual costs are $475,000,
 what is the actual profit?
 A   $40,000
 B   $17,500
 C   $492,500
 D   $475,000

34. A strike has caused delays on your project, but your
  company's policy is to honor labor contract commitments even
  during strikes, so you didn't hire non-union replacement
  workers. You had some contingency time, and you anticipate the
  new labor agreement will change the project costs. What
  technique can you use to determine whether your plan will
  require corrective action?
 A What-if scenario analysis B Re-baselining the schedule C
 Analogous estimating D Resource optimization 35. The purpose of
 a change control system is to A Ensure that project team members
 work the same plan.
 B Make sure that changes to the statement of work (SOW) are
 approved.
 C Assess the impact of changes on cost or schedule before
 deciding to implement them.
 D All the above.

36. Close Project or Phase inputs include all the following except
  A Project management plan B Accepted deliverables C
  Variance analysis D Organizational process assets 37. You're
  bidding on a contract with a government agency. At the bidder
  conference, you discover that a good friend from college is the
  government's contract officer. What is the appropriate plan of
  action?
 A Because you probably see eye to eye on most issues, this
 relationship could be a significant advantage to the government.
 B Establish a policy of dealing only with your friend's subordinates.
 C Avoid any decisions or actions that could be interpreted as a
 conflict of interest.
 D Disclose your past relationship, given that it is a potential conflict
 of interest.

38. The role that initiates projects that are part of a program is A
  The PMO Director B The program manager C The sponsor D
    The Portfolio Committee 39. The items at the lowest level of
  the WBS are referred to as A Control accounts B Tasks C
  Work packages D Activities 40. Which of the following is not a
  component of the human resource management plan?
 A Project organization charts B Resource requirements C
 Roles and responsibilities D Staffing management plan 41. Which
 is the highest level of performance for a project team?
 A Forming B Storming C Norming D Performing 42. A type of
 power that you might have as a project manager because you are
 very good friends with the owner of the company is A Referent B
 Formal C Expert D Forcing 43. You're negotiating the payment
 terms, incentives, penalties, and fees for an FPIF contract. The target
 cost is $500,000. The target profit is 10%. The incentive split is
 70/30. If actual costs are $475,000, what is the actual profit?
 A $60,000
 B $57,500
 C $50,000
 D $532,500

44. Which is not part of the Control Scope process?
 A Making sure that scope creep doesn't occur on the project B
 Managing project and product scope changes C Analyzing
 variance between the baseline and the deliverables D Obtaining
 customer validation for the final deliverable 45. Your SPI for a control
 account is 1.07. What should you report about this at your
 performance review?
 A Give the root cause for the negative variance and your planned
 corrective action.
 B Nothing; it is within the tolerance level.
 C Give the root cause for the positive variance and the projected
 finish date.
 D Nothing; you have sufficient float.

46. Many projects are broken into phases to make them easier to
  manage. Which of the following phases is most likely to be
  associated with the initiating process group?
 A Planning B Testing C Development D Concept 47. The
 project is closed, and all documents have been finalized. These
 documents become a part of the A Accepted deliverables B
 Organizational process assets C Scope statement D Risk register
 updates 48. You're a contract project manager, midway through an
 assignment. Another project comes along at a 50% higher hourly
 rate. Can you take it?
 A As a contract project manager, you can leave immediately.
 B You can begin to phase out of the old project and have team
 members pick up more of the project, while phasing into the new
 project.
 C This is a conflict of interest, which you must disclose. You might
 be able to take the project if all stakeholders agree to the plan.
 D You can give two weeks' notice and take the assignment.

49. Your organization is developing a new product for launch in
  October of this year. The investment is $5,450,000. You expect to
  recapture $3,000,000 by October of the following year and the
  remaining $2,450,000 by April of the next year. This forecast is
  known as A Benefit-cost ratio B Future value C Net present
  value D Payback period 50. You measure completion of
  product scope against A The scope statement B The product
  requirements C The project management plan D The scope
  management plan 51. The skill and capacity required to
  complete project activities is A Authority B Competency C
  Role D Responsibility 52. Your new lab has state-of-the-art
  everything. The problem is that much of the high-end equipment
  has periodic problems, which shuts down operations. Which
 statement reflects your situation?
 A   You have high-quality equipment, but low grade.
 B   The grade is low, but the precision is high.
 C   You have very accurate equipment, but the quality is low.
 D   You have high-grade equipment, but low quality.

53. All the following are results from developing a project team
  except A Improving individualism B Improving team member
  skills C Improving trust D Improving team member
  knowledge 54. Your EV is $650,000, and your AC is $639,000.
  Your BAC is $1,200,000. What is your EAC?
 A   $1,220,657
 B   $1,120,657
 C   $1,176,471
 D   $1,211,000

55. Your cost analyst brings you the latest bad news on the
  budget performance. He shows you a bar chart that ranks all the
  reasons for cost variance, including labor, usage variance,
  overtime, and so on. What type of chart is he showing you?
 A Pareto chart B Cause-and-effect diagram C Flow chart D
 Run chart 56. What is a risk reassessment used for?
 A To validate the accuracy of the data B To determine whether
 assumptions are valid C To identify new risks and update the
 probability and impact D To correct errors in the original risk
 assessment 57. The Close Project process A Occurs only once in
 each project B Ensures the project is successful C May occur
 after each project phase D Is not always required 58. You have a
 major deliverable due on Thursday, and your progress report is due
 Friday. The team ran into some snags on the deliverable but
 identified the issue and plans to work on it over the weekend. The
 team is confident the issue can be resolved by Saturday afternoon,
 so that by Monday, everything will be back on track. What should you
 report in your progress report?
 A Take a vacation day Friday, and submit your report Monday after
 the issue is resolved.
 B Report that everything is on track. By the time the sponsor reads
 the report, that will be the case.
 C Give the sponsor a detailed analysis of the cause and effect of
 the issue and the task breakdown you are using to resolve it. Make
 sure to acknowledge the diligent team members who will be working
 over the weekend in your progress report.
 D Advise the sponsor of the status of the deliverable and the
 corrective action you have planned.

59. The project manager must identify _________, determine their
  requirements, and then manage and influence those
  requirements to ensure a successful project.
 A Team members B Subject matter experts C Sponsors D
 Stakeholders 60. Where should you document the project life cycle?
 A The scope statement B The requirements documentation C
 The project management plan D Scope management plan 61. The
 right to make and approve decisions is A Authority B
 Competency C Role D Responsibility 62. To produce your
 product, you're working with chemicals that must be kept between 46
 and 48 degrees at all times. Therefore, you have a number of
 devices that constantly measure and adjust the temperature in the
 enclosure where the chemicals are stored. You are most concerned
 that these devices have a high degree of A Relevance B
 Precision C Accuracy D Control 63. To effectively manage your
 project team, you need to engage in A Conflict management B
 Norming behavior C Negotiating D Setting project standards 64.
 You're managing a project and determine the only way to resolve a
 vendor problem is to have it resolved by a neutral third party. To
 accomplish this, you should use A Claims resolution guidelines B
 Litigation C Alternative dispute resolution (ADR) D A team
 operating agreement 65. As a result of comparing planned project
 performance against the performance measurements, you submit a
 change request. Which of the following is not considered a change
 request?
A A modification of the in-scope and out-of-scope work in the
scope statement B A new and updated cost estimate C A new
requirement for a key task D An update to the Assumption Log 66.
As the project manager, you need to ensure that all project work is
complete prior to closing the project. Which document would be the
most appropriate to review?
A Scope management plan B Project management plan C Cost
performance index D Integrated schedule 67. You're the project
manager of a team of workers that is doing a job at a client site. You
walk into the area where your team is working and notice that people
have their feet up on the desks, the trash cans are overflowing, and
fast-food bags are strewn about. You call your team together and tell
them that this type of behavior is completely inappropriate and you
expect them to clean up the work space and keep it neat. This
exemplifies which ethics standard?
A Being truthful in our conduct B Conducting ourselves in a
professional manner, even when it is not reciprocated C
Respecting the property rights of others D Reporting unethical
conduct 68. Information from the stakeholder register is used in
which process?
A Develop Project Charter B Plan Communications Management
C Control Communications D Perform Quality Assurance 69.
Which document defines the cost variance thresholds for the project?
A The change management plan B The resource management
plan C The cost management plan D The cost baseline 70.
Which process is concerned with documenting uncertain events that
can influence your project objectives?
A Control Risks B Plan Risk Management C Plan Risk
Responses D Identify Risks 71. The QC results show that a
process is consistently out of control. You ask the QA lead to give you
a chart that shows you the upper control limit and lower control limit
and where the problems occurred. You are asking for a A Control
chart B Run chart C Pareto chart D Fishbone diagram 72. You
and your sponsor are in disagreement over the best way to handle a
discrepancy in the latest procurement audit. You decide that because
this isn't a really big deal and the sponsor outranks you, you should
 emphasize the areas of the audit that you agree on and downplay the
 differences. This is an example of A Avoiding B Collaborating C
 Compromising D Smoothing 73. Often, project managers do not
 have position power, so they need to rely on A Negotiation skills B
   Leadership C Influencing D Listening 74. Your EV is $825,000,
 and your AC is $865,000. Your BAC is $1,200,000. What is your
 EAC?
 A $1,263,158
 B $1,140,592
 C $1,200,000
 D $1,240,000

75. At the close of the development phase of your project, you
  review the risk register to determine whether the risk responses
  were effective and accomplished the intended result. This is
  called a A Risk analysis B Risk audit C Performance
  measurement D Risk reassessment 76. During the Close
  Project or Phase process, there is an outstanding dispute with a
  supplier. You are considering arbitration as an option to resolve
  it. Arbitration is an example of A Litigation B Alternative
  dispute resolution (ADR) C A unilateral negotiation D Trial
  without a jury 77. You've been offered a job as a program
  manager at a new firm. You've managed projects before but
  never something as large and complex as the program you
  would be managing. Your friend who is employed by the
  organization talked you up, and you think that person might
  have overstated your qualifications. This new job would mean a
  20% increase in pay and an opportunity to really improve your
  skills in your profession. When you go to interview, what should
  your approach be?
 A Find out from your friend what criteria is being used to select the
 candidate.
 B Do your research on the company and highlight your areas of
 strength as well as your lack of experience with a program this large.
 C Apply for the PgMP so you can honestly state you are working on
 becoming a certified program manager.
 D Tell your boss you are out looking so he has time to replace you.

78. The purpose of stakeholder analysis is all the following except
  A Identify alternative stakeholders.
 B   Identify the influence and interest of the various stakeholders.
 C   Document stakeholder expectations.
 D   Identify the potential impact or support of each stakeholder.

79. Which of the following is not considered when calculating cost
  of quality?
 A Training B Rework C Appraisal D Quality function
 deployment 80. Your procurement documents clearly state that all
 bidders must have at least five references for similar work. You want
 to make sure the selected vendor has sufficient experience and
 satisfied customers. Asking for five references is an example of A
 Screening criteria B Weighting criteria C Scoring criteria D
 Ranking criteria 81. Direct and Manage Project Work comprises A
 Integrating and coordinating all project plans to create a consistent,
 coherent document B Performing the work defined in the project
 management plan to achieve the project's objectives C
 Coordinating changes across the entire project D The activities
 needed to identify, define, combine, unify, and coordinate the various
 processes and project management activities 82. A contractor, at
 your desk, is very annoyed that even though a change was
 authorized, he's not getting paid what he thinks is a fair price. You
 think it is a fair price, though. The contractor's next action should be
 to A File a claim B Charge you extra next time a change comes
 through C Make it up in overtime D Not work with you again 83.
 Reviewing, approving, or denying preventive and corrective actions is
 part of which process?
 A Direct and Manage Project Work B Monitor and Control Project
 Work C Perform Integrated Change Control D Control Scope 84.
 Your firm laid off everybody and shut down. You decided to use the
 forced "vacation" to get your PMP certification before applying for a
 new job. You received your eligibility letter from PMI and scheduled
 the exam for two weeks hence. You have no doubts that you'll pass,
 but you aren't taking any chances and will study every day. In the
 meantime, you start applying for jobs. Do you put PMP on your
 resume?
 A Sure. You will be certified by the time an interview would be
 scheduled.
 B You can state that you will be taking the exam and expect to
 receive your certification on the scheduled date.
 C Yes, if you put PMP (Pending) after your name.
 D You can say you are a certified project manager as long as you
 do not use any registered PMI terms, such as PMP or PMI.

85. Which of the following is an output of the Estimate Activity
  Resources process?
 A Activity cost estimates B Resource breakdown structure C
 Requested changes D Resource calendars 86. The output of the
 Determine Budget process is A Project funding requirements B
 Cost baseline C Project schedule updates D All the above 87. To
 mitigate any misunderstandings on the project team, you document
 your authority level with regards to decision making, prioritization,
 conflict resolution, and escalation. This is likely to be recorded in
 which document?
 A The project management plan B The project charter C The
 team operating agreement D The project scope statement 88. You
 generally have very high standards for work performance, tie rewards
 to these standards, and make sure that the rewards are what your
 team appreciates. The motivation theory you espouse is A Theory
 X
 B Contingency Theory C Expectancy Theory D Goal-setting
 Theory 89. Evaluating overall project performance on a regular basis
 to provide confidence that the project will satisfy the relevant quality
 standards is referred to as A Plan Quality B Perform Quality
 Assurance C Control Quality D Perform Quality Management 90.
 There are outstanding issues, claims, and disputes with one supplier
 for your project. A common method for addressing these is through A
   Scope verification B Procurement audits C Negotiated
 settlements D Lessons learned 91. Project objectives, project
 approval requirements, and high-level milestones are all components
 of which document?
 A The charter B The strategic plan C The scope statement D
 The WBS

92. You're documenting the methods you'll use to integrate staff
  onto the team and how you will release staff. You're also noting
  training needs and safety requirements for the team. Which
  document compiles this information?
 A Staffing management plan B Responsibility assignment matrix
 C Resource requirements D Resource calendars 93. Crashing
 can A Reduce project duration and cost B Reduce schedule
 duration by increasing the assignment of resources on critical path
 activities C Compress the schedule by overlapping activities that
 would normally be done in sequence D Resequence activities to
 maximize float 94. You're managing a project with specific
 performance criteria. You want a contract that encourages the seller
 to meet or exceed these performance criteria. What type of contract
 should you select?
 A Cost plus incentive fee B Cost plus fixed fee C Firm fixed
 price D Time and material 95. Your organization has had problems
 controlling changes in the past, so on your new project, you
 implement a Change Control board. People aren't familiar with this
 type of process and are resisting your proposal. You reassure them
 by telling them A Members can make changes as needed, but
 those who are not members cannot.
 B The Change Control board need deal only with those changes
 that might jeopardize the project.
 C The role of the board is to make sure that only changes
 beneficial to the project are authorized.
 D The configuration management system automates almost
 everything anyway, so the job of the board is very straightforward.
96. You accept a position in a new organization as project
  manager of a project that's not been meeting its performance
  measures. You meet with the team members and realize that
  they are deeply concerned about their job security and bonuses
  because the previous manager threatened to withhold their
  bonuses if work didn't improve. You recognize that according to
  Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs model, this team is dealing with A
    Esteem needs B Physiological needs C Safety and security
  needs D Social needs 97. Which of the following tools cannot
  be used to determine the root cause of a problem?
 A Fishbone diagram B Ishikawa diagram C Checklist D Flow
 chart 98. The client for your project to develop a new decking finish
 has discovered that the finishing component runs if it isn't allowed to
 set for 48 hours. You need to develop a different finishing component.
 This means changes to the development and testing work, delaying
 your delivery date by six weeks, and adding a significant amount to
 the project cost to cover the rework. You create a change request,
 and it's approved. What else must you do?
 A Write up the incident for preventive action.
 B Develop new quality assurance standards.
 C Notify the Change Control board.
 D Update the project baselines.

99. As a project manager, the conflict management approach that
  you would tend not to use because it does not lead to an
  ongoing positive result is A Problem solving B Compromise
  C Collaboration D Avoidance 100. A project conflict has
  arisen on how to integrate new software midstream during your
  IT project. You wish to gather the team and incorporate multiple
  viewpoints to quickly resolve this conflict. Which conflict
  resolution mode would you apply?
 A   Withdrawing B     Smoothing C     Forcing D   Collaborating
          Sample Test Answers
1. D. This is an uneven distribution that is skewed, so more risks will
  land in the high-risk rating, showing that the organization has a low
  risk tolerance. See Book V, Chapter 1.
2. C. The portfolio manager is interested in financial performance for
  all the projects and programs in a portfolio. See Book I, Chapter 2.
3. A. Quantitative risk analysis can show you the probability of
  meeting cost and schedule objectives. See Book V, Chapter 1.
4. C. Tone and inflection are referred to as para language
  communication. See Book IV, Chapter 4.
5. A. A geographically diverse team is a virtual team. See Book VI,
  Chapter 2.
6. C. Perform Integrated Change Control ensures that only approved
  changes are integrated into the project baselines. See Book VII,
  Chapter 1.
7. C. Verified deliverables come from Control Quality and go into
  Validate Scope for customer acceptance. See Book VII, Chapter 2.
8. D. If there isn't a defined customer who is paying for it, the sponsor
  provides funding for the project. See Book II, Chapter 3.
9. A. Product scope completion is measured against requirements.
  Project scope completion is measured against the project
  management plan. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
10. D. This is a Fairness standard. The offer of the vendor to provide
  breakfast, lunch, and a room would have the appearance of
  favoritism and could impede the impartiality of the selection. The
  bidder conference is a technique to provide equal access to
  information. If a bidder is unable to attend, the buyer cannot make
  special arrangements. Look at PMI Code of Ethics and Professional
  Conduct 4.2. See Book IX, Chapter 2.
11. D. The sender's responsibility is to make sure the information is
  clear and complete and also to confirm that the receiver understood
  the message correctly. The other answers are the responsibility of
  the receiver. See Book IV, Chapter 4.
12. A. Defining, preparing, integrating, and coordinating all subsidiary
  plans is a key part of developing a project management plan. See
  Book III, Chapter 1.
13. B. Getting people to work together toward a common end is
  leadership. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
14. D. Controlling change is important to a successful project.
  However, negotiating, presenting, and public speaking are
  important in managing stakeholder engagement. See Book VI,
  Chapter 3.
15. D. Use resource optimization to make sure no resources are over-
  worked and that the work is spread out as evenly as possible
  among the remaining resources. See Book VII, Chapter 3.
16. C. Verify Scope is about the customer or sponsor formally
  accepting the project deliverables. See Book VII, Chapter 2.
17. A. A procurement audit starts with the very first procurement
  process, Plan Procurement Management. See Book V, Chapter 2.
18. D. This is a Responsibility mandatory standard, meaning that you
  are required to bring violations of the Code to the attention of the
  appropriate body for resolution: in this case, PMI. Review the PMI
  Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct 2.3. See Book IX,
  Chapter 2.
19. A. The project charter and the stakeholder register are inputs to
  the Collect Requirements process. See Book III, Chapter 1.
20. B. A project would not be started for an employee request unless
  there were other compelling reasons, such as a business need or
  any of the other listed options. See Book I, Chapter 2.
21. C. Assumptions and exclusions are documented in the project
  scope statement. See Book III, Chapter 2.
22. B. Outputs from scope definition are work packages. In activity
  definition, the outputs are activities. See Book III, Chapter 3.
23. C. The majority of the product work is accomplished in the Direct
  and Manage Project Work process. The Direct and Manage Project
  Work process is wholly dependent upon the nature of the product,
  service, or result. See Book VI, Chapter 1.
24. B. The processes used to manage the project quality are the
  same, regardless of the product. Managing the product quality
  depends upon the product, service, or result. See Book IV, Chapter
  2.
25. D. A TCPI higher than 1.0 indicates that you have more scope left
  than you do budget. Therefore, this situation is deteriorating. See
  Book VIII, Chapter 1.
26. D. An Ishikawa diagram looks for the root cause of defects. See
  Book VIII, Chapter 2.
27. B. Finalizing open claims, updating records, and finalizing
  payments are all part of the Close Procurements process. You can
  close out a contract at any point in the project life cycle. See Book
  IX, Chapter 1.
28. D. You have a responsibility to take actions and be truthful in your
  communication about what you believe are the best interests of the
  organization. This is a Responsibility aspirational standard and an
  Honesty aspirational standard. Review the PMI Code of Ethics and
  Professional Conduct 2.2 and 5.2. See Book IX, Chapter 2.
29. D. A risk assessment is not a project objective. See Book II,
  Chapter 2.
30. B. A firm fixed price contract shifts the risk to the seller to deliver
  all the scope at a set price. See Book V, Chapter 2.
31. B. The additional accuracy takes time, and therefore costs more,
  to develop. See Book III, Chapter 3, and Book IV, Chapter 1.
32. C. The autocratic style is top-down, where the leader makes the
  decisions. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
33. B. The incentive fee is $40,000. The difference between target
  and actual is -$75,000. -$75,000 x 30% = -$22,500. Therefore,
  $40,000 - $22,500 = $17,500. See Book VI, Chapter 3, and Book
  V, Chapter 2.
34. A. A what-if scenario analysis is a modeling technique that allows
  you to see the effect of various scenarios on your schedule. See
  Book VII, Chapter 3.
35. D. The change control system ensures all team members are
  working to the same plan, that all changes to any aspect of the
  project are approved, and that there is an analysis of the impact of
  a change before it is approved. See Book VII, Chapter 1.
36. C. A variance analysis is not an input to closing the project or a
  phase. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
37. D. This is a Fairness mandatory standard; therefore, you must
  disclose real or potential conflicts of interest to the appropriate
  stakeholders. See Book IX, Chapter 2.
38. B. The program manager is responsible for initiating projects
  within the program. See Book I, Chapter 2.
39. C. A work package is the lowest level of the WBS. See Book III,
  Chapter 2.
40. B. Resource requirements are not part of the human resources
  plan. See Book IV, Chapter 3.
41. D. Teams are at their most efficient in the performing phase. See
  Book VI, Chapter 2.
42. A. Referent power is based on your charisma and personality, or
  on whom you know. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
43. B. The target profit is $50,000. There is a positive variance of
  $25,000. 30% of $25,000 is $7,500. Therefore, the profit is $57,500.
  See Book V, Chapter 2.
44. D. Obtaining customer validation is part of the Validate Scope
  process. See Book VII, Chapter 2.
45. C. This is a positive variance. You should report this as well as the
  cause. See Book VII, Chapter 3, and Book VIII, Chapter 1.
46. D. Concept is most closely associated with developing a charter
  and identifying stakeholders as well as other initiating activities. See
  Book I, Chapter 3.
47. B. Project documents become organizational process assets that
  can be used by future projects. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
48. C. This is a Fairness mandatory standard. Therefore, you must
  refrain from engaging in the decision-making process or otherwise
  attempting to influence outcomes, unless or until: You make a full
  disclosure to the affected stakeholders; you have an approved
  mitigation plan; and you have obtained the consent of the
  stakeholders to proceed. Review the PMI Code of Ethics and
  Professional Conduct 4.3. See Book IX, Chapter 2.
49. D. The forecast of when you recapture your investment and start
  making a profit is the payback period. See Book II, Chapter 1.
50. B. The product scope completion is measured against product
  requirements. See Book III, Chapter 2.
51. B. Competency describes the skill or skill level of an individual.
  See Book IV, Chapter 3.
52. D. "State-of-the-art" indicates high grade. However, the problems
  indicate low quality. See Book IV, Chapter 2.
53. A. Team development does not improve individualism. See Book
  VI, Chapter 2.
54. C. First you have to determine your CPI by dividing EV by AC.
  This gives you a CPI of 1.02. The EAC equation of BAC / CPI gives
  you this answer. See Book VIII, Chapter 1.
55. A. A chart that ranks the problems by frequency is a Pareto chart.
  See Book VIII, Chapter 2.
56. C. Risk reassessment looks for new risks and updates the
  information on existing risks. See Book VIII, Chapter 4.
57. C. You perform closure activities at least at the end of each phase
  and each project. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
58. D. C is a good option, but the sponsor probably doesn't want to
  know all the technical details -- only that you have the situation
  under control. This is an Honesty aspirational standard, which
  indicates that you need to provide accurate information in a timely
  manner. Review the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
  See Book IX, Chapter 2.
59. D. You should identify stakeholders and their requirements. See
  Book II, Chapter 3.
60. C. The project life cycle is documented in the project
  management plan. See Book III, Chapter 1.
61. A. Authority is the right to make decisions. See Book IV, Chapter
  3.
62. C. Because you have a very tight temperature tolerance, your
  measurements need to be accurate. See Book IV, Chapter 2.
63. A. Managing conflict is a key ingredient in effective team
  management. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
64. C. Mediation and arbitration are types of alternative dispute
  resolution (ADR). See Book VIII, Chapter 4.
65. D. The Assumption Log is a dynamic document that should be
  continuously updated. All the other answer choice items represent a
  change that needs to be submitted to the CCB. See Book VII,
  Chapter 1.
66. B. The project management plan is used to ensure that the
  project is complete. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
67. C. This is a Respect mandatory standard that states we respect
  the property rights of others. Review the PMI Code of Ethics and
  Professional Conduct 3.3. See Book IX, Chapter 2.
68. B. You will plan your communications based on stakeholder
  requirements. See Book II, Chapter 3.
69. C. The cost management plan contains the cost variance
  thresholds. See Book IV, Chapter 1.
70. D. Identifying risks is about looking for what can affect an
  objective and then documenting that event. See Book V, Chapter 1.
71. A. A control chart has upper and lower control limits, and also
  charts whether a process is in control. See Book VIII, Chapter 2.
72. D. Smoothing is used when you need to maintain a relationship or
  have little relative power. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
73. C. If you don't have position power, you need to rely on your
  ability to influence others. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
74. A. Your CPI is .95. The EAC is BAC / CPI. EAC = 1,200,000 / .95
  = 1,263,158. See Book VIII, Chapter 1.
75. B. A risk audit looks to see whether the risk management
  processes and the risk responses are appropriate for the project.
  See Book VIII, Chapter 4.
76. B. Arbitration is a form of ADR. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
77. B. You have a responsibility to identify both your strengths and
  weaknesses. Just because you haven't managed something this
  big doesn't mean that you can't. However, the employer has a right
  to know. This is a Responsibility aspirational standard. Review the
  PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct 2.2. See Book IX,
  Chapter 2.
78. A. The purpose is not to identify alternative stakeholders, but
  rather to identify the influences, interests, expectations, and effects
  of the stakeholders. See Book II, Chapter 3.
79. D. Quality function deployment is not considered a cost of quality.
  It is a technique used in planning quality. See Book IV, Chapter 2.
80. A. The five references are screening criteria. See Book V,
  Chapter 2.
81. B. Performing the work defined in the project management plan to
  achieve the project's objectives is the PMBOK Guide glossary
  definition of Direct and Manage Project Execution. See Book VI,
  Chapter 1.
82. A. The contractor can file a claim if he feels the situation is unfair.
  See Book VIII, Chapter 4.
83. C. Perform Integrated Change Control looks at all change
  requests and approves or denies them. See Book VII, Chapter 1.
84. B. Claiming to PMP certification is against the Honesty mandatory
  standard that states you do not engage in dishonest behavior with
  the intention of personal gain or at the expense of another. Review
  the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. See Book IX,
  Chapter 2.
85. B. A resource breakdown structure is an output of the Estimate
  Activity Resources process. See Book III, Chapter 3.
86. D. Funding requirements, the cost baseline, and updates to
  project documents, including the project schedule, are all outputs
  from the Determine Budget process. See Book IV, Chapter 1.
87. B. The project charter has a section to document the PM
  authority. See Book II, Chapter 2.
88. C. Expectancy Theory is about motivating people based on their
  expectations. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
89. B. Quality assurance makes sure the project can satisfy the
  quality standards. See Book VI, Chapter 1.
90. C. As you close out contracts, you will want to make sure that all
  open claims are negotiated and settled. See Book IX, Chapter 1.
91. A. The charter documents the project objectives, project approval
  requirements, and high-level milestones. See Book II, Chapter 2.
92. A. Information on bringing on staff and releasing staff, as well as
  training requirements, is part of the staffing management plan. See
  Book IV, Chapter 3.
93. B. Crashing reduces time on the critical path by adding resources
  or extending work periods. See Book III, Chapter 3.
94. A. An incentive fee encourages contractors to meet specified
  performance criteria. See Book V, Chapter 2.
95. C. A change control board (CCB) ensures that beneficial changes
  are approved and implemented, and also that only approved
  changes are implemented. See Book VII, Chapter 1.
96. C. The team members can't work effectively if they're worried
  about being fired or having their bonuses negatively affected. They
  are worried about work survival and security needs. See Book VI,
  Chapter 2.
97. C. A checklist does not identify a root cause. See Book VIII,
  Chapter 2.
98. D. After the change is approved, you need to update your
  baseline. See Book VII, Chapter 1.
99. D. Avoidance does not usually lead to a long-term positive
  outcome. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
100. D. Collaboration uses the team's input and is an effective way to
  gather multiple points of view. See Book VI, Chapter 2.
           Appendix C: Lab Work
 This appendix has a number of exercises that will help you remember key
 terms and vocabulary you need for the PMP exam. The first lab has
 definitions of knowledge areas and process groups, which will help set the
 framework for all the processes in project management. The remaining
 exercises focus on a specific knowledge area. This is a different approach
 than how the information is presented in the chapters of this book, which
 organize information by process group. Here, you are asked to recall
 information by knowledge area. This will keep your brain nimble when
 recalling processes, inputs, tools, techniques, outputs, and vocabulary. You
 can find the answers to each lab in the back half of this appendix.
 Good luck!

Knowledge Area and Process Groups
 Fill in the blank with the name of the correct knowledge area or process
 group.
 1. Project ______ Management includes the processes necessary to purchase
   or acquire the products, services, or results needed from outside the project
   team.
 2. ______ ______ are those processes performed to finalize all activities
   across all Process Groups to formally close a project or phase.
 3. Project ______ Management includes the processes involved in planning,
   estimating, budgeting, financing, funding, managing, and controlling costs
   so that the project can be completed within the approved budget.
 4. ______ are those processes performed to establish the scope of the project,
   refine the objectives, and define the course of action required to attain the
   objectives that the project was undertaken to achieve.
 5. Project ______ Management includes the processes of conducting risk
   management planning, identification, analysis, response planning, and
   controlling risk on a project.
 6. Project ______ Management includes the processes and activities of the
   performing organization that determine quality policies, objectives, and
   responsibilities so that the project will satisfy the needs for which it was
   undertaken.
 7. ______ ______ ______ ______ are those processes required to track,
   review, and regulate the progress and performance of the project; identify
   any areas in which changes to the plan are required; and initiate the
   corresponding changes.
 8. Project ______ Management includes the processes required to ensure that
   the project includes all the work required, and only the work required, to
   complete the project successfully.
 9. Project ______ ______ Management includes the processes that organize,
   manage, and lead the project team.
 10. ______ ______ are those processes performed to complete the work
   defined in the project management plan to satisfy the project specifications.
 11. Project ______ Management includes the processes and activities needed
   to identify, define, combine, unify, and coordinate the various processes and
   project management activities within the Project Management process
   groups.
 12. Project ______ Management includes the processes required to manage
   the timely completion of a project.
 13. Project ______ Management includes the processes required to identify
   all people or organizations impacted by the project, analyzing stakeholder
   expectations and impact on the project, and developing appropriate
   management strategies for effectively engaging stakeholders in project
   decisions and execution.
 14. ______ ______ are those processes performed to define a new project or
   a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the
   project or phase.
 15. Project ______ Management includes the processes that are required to
   ensure timely and appropriate planning, collection, creation, distribution,
   storage, retrieval, management, control, monitoring, and ultimate
   disposition of project information.


PMP Foundation
 The following list of terms comes from Chapters 1-3 of the PMBOK Guide.
 These terms are discussed in Book I of this book. There's also a table with
 selected definitions from the PMBOK Guide glossary. Match the term with
 the appropriate definitions. Hint: Not all terms will be used.
 Functional organization Project management office
 Project phase                   Project management
 Matrix organization             Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs)
 Project                         Progressive elaboration
 Progressive elaboration Organizational process assets (OPAs)
 Project life cycle              Program
 Portfolio                       Projectized organization

 Term Definition

      A collection of logically related project activities that culminates in the completion of one or more
      deliverables.

      Conditions, not under the immediate control of the team, that influence or direct the project,
      program, or portfolio.
      A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.

      The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to meet the project
      requirements.

      The series of phases that a project passes through from its initiation to its closure.

      Any organizational structure in which the project manager shares responsibility with the functional
      managers for assigning priorities and for directing the work of persons assigned to the project.

      Plans, processes, policies, procedures, and knowledge basis that are specific to and used by the
      performing organization.
      The iterative process of increasing the level of detail in a project management plan as greater
      amounts of information and more accurate estimates become available.




Project Integration Management
 Here is a list of terms and processes from Project Integration Management.
 The following table contains selected definitions from the PMBOK Guide
 glossary. Match each term with the appropriate definition.
 Develop Project Charter Project management plan
 Close Project or Phase          Project charter
 Defect repair                   Monitor and Control Project Work
 Corrective action                  Perform Integrated Change Control
 Preventive action                  Direct and Manage Project Execution
 Change request                     Develop Project Management Plan

 Term Definition

        An intentional activity to modify a nonconforming product or product component.
        Tracking, reviewing, and reporting the progress to meet the performance objectives defined in the
        project management plan.
        A document issued by the project initiator or sponsor that formally authorizes the existence of a
        project and also provides the project manager with the authority to apply organizational resources to
        project activities.

        The document that describes how the project will be executed, monitored, and controlled.
        A formal proposal to modify any document, deliverable, or baseline.

        Leading and performing the work defined in the project management plan and implementing
        approved changes to achieve the project's objectives.
        An intentional activity that ensures the future performance of the project work is aligned with the
        project management plan.

        Finalizing all activities across all project management process groups to formally complete the
        project or phase.

        Developing a document that formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project
        manager with the authority to apply organizational resources to project activities.
        Defining, preparing, and coordinating all subsidiary plans and integrating them into a comprehensive
        project management plan.

        An intentional activity that realigns the performance of the project work with the project management
        plan.

        Reviewing all change requests; approving changes and managing changes to deliverables,
        organizational process assets, project documents, and project management plan; and
        communicating their disposition.




Project Scope Management
 In the right column, enter the name of the Project Scope Management process
 most associated with the tool, technique, or output identified in the left
 column.
 Tool, technique, or output          Project Scope Management process

 Rolling wave planning

 Product analysis

 Requirements traceability matrix
 Accepted deliverables

 Assumption
 Decomposition
 Work performance measurements
 WBS dictionary
 Constraint

 Group creativity techniques
 Variance analysis
 Work package
 Project scope statement
 Scope change

 Scope baseline
 Inspection

 Prototypes
 Control account

 Scope management plan




Project Time Management
 The left column holds glossary terms from the Project Time Management
 knowledge area. The right column has PMBOK Guide glossary definitions for
 the terms. Match the term to the PMBOK Guide glossary definition by
 entering the definition number next to the term.

 Term         Definition

 ___          1. A schedule compression technique in which activities or phases normally done in sequence
 Milestone    are performed in parallel for at least a portion of their duration.

 ___
              2. The amount of time whereby a successor activity can be advanced with respect to a
 Network
              predecessor activity.
 diagram

              3. A technique used to shorten the schedule duration for the least incremental cost by adding
 ___ Effort
              resources.

 ___          4. The total amount of time that a schedule activity may be delayed or extended from its early
 Duration     start date without delaying the project finish date or violating a schedule constraint.

 ___
            5. A technique for estimating the duration or cost of an activity or a project using historical data
 Analogous
            from a similar activity or project.
 estimating

 ___ Lead     6. A significant point or event in the project, program, or portfolio.
              7. The logical relationship in which a successor activity cannot finish until a predecessor activity
 ___ Lag
              has finished.

 ___
          8. A critical path technique for calculating the late start and late finish dates by working
 Backward
          backward through the schedule model from the project end date.
 pass
 ___ Early 9. The amount of time whereby the successor activity is required to be delayed with respect to
 finish date a predecessor activity.
              10. The total number of work periods (not including holidays or other nonworking periods)
 ___ Total
              required to complete a schedule activity or work breakdown structure component. Usually
 float
              expressed as workdays or workweeks. Sometimes incorrectly equated with elapsed time.
 ___          11. The number of labor units required to complete a schedule activity or work breakdown
 Crashing     structure component, often expressed in hours, days, or weeks.
 ___ Fast-
              12. A graphical representation of the logical relationships among the project schedule activities.
 tracking
 ___          13. In the critical path method, the earliest possible point in time when the uncompleted
 Finish-to-   portions of a schedule activity can finish based on the schedule network logic, the data date,
 finish       and any schedule constraints.




Project Cost Management
 The following is a list of earned value (EV) terms and processes from Project
 Cost Management. Use the following table of selected definitions from the
 PMBOK Guide glossary to match the term with the appropriate definition.
 Hint: Not all terms are used.
 Budget                            Cost performance baseline
 Schedule variance                 Actual cost (AC)
 Cost performance index Performance measurement baseline
 Planned value (PV)                Estimate to complete
 Cost variance                     Budget at completion
 Earned value (EV)                 Schedule performance index
 Estimate at completion

 Term Definition

        A measure of schedule efficiency expressed as the ratio of earned value to planned value.

        The expected total cost of completing the work expressed as the sum of the actual cost to date and
        the estimate to complete.
        The authorized budget assigned to scheduled work.

        The expected cost to finish all the remaining project work.
        A measure of the cost efficiency of budgeted resources expressed as the ratio of earned value to
        actual cost.
        The amount of budget deficit or surplus at a given point in time, expressed as the difference
        between the earned value and the actual cost.

        The sum of all the budgets established for the work to be performed.
        The measure of work performed expressed in terms of the budget authorized for that work.
        A measure of schedule performance expressed as the difference between the earned value and the
        planned value.




Earned Value
 For the following, add the equation that matches the earned value (EV)
 acronym.
 SV:
 SPI:
 CV:
 CPI:
 ETC:
 EAC:

 In the following scenario, use the PV, EV, AC, and BAC values for a project
 to complete the calculations for SV, CV, SPI, CPI, ETC, and EAC. Round to
 two decimal places for index calculations.
    PV = 125,000EV = 117,000AC = 133,000BAC = 225,000

 SV:
 SPI:
 CV:
 CPI:
 ETC:
 EAC:


Project Quality Management
Match the term or process from Project Quality Management next to the
appropriate definition in the following table of selected definitions. Hint:
Note that not all the terms are defined in the PMBOK Guide glossary; some
are defined throughout this book.
Control chart                     Grade
Variable sampling                 Scatter diagram
Accuracy                          Flowcharting
Customer satisfaction             Pareto chart
Precision                         Quality
Cause-and-effect diagram Specification limits
Attribute sampling                Tolerance

Term Definition

     An assessment of correctness.
     The depiction in a diagram format of the inputs, process actions, and outputs of one or more
     processes within a system.

     The degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements.
     A category or rank used to distinguish items that have the same functional use but do not share the
     same requirements for quality.

     A measure of exactness.
     A histogram, ordered by frequency of occurrence, that shows how many results were generated by
     each identified cause.

     A graphic display of process data over time and against established control limits, and that has a
     centerline that assists in detecting a trend of plotted values toward either control limit.

     The quantified description of acceptable variation for a quality requirement.

     A decomposition technique that helps trace an undesirable effect back to its root cause.

     The area, on either side of the centerline, or mean, of data plotted on a control chart that meets the
     customer's requirements for a product or service. This area may be greater than or less than the
     area defined by the control limits.

     A correlation chart that uses a regression line to explain or to predict how the change in an
     independent variable will change a dependent variable.


Fill in the blanks with the appropriate quality management tools or technique.
1. If you want to eliminate defects, and you want to start with the element that
  causes the most defects, you should use a(n) ______ ______.
2. If you're trying to identify where quality problems could occur, you should
   use ______.
 3. Providing training and documenting processes are examples of ______
   ______.
 4. To measure your project practices against those of comparable projects or
   organizations in order to identify best practices and generate ideas for
   improvement, you should use ______.
 5. A(n) ______ ______ is used to determine whether a process is stable or has
   predictable performance.


Project Human Resource Management
 In the right column of the following table, enter the name of the Project
 Human Resource Management process most associated with the tool,
 technique, or output in the left column.

 Tool, technique, or output               Project Human Resource Management process

 Recognition and rewards

 Organizational charts
 Pre-assignment

 Team-building activities
 Organizational theory

 Conflict management

 Ground rules
 Issue log

 Virtual teams

 Training
 Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM)




Project Communications Management
 In the left column, enter the name of the process, term, or output that matches
 the definition in the right column.

 Process,
 term, or        Definition
 output
               Creating, collecting, distributing, storing, retrieving, and the ultimate disposition of project
               information in accordance with the communications management plan.
               A component of the project, program, or portfolio management plan that describes how,
               when, and by whom information about the project will be administered and disseminated.
               Developing an appropriate approach and plan for project communications based on
               stakeholder's information needs and requirements as well as available organizational assets.
               Thoughts or ideas are translated into language by the sender.
               Used for very large volumes of information, or for very large audiences, and requires the
               recipients to access the communication content at their own discretion.
               Performance reports, deliverable status, schedule progress, and costs incurred.
               Monitoring and controlling communications throughout the entire project life cycle to ensure
               the information needs of the project stakeholders are met.




Project Risk Management
 In the following table, match the term next to the appropriate PMBOK Guide
 glossary definition. Hint: Not all terms are used.
 Fallback plan            Reserve            Risk register
 Risk transference Trigger                   Risk tolerance
 Risk mitigation          Threat             Delphi technique
 Risk avoidance           Risk register Risk acceptance
 Risk                     Opportunity Probability and impact matrix

 Term Definition

        A provision in the project management plan to mitigate cost and/or schedule risk. Often used with a
        modifier (for example, management reserve, contingency reserve) to provide further detail on what
        types of risk are meant to be mitigated.

        A risk response strategy whereby the project team works to eliminate the threat or protect the project
        from its impact.

        An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on one or more
        project objectives.

        A risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to reduce the probability of occurrence or
        impact of a risk.
        The degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization or individual will withstand.

        The document in which the results of risk analysis and risk response planning are recorded.

        A risk response strategy whereby the project team shifts the impact of a threat to a third party,
        together with ownership of the response.

        A grid for mapping the probability of each risk occurrence and its impact on project objectives if that
        risk occurs.
      A risk response strategy whereby the project team decides to acknowledge the risk and not take any
      action unless the risk occurs.
      An event or situation that indicates that a risk is about to occur.




Project Procurement Management
 Fill in the blank(s) with the name of the correct process or term. Not all
 definitions are in the PMBOK Guide glossary.
 1. ______ ______ is the process of managing procurement relationships,
   monitoring contract performance, and making changes and corrections as
   appropriate.
 2. The profit component of compensation to the seller is a(n) ______.
 3. ______ ______ ______is the process of documenting project procurement
   decisions, specifying the approach, and identifying potential sellers.
 4. ______ ______ is the process of obtaining seller responses, selecting a
   seller, and awarding a contract.
 5. A type of contract involving payment to the seller for the seller's actual
   costs, plus a fee typically representing the seller's profit. ______ ______
   contracts often include incentive clauses where if the seller meets or
   exceeds selected project objectives, such as schedule targets or total cost,
   then the seller receives from the buyer an incentive or bonus payment.
 6. ______ ______ is the process of completing each project procurement.
 7. A(n) ______ is a mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller to
   provide the specified product or service or result and obligates the buyer to
   pay for it.
 8. A(n) ______ ______ ______ is an agreement that sets the fee that will be
   paid for a defined scope of work regardless of the cost or effort to deliver it.

Project Stakeholder Management
 In the following table, match the term next to the appropriate PMBOK Guide
 glossary definition.
 Identify Stakeholders                                     Plan Stakeholder Management
 Manage Stakeholder Engagement                             Control Stakeholder Engagement
 Stakeholder register                                      Stakeholder management plan
 Stakeholder engagement assessment matrix Power/interest grid
 Stakeholder analysis                                      Issue

 Term Definition

      A classification model used for stakeholder analysis.
      A component of the project management plan that identifies the management strategies required to
      effectively engage stakeholders.
      Monitoring overall stakeholder relationships and adjusting strategies and plans for engaging
      stakeholders.
      Systematically gathering and analyzing quantitative and qualitative information to determine whose
      interests should be taken into account throughout the project.
      Identifying the people, groups, or organizations that could impact or be impacted by a decision, an
      activity, or an outcome of the project; and analyzing and documenting relevant information regarding
      their interests, involvement, interdependencies, influence, and potential impact on project success.
      A tool used to indicate the current and desired level of stakeholder engagement.

      Communication and working with stakeholders to meet their needs/expectations, address issues as
      they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement in project activities throughout the
      project life cycle.
      A document including the identification, assessment, and classification of project stakeholders.

      Developing appropriate management strategies to effectively engage stakeholders throughout the
      project life cycle, based on the analysis of their needs, interests, and potential impact on project
      success.

      A point or matter in question or in dispute, or a point or matter that is not settled and is under
      discussion or over which there are opposing views or disagreements.




Appendix C Answers
Knowledge Areas and Process Groups
 1. Project Procurement Management includes the processes to purchase or
   acquire the products, services, or results needed from outside the project
   team.
 2. Closing Processes are those processes performed to finalize all activities
   across all Process Groups to formally close a project or phase.
 3. Project Cost Management includes the processes involved in planning,
   estimating, budgeting, financing, funding, managing, and controlling costs
   so that the project can be completed within the approved budget.
4. Planning processes are those processes performed to establish the scope of
  the project, refine the objectives, and define the course of action required to
  attain the objectives that the project was undertaken to achieve.
5. Project Risk Management includes the processes of conducting risk
  management planning, identification, analysis, response planning, and
  controlling risk on a project.
6. Project Quality Management includes the processes and activities of the
  performing organization that determine quality policies, objectives, and
  responsibilities so that the project will satisfy the needs for which it was
  undertaken.
7. Monitoring and Controlling processes are those processes required to track,
  review, and regulate the progress and performance of the project; identify
  any areas in which changes to the plan are required; and initiate the
  corresponding changes.
8. Project Scope Management includes the processes required to ensure that
  the project includes all the work required, and only the work required, to
  complete the project successfully.
9. Project Human Resource Management includes the processes that
  organize, manage, and lead the project team.
10. Executing processes are those processes performed to complete the work
  defined in the project management plan to satisfy the project specifications.
11. Project Integration Management includes the processes and activities
  needed to identify, define, combine, unify, and coordinate the various
  processes and project management activities within the Project
  Management process groups.
12. Project Time Management includes the processes required to manage the
  timely completion of a project.
13. Project Stakeholder Management includes the processes required to
  identify all people or organizations impacted by the project, analyzing
  stakeholder expectations and impact on the project, and developing
  appropriate management strategies for effectively engaging stakeholders in
  project decisions and execution.
14. Initiating processes are those processes performed to define a new project
  or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the
  project or phase.
 15. Project Communications Management includes the processes that are
   required to ensure timely and appropriate planning, collection, creation,
   distribution, storage, retrieval, management, control, monitoring, and
   ultimate disposition of project information.


PMP Foundation
 Term                   Definition

                        A collection of logically related project activities that culminates in the completion of one
 Project phase
                        or more deliverables.
 Enterprise
                        Conditions, not under the immediate control of the team, that influence, or direct the
 environmental
                        project, program, or portfolio.
 factors (EEFs)
 Project                A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.

 Project                The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to meet
 management             the project requirements.

 Project life cycle     The series of phases that a project passes through from its initiation to its closure.

                        Any organizational structure in which the project manager shares responsibility with the
 Matrix
                        functional managers for assigning priorities and for directing the work of persons
 organization
                        assigned to the project.

 Organizational
                        Plans, processes, policies, procedures, and knowledge basis that are specific to and
 process assets
                        used by the performing organization.
 (OPAs)

 Progressive            The iterative process of increasing the level of detail in a project management plan as
 elaboration            greater amounts of information and more accurate estimates become available.




Project Integration Management
 Term                 Definition

 Defect repair        An intentional activity to modify a nonconforming product or product component.

 Monitor and
                 Tracking, reviewing, and reporting the progress to meet the performance objectives
 Control Project
                 defined in the project management plan.
 Work

                 A document issued by the project initiator or sponsor that formally authorizes the existence
 Project charter of a project, and provides the project manager with the authority to apply organizational
                 resources to project activities.

 Project
 management           The document that describes how the project will be executed, monitored, and controlled.
 plan
 Change
 request            A formal proposal to modify any document, deliverable, or baseline.


 Direct and
 Manage             Leading and performing the work defined in the project management plan and
 Project            implementing approved changes to achieve the project's objectives.
 Execution

 Preventive         An intentional activity that ensures the future performance of the project work is aligned
 action             with the project management plan.
 Close Project      Finalizing all activities across all project management process groups to formally complete
 or Phase           the project or phase.
 Develop         Developing a document that formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides the
 Project Charter project manager with the authority to apply organizational resources to project activities.
 Develop
 Project            Defining, preparing, and coordinating all subsidiary plans and integrating them into a
 Management         comprehensive project management plan.
 Plan
 Corrective         An intentional activity that realigns the performance of the project work with the project
 action             management plan.

 Perform
                    Reviewing all change requests; approving changes, and managing changes to
 Integrated
                    deliverables, organizational process assets, project documents, and project management
 Change
                    plan; and communicating their disposition.
 Control




Project Scope Management
 Tool, technique, or output            Project Scope Management process

 Rolling wave planning                 Create WBS

 Product analysis                      Define Scope
 Requirements traceability matrix      Collect Requirements

 Accepted deliverables                 Validate Scope

 Assumption                            Define Scope
 Decomposition                         Create WBS

 Work performance measurements Control Scope

 WBS dictionary                        Create WBS

 Constraint                            Define Scope
 Group creativity techniques           Collect Requirements

 Variance analysis                     Control Scope

 Work package                          Create WBS

 Project scope statement               Define Scope

 Scope change                          Control Scope
 Scope baseline                        Create WBS

 Inspection                            Validate Scope
 Prototypes                            Collect Requirements
 Control account                       Create WBS
 Scope management plan                 Plan Scope Management




Project Time Management
 Term         Definition

 6            1. A schedule compression technique in which activities or phases normally done in sequence
 Milestone    are performed in parallel for at least a portion of their duration.

 12
              2. The amount of time whereby a successor activity can be advanced with respect to a
 Network
              predecessor activity.
 diagram

              3. A technique used to shorten the schedule duration for the least incremental cost by adding
 11 Effort
              resources.
 10           4. The total amount of time that a schedule activity may be delayed or extended from its early
 Duration     start date without delaying the project finish date or violating a schedule constraint.

 5
            5. A technique for estimating the duration or cost of an activity or a project using historical data
 Analogous
            from a similar activity or project.
 estimating

 2 Lead       6. A significant point or event in the project, program, or portfolio.
              7. The logical relationship in which a successor activity cannot finish until a predecessor activity
 9 Lag
              has finished.

 8
          8. A critical path technique for calculating the late start and late finish dates by working
 Backward
          backward through the schedule model from the project end date.
 pass

 13 Early    9. The amount of time whereby the successor activity is required to be delayed with respect to
 finish date a predecessor activity.

              10. The total number of work periods (not including holidays or other nonworking periods)
 4 Total
              required to complete a schedule activity or work breakdown structure component. Usually
 float
              expressed as workdays or workweeks. Sometimes incorrectly equated with elapsed time.

 3            11. The number of labor units required to complete a schedule activity or work breakdown
 Crashing     structure component, often expressed in hours, days, or weeks.

 1 Fast-
              12. A graphical representation of the logical relationships among the project schedule activities.
 tracking

              13. In the critical path method, the earliest possible point in time when the uncompleted
 7 Finish-
              portions of a schedule activity can finish based on the schedule network logic, the data date,
 to-finish
              and any schedule constraints.
Project Cost Management
 Term             Definition

 Schedule
                  A measure of schedule efficiency expressed as the ratio of earned value to planned
 performance
                  value.
 index

 Estimate at      The expected total cost of completing the work expressed as the sum of the actual cost
 completion       to date and the estimate to complete.
 Planned value
                  The authorized budget assigned to scheduled work.
 (PV)
 Estimate to
                  The expected cost to finish all the remaining project work.
 complete
 Cost
                  A measure of the cost efficiency of budgeted resources expressed as the ratio of earned
 performance
                  value to actual cost.
 index

                  The amount of budget deficit or surplus at a given point in time, expressed as the
 Cost variance
                  difference between the earned value and the actual cost.

 Budget at
                  The sum of all the budgets established for the work to be performed.
 completion
 Earned value     The measure of work performed expressed in terms of the budget authorized for that
 (EV)             work.

 Schedule         A measure of schedule performance expressed as the difference between the earned
 variance         value and the planned value.




Earned Value
 SV:        EV - PV
 SPI:       EV / PV
 CV:        EV - AC
 CPI:       EV / AC
 ETC: BAC - EV (may be divided by CPI or CPI x SPI)
 EAC: AC + ((BAC - EV) / CPI)Note: Divisor may be CPI x SPI or other variants

     PV = 125,000EV = 117,000AC = 133,000BAC = 225,000


 SV:        -8,000
 SPI:        .94

 CV:         -16,000

 CPI:        .88

 ETC:        108,000

 EAC:        255,682


Project Quality Management
 Term           Definition

 Accuracy       An assessment of correctness.
                The depiction in a diagram format of the inputs, process actions, and outputs of one or more
 Flowcharting
                processes within a system.

 Quality        The degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements.

                A category or rank used to distinguish items that have the same functional use but do not
 Grade
                share the same requirements for quality.

 Precision      A measure of exactness.

                A histogram, ordered by frequency of occurrence, that shows how many results were
 Pareto chart
                generated by each identified cause.

 Control        A graphic display of process data over time and against established control limits, and that
 chart          has a centerline that assists in detecting a trend of plotted values toward either control limit.

 Tolerance      The quantified description of acceptable variation for a quality requirement.

 Cause-and-
 effect         A decomposition technique that helps trace an undesirable effect back to its root cause.
 diagram
 Specification The area, on either side of the centerline, or mean, of data plotted on a control chart that
 limits        meets the customer's requirements for a product or service. This area may be greater than or
               less than the area defined by the control limits.
 Scatter         A correlation chart that uses a regression line to explain or to predict how the change in an
 diagram         independent variable will change a dependent variable.


 1. If you want to eliminate defects, and you want to start with the element that
   causes the most defects, you should use a Pareto chart.
 2. If you are trying to identify where quality problems could occur, you
   should use flowcharting.
 3. Providing training and documenting processes are examples of preventive
   costs.
 4. To measure your project practices against those of comparable projects or
   organizations in order to identify best practices and generate ideas for
   improvement, you should use benchmarking.
 5. A control chart is used to determine whether a process is stable or has
   predictable performance.

Project Human Resource Management
 Tool, technique, or output                  Project Human Resource Management process

 Recognition and rewards                     Develop Project Team

 Organizational charts                       Plan Human Resource Management
 Pre-assignment                              Acquire Project Team

 Team-building activities                    Develop Project Team

 Organizational theory                       Plan Human Resource Management
 Conflict management                         Manage Project Team

 Ground rules                                Develop Project Team

 Issue log                                   Manage Project Team

 Virtual teams                               Acquire Project Team

 Training                                    Develop Project Team
 Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) Plan Human Resource Management




Project Communications Management
 Process, term,     Definition
 or output

 Manage         Creating, collecting, distributing, storing, retrieving, and the ultimate disposition of project
 Communications information in accordance with the communications management plan.

 Communications
                A component of the project, program, or portfolio management plan that describes how,
 management
                when, and by whom information about the project will be administered and disseminated.
 plan
 Plan
                Developing an appropriate approach and plan for project communications based on
 Communications
                stakeholder's information needs and requirements, and available organizational assets.
 Management
 Encode             Thoughts or ideas are translated into language by the sender.
 Pull               Used for very large volumes of information, or for very large audiences, and requires the
 communication      recipients to access the communication content at their own discretion.
 Project
                    Performance reports, deliverable status, schedule progress, and costs incurred.
 communications

 Control        Monitoring and controlling communications throughout the entire project life cycle to
 Communications ensure the information needs of the project stakeholders are met.




Project Risk Management
 Term          Definition

               A provision in the project management plan to mitigate cost and/or schedule risk. Often used
 Reserve       with a modifier (for example, management reserve, contingency reserve) to provide further
               detail on what types of risk are meant to be mitigated.
 Risk          A risk response strategy whereby the project team works to eliminate the threat or protect the
 avoidance     project from its impact.

               An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on one or
 Risk
               more project objectives.

 Risk          A risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to reduce the probability of
 mitigation    occurrence or impact of a risk.

 Risk
               The degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization or individual will withstand.
 tolerance
 Risk register The document in which the results of risk analysis and risk response planning are recorded.

 Risk         A risk response strategy whereby the project team shifts the impact of a threat to a third party,
 transference together with ownership of the response.
 Probability
               A grid for mapping the probability of each risk occurrence and its impact on project objectives
 and Impact
               if that risk occurs.
 Matrix

 Risk          A risk response strategy whereby the project team decides to acknowledge the risk and not
 acceptance    take any action unless the risk occurs.

 Trigger
               An event or situation that indicates that a risk is about to occur.
 condition
Project Procurement Management
 1. Control Procurements is the process of managing procurement
   relationships, monitoring contract performance, and making changes and
   corrections as appropriate.
 2. The profit component of compensation to the seller is a fee.
 3. Plan Procurement Management is the process of documenting project
   procurement decisions, specifying the approach, and identifying potential
   sellers.
 4. Conduct Procurements is the process of obtaining seller responses,
   selecting a seller, and awarding a contract.
 5. A type of contract involving payment to the seller for the seller's actual
   costs, plus a fee typically representing seller's profit. Cost-reimbursable
   contracts often include incentive clauses where if the seller meets or
   exceeds selected project objectives, such as schedule targets or total cost,
   then the seller receives from the buyer an incentive or bonus payment.
 6. Close Procurements is the process of completing each project procurement.
 7. A contract is a mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller to
   provide the specified product or service or result and obligates the buyer to
   pay for it.
 8. A fixed-price contract is an agreement that sets the fee that will be paid for
   a defined scope of work regardless of the cost or effort to deliver it.


Project Stakeholder Management
 Term           Definition

 Power/interest
                A classification model used for stakeholder analysis.
 grid

 Stakeholder
                A component of the project management plan that identifies the management strategies
 management
                required to effectively engage stakeholders.
 plan
 Control
                Monitoring overall stakeholder relationships and adjusting strategies and plans for engaging
 Stakeholder
                stakeholders.
 Engagement

 Stakeholder    Systematically gathering and analyzing quantitative and qualitative information to determine
 analysis       whose interests should be taken into account throughout the project.
               Identifying the people, groups, or organizations that could impact or be impacted by a
Identify
               decision, an activity, or an outcome of the project; and analyzing and documenting relevant
Stakeholders
               information regarding their interests, involvement, interdependencies, influence, and
               potential impact on project success.

Stakeholder
engagement
               A tool used to indicate the current and desired level of stakeholder engagement.
assessment
matrix
Manage         Communication and working with stakeholders to meet their needs/expectations, address
Stakeholder    issues as they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement in project activities
Engagement     throughout the project life cycle.
Stakeholder    A document including the identification, assessment, and classification of project
register       stakeholders.
Plan           Developing appropriate management strategies to effectively engage stakeholders
Stakeholder    throughout the project life cycle, based on the analysis of their needs, interests, and
Management     potential impact on project success.

               A point or matter in question or in dispute, or a point or matter that is not settled and is
Issue
               under discussion or over which there are opposing views or disagreements.
   Appendix D: Exam Objective
          Cross Walk
The PMP exam tests information in each of five domains: initiating, planning,
executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing. To optimize your chances
of doing well on the exam, remember the following information about how
the exam is designed and how the exam objectives are tested.
   Each domain has associated tasks that assess a project manager's
   competence in that domain.
   Each domain has knowledge and skills that are required to competently
   perform the tasks in that domain.
   In addition to the knowledge and skills associated with each domain,
   cross-cutting knowledge and skills are used in multiple domains and tasks.
   The information from the PMI Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
   (the Code) is integrated into exam questions.
Information in this appendix summarizes
    Domain tasks and where you can find them (domain tasks are listed as
   objectives in the front of each chapter) Domain-specific knowledge and
   skills   Cross-cutting knowledge and skills, as well as the minibooks that
   have processes where the cross-cutting knowledge and skills are applied
       Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct standards, as well as where
   you can find an example of how each standard could be integrated into an
   exam question Domain Tasks
The domain tasks assess your competence in each domain. The domain and
the percent of exam questions from that domain are listed in the following
tables.

Table D-1 Initiating, 13%
Task 1

Book II, Meet with the sponsor, customer, and other subject matter experts and review available
Chapter information to evaluate the feasibility of new products or services, keeping in mind given
1        assumptions and constraints.

Task 2

Book II,
         Given business and compliance requirements, define the high-level scope needed to meet
Chapter
         customer expectations.
2

Task 3
Book II,
Chapter Analyze stakeholders to identify expectations and gain support for the project.
3

Task 4

Book II, Use historical data, information on the environment, and expert judgment to identify and document
Chapter high-level risks, assumptions, and constraints. Use the information to propose an approach to
2        carry out the project.

Task 5

Book II,
         Analyze stakeholder requirements to document the scope, milestones, and deliverables and
Chapter
         complete a project charter.
2

Task 6
Book II,
         Gain commitment for the project and formalize project management authority by obtaining
Chapter
         approval for the project charter.
2



Table D-2 Planning, 24%
Task 1
Book
        Using the project charter, lessons learned, and requirements-gathering techniques, such as
III,
        interviews, brainstorming, focus groups, and so on, assess the project requirements,
Chapter
        assumptions, and constraints to determine project deliverables.
2
Task 2
Book
III,
        Deconstruct the project into a WBS in order to manage the project scope.
Chapter
2
Task 3
Book
IV,     Using cost-estimating techniques, develop a budget plan based on the project scope in order to
Chapter manage project cost.
1
Task 4

Book
III,    Using the scope and resource plan, create a project schedule to manage the timely completion of
Chapter the project.
3

Task 5
Book
IV,     Develop roles and responsibilities and an organizational structure as part of the human resource
Chapter management plan to help manage project staff.
3
Task 6

Book
IV,     Use stakeholder requirements and the project organizational structure to create a communications
Chapter plan that will help manage the flow of project information.
4

Task 7

Book V,
        Review the project scope and schedule to determine what, if any, scope or resources will need to
Chapter
        be procured.
1
Task 8

Book
IV,     Review the project scope to determine the quality requirements and standards needed to meet
Chapter stakeholder expectations.
2

Task 9

Book
III,    Define and document how changes will be addressed to track and manage changes throughout
Chapter the project.
1

Task 10

Book V,
Chapter Create a risk management plan that provides guidance for identifying, analyzing, prioritizing, and
1       developing response strategies to manage uncertainty throughout the project.

Task 11

Book
III,
        Present the project management plan to attain approval before executing the project.
Chapter
1
Task 12
Book
III,
        Hold a kick-off meeting to start the project and communicate key project information.
Chapter
1



Table D-3 Executing, 30%
Task 1

Book VI,     Acquire and manage project resources, both internal and external, to execute the project.
Chapter 2    Follow the procurement management plan for acquiring external resources.
Task 2

Book VI,     Execute project activities defined in the project management plan to create project deliverables
Chapter 1    on time and within budget.
Task 3

Book VI,     Follow the quality management plan, using appropriate tools and techniques to assure work
Chapter 1    and scope meet the quality requirements and standards.
Task 4

Book VI,     Follow the change management plan with regards to processes and procedures and
Chapter 1    implement approved changes.
Task 5

Book VIII,   Actively employ risk management techniques as documented in the risk management plan to
Chapter 4    minimize the impact of risk on the project.

Task 6
Book VI,     Employ leadership, training, motivating, mentoring, and other interpersonal skills to maximize
Chapter 2    team performance.

Book VI,
             Implement the procurement of project resources in accordance with the procurement plan.
Chapter 3

Book VI,     Ensure a common understanding by setting expectations in accordance with the project plan to
Chapter 3    align the stakeholder and team members.



Table D-4 Monitoring and Controlling, 25%
Task 1
Book VII, Chapter 1
Book VII, Chapter 2       Measure project performance, identify and quantify variances, and determine
Book VII, Chapter 3       appropriate preventive and corrective actions. Communicate status to
Book VIII, Chapter 3      stakeholders per the communication management plan.

Task 2
Book VII, Chapter 1Book
                        Ensure baseline integrity by updating the project management plan in response
VII, Chapter 2Book VII,
                        to approved changes and communicating those approved changes to the team.
Chapter 3
Task 3
                          Control quality and ensure that project deliverables are aligned with the quality
                          standards established in the project quality plan by using appropriate tools and
Book VIII, Chapter 2
                          techniques (such as testing, inspection, and control charts) to adhere to
                          customer requirements.

Task 4
                          Conduct risk reassessment on a regular basis and implement response
Book VIII, Chapter 3
                          strategies as indicated in the risk register.

Task 5
                          Minimize the impact of issues with the project schedule cost and resources by
Book VI, Chapter 3
                          using the issue register to manage issues and assign corrective actions.

Task 6
                          Communicate project status and continue to ensure the project is aligned with
Book VIII, Chapter 3
                          business needs.

                          Administer contracts and measure contractor performance, identify and quantify
Book VIII, Chapter 4
                          variances, and determine appropriate preventive and corrective actions.


Table D-5 Closing, 8%
Task 1

Book IX,
           Confirm that the project scope and deliverables are complete by attaining final acceptance by
Chapter
           the project sponsor and customer.
1

Task 2
Book IX,
Chapter    Facilitate project closure by transferring ownership and management of project deliverables.
1

Task 3

Book IX,
           Formally close the project and all contracts by obtaining legal, financial, and administrative
Chapter
           closure, thus eliminating further liability.
1

Task 4

Book IX,
           Write the final project report that communicates final project performance, including any
Chapter
           variances and project issues. Distribute to appropriate stakeholders.
1

Task 5
 Book IX,
            Conduct a thorough project review to collect and document lessons learned and contribute them
 Chapter
            to the organization's knowledge base.
 1
 Task 6

 Book IX,
            Collect, organize, and archive project and contract documents and records to comply with
 Chapter
            regulatory requirements, retain for future projects, and be available for audit purposes.
 1




Domain-Specific Knowledge and Skills
 The following knowledge and skills are listed by domain. In the final chapter
 of each process group in the book, I identify the knowledge and skills listed
 in that process group and where you can find examples.
Initiating Knowledge and Skills
Initiating knowledge and skills are used to initiate the project and phases in
the project life cycle.
    Cost-benefit analysis     Business case development Project selection
   criteria (for example, cost, feasibility, impact) Stakeholder-
   identification techniques      Risk-identification techniques Elements of
   a project charter Planning Knowledge and Skills
Planning knowledge and skills are used to elaborate the project objectives
that were identified in the initiating processes.
    Requirements-gathering techniques     Work breakdown structure (WBS)
   tools and techniques   Time-, budget-, and cost-estimation techniques
   Scope-management techniques        Resource-planning process
   Workflow-diagramming techniques        Types and uses of organization
   charts    Elements, purpose, and techniques of project planning
   Elements, purpose, and techniques of communications planning
   Elements, purpose, and techniques of procurement planning      Elements,
   purpose, and techniques of quality management planning      Elements,
   purpose, and techniques of change management planning Elements,
   purpose, and techniques of risk management planning Executing
   Knowledge and Skills
Executing knowledge and skills are used to manage the project work and the
team members.
    Project-monitoring tools and techniques     Elements of a statement of
   work     Interaction of work breakdown structure elements within the
   project schedule Project-budgeting tools and techniques         Quality-
   standard tools    Continuous-improvement processes Monitor and Control
   Knowledge and Skills
Monitoring and controlling skills are used make sure the project is proceeding
as planned and to take appropriate actions to correct product and project
progress as needed.
   Performance measurement and tracking techniques (for example, EV,
   CPM, PERT) Project control limits (for example, thresholds, tolerance)
     Project performance metrics (for example, efforts, costs, milestones)
   Cost-analysis techniques  Variance and trend analysis techniques
   Project plan management techniques       Change management techniques
      Integrated change control processes      Risk identification and analysis
   techniques      Risk-response techniques (for example, transference,
   mitigation, insurance, acceptance) Problem-solving techniques
   (including root cause analysis) Reporting procedures Closing
   Knowledge and Skills
Closing knowledge and skills are used to close out the project, a phase in the
project life cycle, and procurement contracts.
    Contract closure requirements       Basic project accounting principles
   Close-out procedures       Feedback techniques       Project-review
   techniques      Archiving techniques and statutes      Compliance
   (statute/organization) Transition planning techniques Cross-Cutting
   Skills and Knowledge
Cross-cutting knowledge and skills cut across all process groups. You will
need the skills throughout your project. However, you may need them with
more frequency or intensity during some process groups than others.
Therefore, at the beginning of each process group, I inserted a sidebar that
identifies the cross-cutting skills you are most likely to use in that process
group. The following table identifies the minibook or minibooks with the
processes where each specific cross-cutting skill would most likely be used.
Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct
 The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct (the Code) guides our behavior
 as project managers. It establishes standards that are mandatory and standards
 that we should aspire to (aspirational standards). The standards cover
 responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty. The following table shows the
 standard in the left column; the right column shows where in the book you
 can find a discussion on the standard. I emphasized some of the standards in
 multiple locations because they are particularly relevant in the executing and
 monitoring and controlling processes. Any standard can show up in a
 question from any process group. I also point them out in specific chapters
 just to give you an idea of how a standard can be applied in an exam question.

 Table D-7 Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
Responsibility Aspirational Standards
Find Here

                                                                                                    Book
We make decisions and take actions based on the best interests of society, public safety, and the   VI,
environment.                                                                                        Chapter
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                    Book
We accept only those assignments that are consistent with our background, experience, skills,       VII,
and qualifications.                                                                                 Chapter
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                    Book
                                                                                                    VII,
We fulfill the commitments that we undertake -- we do what we say we will do.
                                                                                                    Chapter
                                                                                                    1
When we make errors or omissions, we take ownership and make corrections promptly. When we          Book
discover errors or omissions caused by others, we communicate them to the appropriate body as       VII,
soon they are discovered. We accept accountability for any issues resulting from our errors or      Chapter
omissions and any resulting consequences.                                                           1
                                                                                                    Book
                                                                                                    VIII,
We protect proprietary or confidential information that has been entrusted to us.
                                                                                                    Chapter
                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                    Book
                                                                                                    VII,
We uphold this Code and hold each other accountable to it.
                                                                                                    Chapter
                                                                                                    1
Responsibility Mandatory Standards

We inform ourselves and uphold the policies, rules, regulations, and laws that govern our     Book I,
work, professional, and volunteer activities.                                                 Chapter 2
We report unethical or illegal conduct to appropriate management and, if necessary, to those Book VIII,
affected by the conduct.                                                                     Chapter 2

                                                                                              Book VIII,
We bring violations of this Code to the attention of the appropriate body for resolution.
                                                                                              Chapter 2
                                                                                              Book VIII,
We file ethics complaints only when they are substantiated by facts.
                                                                                              Chapter 2
We pursue disciplinary action against an individual who retaliates against a person raising   Book VIII,
ethics concerns.                                                                              Chapter 2
Respect Aspirational Standards

We inform ourselves about the norms and customs of others and avoid engaging in    Book VI,
behaviors they might consider disrespectful.                                       Chapter 2
                                                                                   Book VI,
We listen to others' points of view, seeking to understand them.
                                                                                   Chapter 2

                                                                                   Book VI,
We approach directly those persons with whom we have a conflict or disagreement.
                                                                                   Chapter 2
                                                                                   Book VI,
We conduct ourselves in a professional manner, even when it is not reciprocated.
                                                                                   Chapter 2
Respect Mandatory Standards

We negotiate in good faith.                                                            Book VI, Chapter 3
We do not exercise the power of our expertise or position to influence the decisions
                                                                                       Book VI, Chapter 2
or actions of others in order to benefit personally at their expense.
We do not act in an abusive manner toward others.                                      Book VI, Chapter 2
                                                                                       Book VI, Chapter
We respect the property rights of others.
                                                                                       3Book VIII, Chapter 4
Fairness Aspirational Standards

                                                                                        Book VI, Chapter
We demonstrate transparency in our decision-making process.
                                                                                        2
We constantly reexamine our impartiality and objectivity, taking corrective action as   Book VI, Chapter
appropriate.                                                                            3

We provide equal access to information to those who are authorized to have that         Book VI, Chapter
information.                                                                            3
                                                                                        Book VI, Chapter
We make opportunities equally available to qualified candidates.
                                                                                        3
Fairness Mandatory Standards

                                                                                                     Book
We proactively and fully disclose any real or potential conflicts of interest to the appropriate     VI,
stakeholders.                                                                                        Chapter
                                                                                                     3
When we realize that we have a real or potential conflict of interest, we refrain from engaging in   Book
the decision-making process or otherwise attempting to influence outcomes, unless or until We        VI,
have made full disclosure to the affected stakeholders. We have an approved mitigation plan. *       Chapter
We have obtained the consent of the stakeholders to proceed.                                         3
                                                                                                     Book
We do not hire or fire, reward or punish, or award or deny contracts based on personal               VI,
considerations, including but not limited to, favoritism, nepotism, or bribery.                      Chapter
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                     Book
We do not discriminate against others based on, but not limited to, gender, race, age, religion,     VI,
disability, nationality, or sexual orientation.                                                      Chapter
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                     Book
We apply the rules of the organization (employer, Project Management Institute, or other group)      VII,
without favoritism or prejudice.                                                                     Chapter
                                                                                                     1
Honesty Aspirational Standards

We earnestly seek to understand the truth.                  Book VI, Chapter 3Book VIII, Chapter 3
                                                            Book VI, Chapter 3Book VII, Chapter 3Book
We are truthful in our communications and in our conduct.
                                                            VIII, Chapter 3
                                                            Book VI, Chapter 3Book VII, Chapter 3Book
We provide accurate information in a timely manner.
                                                            VIII, Chapter 3
We make commitments and promises, implied or explicit, in
                                                          Book VIII, Chapter 4
good faith.
We strive to create an environment in which others feel
                                                            Book VI, Chapter 2
safe to tell the truth.
Honesty Mandatory Standards

We do not engage in or condone behavior that is designed to deceive others, including but not       Book VII,
limited to, making misleading or false statements, stating half-truths, providing information out   Chapter
of context or withholding information that, if known, would render our statements as                3Book VIII,
misleading or incomplete.                                                                           Chapter 3
We do not engage in dishonest behavior with the intention of personal gain or at the expense        Book VIII,
of another.                                                                                         Chapter 4
            Appendix E: Glossary
1. Inclusions and Exclusions
 This glossary includes terms that are:
    Unique or nearly unique to project management (e.g., project scope
    statement, work package, work breakdown structure, critical path method).
    Not unique to project management, but used differently or with a
    narrower meaning in project management than in general everyday usage
    (e.g., early start date).
 This glossary generally does not include:
    Application area-specific terms.
    Terms used in project management which do not differ in any material
    way from everyday use (e.g., calendar day, delay).
     Compound terms whose meaning is clear from the combined meanings of
    the component parts.
     Variants when the meaning of the variant is clear from the base term.
 As a result of the above inclusions and exclusions, this glossary includes:
     A preponderance of terms related to Project Scope Management, Project
    Time Management, and Project Risk Management, since many of the
    terms used in these Knowledge Areas are unique or nearly unique to
    project management.
    Many terms from Project Quality Management, since these terms are used
    more narrowly than in their everyday usage.
    Relatively few terms related to Project Human Resource Management,
    Project Communications Management, and Project Stakeholder
    Management, since most of the terms used in these Knowledge Areas do
    not differ significantly from everyday usage.
    Relatively few terms related to Project Cost Management, Project
    Integration Management, and Project Procurement Management, since
   many of the terms used in these Knowledge Areas have narrow meanings
   that are unique to a particular application area.


2. Common Acronyms
 AC       actual cost
 ACWP     actual cost of work performed
 BAC      budget at completion
 CCB      change control board
 COQ      cost of quality
 CPAF     cost plus award fee
 CPFF     cost plus fixed fee
 CPI      cost performance index
 CPIF     cost plus incentive fee
 CPM      critical path methodology
 CV       cost variance
 EAC      estimate at completion
 EF       early finish date
 EMV      expected monetary value
 ES       early start date
 ETC      estimate to complete
 EV       earned value
 EVM      earned value management
 FF       finish-to-finish
 FFP      firm fixed price contract
 FMEA     failure mode and effect analysis
 FP-EPA fixed price with economic price adjustment
 FPIF     fixed price incentive fee
 FS       finish to start
 IFB      invitation for bid
 LF       late finish date
  LOE      level of effort
  LS       late start date
  OBS      organizational breakdown structure
  PDM      precedence diagramming method
  PMBOK Project Management Body of Knowledge
  PV       planned value
  QFD      quality function deployment
  RACI     responsible, accountable, consult, and inform
  RAM      responsibility assignment matrix
  RBS      risk breakdown structure
  RFI      request for information
  RFP      request for proposal
  RFQ      request for quotation
  SF       start-to-finish
  SOW      statement of work
  SPI      schedule performance index
  SS       start-to-start
  SV       schedule variance
  SWOT     strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
  T&M      time and material contract
  WBS      work breakdown structure


3. Definitions
 Many of the words defined here have broader, and in some cases different,
 dictionary definitions.
 The definitions use the following conventions:
    In some cases, a single glossary term consists of multiple words (e.g., risk
    urgency assessment).
    When synonyms are included, no definition is given and the reader is
    directed to the preferred term (i.e., see preferred term).
   Related terms that are not synonyms are cross-referenced at the end of the
   definition (i.e., see also related term).
Acceptance Criteria. A set of conditions that is required to be met before
deliverables are accepted.
Accepted Deliverables. Products, results, or capabilities produced by a
project and validated by the project customer or sponsors as meeting their
specified acceptance criteria.
Accuracy. Within the quality management system, accuracy is an assessment
of correctness.
Acquire Project Team. The process of confirming human resource
availability and obtaining the team necessary to complete project activities.
Acquisition. Obtaining human and material resources necessary to perform
project activities. Acquisition implies a cost of resources, and is not
necessarily financial.
Activity. A distinct, scheduled portion of work performed during the course
of a project.
Activity Attributes. Multiple attributes associated with each schedule
activity that can be included within the activity list. Activity attributes include
activity codes, predecessor activities, successor activities, logical
relationships, leads and lags, resource requirements, imposed dates,
constraints, and assumptions.
Activity Code. One or more numerical or text values that identify
characteristics of the work or in some way categorize the schedule activity
that allows filtering and ordering of activities within reports.
Activity Cost Estimates. The projected cost of the schedule activity that
includes the cost for all resources required to perform and complete the
activity, including all cost types and cost components.
Activity Duration. The time in calendar units between the start and finish of
a schedule activity. See also duration.
Activity Duration Estimate. A quantitative assessment of the likely amount
or outcome for the duration of an activity.
Activity Identifier. A short, unique numeric or text identification assigned to
each schedule activity to differentiate that project activity from other
activities. Typically unique within any one project schedule network diagram.
Activity List. A documented tabulation of schedule activities that shows the
activity description, activity identifier, and a sufficiently detailed scope of
work description so project team members understand what work is to be
performed.
Activity Network Diagrams. See project schedule network diagram.
Activity-on-Node (AON). See precedence diagramming method (PDM).
Activity Resource Requirements. The types and quantities of resources
required for each activity in a work package.
Actual Cost (AC). The realized cost incurred for the work performed on an
activity during a specific time period.
Actual Duration. The time in calendar units between the actual start date of
the schedule activity and either the data date of the project schedule if the
schedule activity is in progress or the actual finish date if the schedule
activity is complete.
Adaptive Life Cycle. A project life cycle, also known as change-driven or
agile methods, that is intended to facilitate change and require a high degree
of ongoing stakeholder involvement. Adaptive life cycles are also iterative
and incremental, but differ in that iterations are very rapid (usually 2-4 weeks
in length) and are fixed in time and resources.
Additional Quality Planning Tools. A set of tools used to define the quality
requirements and to plan effective quality management activities. They
include, but are not limited to: brainstorming, force field analysis, nominal
group techniques and quality management and control tools.
Adjusting Leads and Lags. A technique used to find ways to bring project
activities that are behind into alignment with plan during project execution.
Advertising. The process of calling public attention to a project or effort.
Affinity Diagram. A group creativity technique that allows large numbers of
ideas to be classified into groups for review and analysis.
Agreements. Any document or communication that defines the initial
intentions of a project. This can take the form of a contract, memorandum of
understanding (MOU), letters of agreement, verbal agreements, email, etc.
Alternative Analysis. A technique used to evaluate identified options in
order to select which options or approaches to use to execute and perform the
work of the project.
Alternatives Generation. A technique used to develop as many potential
options as possible in order to identify different approaches to execute and
perform the work of the project.
Analogous Estimating. A technique for estimating the duration or cost of an
activity or a project using historical data from a similar activity or project.
Analytical Techniques. Various techniques used to evaluate, analyze, or
forecast potential outcomes based on possible variations of project or
environmental variables and their relationships with other variables.
Application Area. A category of projects that have common components
significant in such projects, but are not needed or present in all projects.
Application areas are usually defined in terms of either the product (i.e., by
similar technologies or production methods) or the type of customer (i.e.,
internal versus external, government versus commercial) or industry sector
(i.e., utilities, automotive, aerospace, information technologies, etc.).
Application areas can overlap.
Applying Leads and Lags. A technique that is used to adjust the amount of
time between predecessor and successor activities.
Apportioned Effort. An activity where effort is allotted proportionately
across certain discrete efforts and not divisible into discrete efforts. [Note:
Apportioned effort is one of three earned value management (EVM) types of
activities used to measure work performance.]
Approved Change Request. A change request that has been processed
through the integrated change control process and approved.
Approved Change Requests Review. A review of the change requests to
verify that these were implemented as approved.
Assumption. A factor in the planning process that is considered to be true,
real, or certain, without proof or demonstration.
Assumptions Analysis. A technique that explores the accuracy of
assumptions and identifies risks to the project from inaccuracy, inconsistency,
or incompleteness of assumptions.
Attribute Sampling. Method of measuring quality that consists of noting the
presence (or absence) of some characteristic (attribute) in each of the units
under consideration. After each unit is inspected, the decision is made to
accept a lot, reject it, or inspect another unit.
Authority. The right to apply project resources, expend funds, make
decisions, or give approvals.
Backlog. A listing of product requirements and deliverables to be completed,
written as stories, and prioritized by the business to manage and organize the
project's work.
Backward Pass. A critical path method technique for calculating the late
start and late finish dates by working backward through the schedule model
from the project end date.
Bar Chart. A graphic display of schedule-related information. In the typical
bar chart, schedule activities or work breakdown structure components are
listed down the left side of the chart, dates are shown across the top, and
activity durations are shown as date-placed horizontal bars. See also Gantt
chart.
Baseline. The approved version of a work product that can be changed only
through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for
comparison.
Basis of Estimates. Supporting documentation outlining the details used in
establishing project estimates such as assumptions, constraints, level of detail,
ranges, and confidence levels.
Benchmarking. Benchmarking is the comparison of actual or planned
practices, such as processes and operations, to those of comparable
organizations to identify best practices, generate ideas for improvement, and
provide a basis for measuring performance.
Bidder Conference. The meetings with prospective sellers prior to the
preparation of a bid or proposal to ensure all prospective vendors have a clear
and common understanding of the procurement. Also known as contractor
conferences, vendor conferences, or pre-bid conferences.
Bottom-Up Estimating. A method of estimating project duration or cost by
aggregating the estimates of the lower-level components of the work
breakdown structure (WBS).
Brainstorming. A general data gathering and creativity technique that can be
used to identify risks, ideas, or solutions to issues by using a group of team
members or subject matter experts.
Budget. The approved estimate for the project or any work breakdown
structure component or any schedule activity.
Budget at Completion (BAC). The sum of all budgets established for the
work to be performed.
Buffer. See reserve.
Business Case. A documented economic feasibility study used to establish
validity of the benefits of a selected component lacking sufficient definition
and that is used as a basis for the authorization of further project management
activities.
Business Value. A concept that is unique to each organization and includes
tangible and intangible elements. Through the effective use of project,
program, and portfolio management disciplines, organizations will possess
the ability to employ reliable, established processes to meet enterprise
objectives and obtain greater business value from their investments.
Buyer. The acquirer of products, services, or results for an organization.
Cause and Effect Diagram. A decomposition technique that helps trace an
undesirable effect back to its root cause.
Central Tendency. A property of the central limit theorem predicting that the
data observations in a distribution will tend to group around a central
location. The three typical measures of central tendency are the mean,
median, and mode.
Change Control. A process whereby modifications to documents,
deliverables, or baselines associated with the project are identified,
documented, approved, or rejected.
Change Control Board (CCB). A formally chartered group responsible for
reviewing, evaluating, approving, delaying, or rejecting changes to the
project, and for recording and communicating such decisions.
Change Control System. A set of procedures that describes how
modifications to the project deliverables and documentation are managed and
controlled.
Change Control Tools. Manual or automated tools to assist with change
and/or configuration management. At a minimum, the tools should support
the activities of the CCB.
Change Log. A comprehensive list of changes made during the project. This
typically includes dates of the change and impacts in terms of time, cost, and
risk.
Change Request. A formal proposal to modify any document, deliverable, or
baseline.
Charter. See project charter.
Checklist Analysis. A technique for systematically reviewing materials using
a list for accuracy and completeness.
Checksheets. A tally sheet that can be used as a checklist when gathering
data.
Claim. A request, demand, or assertion of rights by a seller against a buyer,
or vice versa, for consideration, compensation, or payment under the terms of
a legally binding contract, such as for a disputed change.
Claims Administration. The process of processing, adjudicating, and
communicating contract claims.
Close Procurements. The process of completing each project procurement.
Close Project or Phase. The process of finalizing all activities across all of
the Project Management Process Groups to formally complete a project or
phase.
Closed Procurements. Project contracts or other procurement agreements
that have been formally acknowledged by the proper authorizing agent as
being finalized and signed off.
Closing Process Group. Those processes performed to finalize all activities
across all Process Groups to formally close a project or phase.
Code of Accounts. A numbering system used to uniquely identify each
component of the work breakdown structure (WBS).
Collect Requirements. The process of determining, documenting, and
managing stakeholder needs and requirements to meet project objectives.
Colocation. An organizational placement strategy where the project team
members are physically located close to one another in order to improve
communication, working relationships, and productivity.
Communication Constraints. Restrictions on the content, timing, audience,
or individual who will deliver a communication usually stemming from
specific legislation or regulation, technology, or organizational policies.
Communication Methods. A systematic procedure, technique, or process
used to transfer information among project stakeholders.
Communication Models. A description, analogy or schematic used to
represent how the communication process will be performed for the project.
Communication Requirements Analysis. An analytical technique to
determine the information needs of the project stakeholders through
interviews, workshops, study of lessons learned from previous projects, etc.
Communication Technology. Specific tools, systems, computer programs,
etc., used to transfer information among project stakeholders.
Communications Management Plan. A component of the project, program,
or portfolio management plan that describes how, when, and by whom
information about the project will be administered and disseminated.
Compliance. A general concept of conforming to a rule, standard, law, or
requirement such that the assessment of compliance results in a binomial
result stated as "compliant" or "noncompliant."
Conduct Procurements. The process of obtaining seller responses, selecting
a seller, and awarding a contract.
Configuration Management System. A subsystem of the overall project
management system. It is a collection of formal documented procedures used
to apply technical and administrative direction and surveillance to: identify
and document the functional and physical characteristics of a product, result,
service, or component; control any changes to such characteristics; record and
report each change and its implementation status; and support the audit of the
products, results, or components to verify conformance to requirements. It
includes the documentation, tracking systems, and defined approval levels
necessary for authorizing and controlling changes.
Conflict Management. Handling, controlling, and guiding a conflictual
situation to achieve a resolution.
Conformance. Within the quality management system, conformance is a
general concept of delivering results that fall within the limits that define
acceptable variation for a quality requirement.
Conformance Work. In the cost of quality framework, conformance work is
done to compensate for imperfections that prevent organizations from
completing planned activities correctly as essential first-time work.
Conformance work consists of actions that are related to prevention and
inspection.
Constraint. A limiting factor that affects the execution of a project, program,
portfolio, or process.
Context Diagrams. A visual depiction of the product scope showing a
business system (process, equipment, computer system, etc.), and how people
and other systems (actors) interact with it.
Contingency. An event or occurrence that could affect the execution of the
project that may be accounted for with a reserve.
Contingency Allowance. See reserve.
Contingency Reserve. Budget within the cost baseline or performance
measurement baseline that is allocated for identified risks that are accepted
and for which contingent or mitigating responses are developed.
Contingent Response Strategies. Responses provided which may be used in
the event that a specific trigger occurs.
Contract. A contract is a mutually binding agreement that obligates the seller
to provide the specified product or service or result and obligates the buyer to
pay for it.
Contract Change Control System. The system used to collect, track,
adjudicate, and communicate changes to a contract.
Control. Comparing actual performance with planned performance,
analyzing variances, assessing trends to effect process improvements,
evaluating possible alternatives, and recommending appropriate corrective
action as needed.
Control Account. A management control point where scope, budget, actual
cost, and schedule are integrated and compared to earned value for
performance measurement.
Control Chart. A graphic display of process data over time and against
established control limits, which has a centerline that assists in detecting a
trend of plotted values toward either control limit.
Control Communications. The process of monitoring and controlling
communications throughout the entire project life cycle to ensure the
information needs of the project stakeholders are met.
Control Costs. The process of monitoring the status of the project to update
the project costs and managing changes to the cost baseline.
Control Limits. The area composed of three standard deviations on either
side of the centerline or mean of a normal distribution of data plotted on a
control chart, which reflects the expected variation in the data. See also
specification limits.
Control Procurements. The process of managing procurement relationships,
monitoring contract performance, and making changes and corrections as
appropriate.
Control Quality. The process of monitoring and recording results of
executing the quality activities to assess performance and recommend
necessary changes.
Control Risks. The process of implementing risk response plans, tracking
identified risks, monitoring residual risks, identifying new risks, and
evaluating risk process effectiveness throughout the project.
Control Schedule. The process of monitoring the status of project activities
to update project progress and manage changes to the schedule baseline to
achieve the plan.
Control Scope. The process of monitoring the status of the project and
product scope and managing changes to the scope baseline.
Control Stakeholder Engagement. The process of monitoring overall
project stakeholder relationships and adjusting strategies and plans for
engaging stakeholders.
Corrective Action. An intentional activity that realigns the performance of
the project work with the project management plan.
Cost Aggregation. Summing the lower-level cost estimates associated with
the various work packages for a given level within the project's WBS or for a
given cost control account.
Cost Baseline. The approved version of the time-phased project budget,
excluding any management reserves, which can be changed only through
formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for comparison to
actual results.
Cost Management Plan. A component of a project or program management
plan that describes how costs will be planned, structured, and controlled.
Cost of Quality. A method of determining the costs incurred to ensure
quality. Prevention and appraisal costs (cost of conformance) include costs
for quality planning, quality control (QC), and quality assurance to ensure
compliance to requirements (i.e., training, QC systems, etc.). Failure costs
(cost of nonconformance) include costs to rework products, components, or
processes that are noncompliant, costs of warranty work and waste, and loss
of reputation.
Cost Performance Index (CPI). A measure of the cost efficiency of
budgeted resources expressed as the ratio of earned value to actual cost.
Cost Plus Award Fee Contracts (CPAF). A category of contract that
involves payments to the seller for all legitimate actual costs incurred for
completed work, plus an award fee representing seller profit.
Cost Plus Fixed Fee Contract (CPFF). A type of cost-reimbursable contract
where the buyer reimburses the seller for the seller's allowable costs
(allowable costs are defined by the contract) plus a fixed amount of profit
(fee).
Cost Plus Incentive Fee Contract (CPIF). A type of cost-reimbursable
contract where the buyer reimburses the seller for the seller's allowable costs
(allowable costs are defined by the contract), and the seller earns its profit if it
meets defined performance criteria.
Cost Variance (CV). The amount of budget deficit or surplus at a given point
in time, expressed as the difference between the earned value and the actual
cost.
Cost-Benefit Analysis. A financial analysis tool used to determine the
benefits provided by a project against its costs.
Cost-Reimbursable Contract. A type of contract involving payment to the
seller for the seller's actual costs, plus a fee typically representing seller's
profit. Cost-reimbursable contracts often include incentive clauses where, if
the seller meets or exceeds selected project objectives, such as schedule
targets or total cost, then the seller receives from the buyer an incentive or
bonus payment.
Crashing. A technique used to shorten the schedule duration for the least
incremental cost by adding resources.
Create WBS. The process of subdividing project deliverables and project
work into smaller, more manageable components.
Criteria. Standards, rules, or tests on which a judgment or decision can be
based or by which a product, service, result, or process can be evaluated.
Critical Chain Method. A schedule method that allows the project team to
place buffers on any project schedule path to account for limited resources
and project uncertainties.
Critical Path. The sequence of activities that represents the longest path
through a project, which determines the shortest possible duration.
Critical Path Activity. Any activity on the critical path in a project schedule.
Critical Path Method. A method used to estimate the minimum project
duration and determine the amount of scheduling flexibility on the logical
network paths within the schedule model.
Customer. Customer is the person(s) or organization(s) that will pay for the
project's product, service, or result. Customers can be internal or external to
the performing organization.
Customer Satisfaction. Within the quality management system, a state of
fulfillment in which the needs of a customer are met or exceeded for the
customer's expected experiences as assessed by the customer at the moment
of evaluation.
Data Date. A point in time when the status of the project is recorded.
Data Gathering and Representation Techniques. Techniques used to
collect, organize, and present data and information.
Decision Tree Analysis. A diagramming and calculation technique for
evaluating the implications of a chain of multiple options in the presence of
uncertainty.
Decomposition. A technique used for dividing and subdividing the project
scope and project deliverables into smaller, more manageable parts.
Defect. An imperfection or deficiency in a project component where that
component does not meet its requirements or specifications and needs to be
either repaired or replaced.
Defect Repair. An intentional activity to modify a nonconforming product or
product component.
Define Activities. The process of identifying and documenting the specific
actions to be performed to produce the project deliverables.
Define Scope. The process of developing a detailed description of the project
and product.
Deliverable. Any unique and verifiable product, result, or capability to
perform a service that is required to be produced to complete a process,
phase, or project.
Delphi Technique. An information gathering technique used as a way to
reach a consensus of experts on a subject. Experts on the subject participate
in this technique anonymously. A facilitator uses a questionnaire to solicit
ideas about the important project points related to the subject. The responses
are summarized and are then recirculated to the experts for further comment.
Consensus may be reached in a few rounds of this process. The Delphi
technique helps reduce bias in the data and keeps any one person from having
undue influence on the outcome.
Dependency. See logical relationship.
Dependency Determination. A technique used to identify the type of
dependency that is used to create the logical relationships between
predecessor and successor activities.
Design of Experiments. A statistical method for identifying which factors
may influence specific variables of a product or process under development
or in production.
Determine Budget. The process of aggregating the estimated costs of
individual activities or work packages to establish an authorized cost
baseline.
Develop Project Charter. The process of developing a document that
formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project
manager with the authority to apply organizational resources to project
activities.
Develop Project Management Plan. The process of defining, preparing, and
coordinating all subsidiary plans and integrating them into a comprehensive
project management plan.
Develop Project Team. The process of improving competencies, team
member interaction, and overall team environment to enhance project
performance.
Develop Schedule. The process of analyzing activity sequences, durations,
resource requirements, and schedule constraints to create the project schedule
model.
Diagramming Techniques. Approaches to presenting information with
logical linkages that aid in understanding.
Dictatorship. A group decision-making technique in which one individual
makes the decision for the group.
Direct and Manage Project Work. The process of leading and performing
the work defined in the project management plan and implementing approved
changes to achieve the project's objectives.
Discrete Effort. An activity that can be planned and measured and that yields
a specific output. [Note: Discrete effort is one of three earned value
management (EVM) types of activities used to measure work performance.]
Discretionary Dependency. A relationship that is established based on
knowledge of best practices within a particular application area or an aspect
of the project where a specific sequence is desired.
Document Analysis. An elicitation technique that analyzes existing
documentation and identifies information relevant to the requirements.
Documentation Reviews. The process of gathering a corpus of information
and reviewing it to determine accuracy and completeness.
Duration (DU or DUR). The total number of work periods (not including
holidays or other nonworking periods) required to complete a schedule
activity or work breakdown structure component. Usually expressed as
workdays or workweeks. Sometimes incorrectly equated with elapsed time.
Contrast with effort.
Early Finish Date (EF). In the critical path method, the earliest possible
point in time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can finish
based on the schedule network logic, the data date, and any schedule
constraints.
Early Start Date (ES). In the critical path method, the earliest possible point
in time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can start based
on the schedule network logic, the data date, and any schedule constraints.
Earned Value (EV). The measure of work performed expressed in terms of
the budget authorized for that work.
Earned Value Management. A methodology that combines scope, schedule,
and resource measurements to assess project performance and progress.
Effort. The number of labor units required to complete a schedule activity or
work breakdown structure component, often expressed in hours, days, or
weeks.
Emotional Intelligence. The capability to identify, assess, and manage the
personal emotions of oneself and other people, as well as the collective
emotions of groups of people.
Enterprise Environmental Factors. Conditions, not under the immediate
control of the team, that influence, constrain, or direct the project, program,
or portfolio.
Estimate. A quantitative assessment of the likely amount or outcome.
Usually applied to project costs, resources, effort, and durations and is usually
preceded by a modifier (i.e., preliminary, conceptual, feasibility, order-of-
magnitude, definitive). It should always include some indication of accuracy
(e.g.,  x percent). See also budget and cost.
Estimate Activity Durations. The process of estimating the number of work
periods needed to complete individual activities with estimated resources.
Estimate Activity Resources. The process of estimating the type and
quantities of material, human resources, equipment, or supplies required to
perform each activity.
Estimate at Completion (EAC). The expected total cost of completing all
work expressed as the sum of the actual cost to date and the estimate to
complete.
Estimate Costs. The process of developing an approximation of the
monetary resources needed to complete project activities.
Estimate to Complete (ETC). The expected cost to finish all the remaining
project work.
Execute. Directing, managing, performing, and accomplishing the project
work; providing the deliverables; and providing work performance
information.
Executing Process Group. Those processes performed to complete the work
defined in the project management plan to satisfy the project specifications.
Expected Monetary Value (EMV) Analysis. A statistical technique that
calculates the average outcome when the future includes scenarios that may
or may not happen. A common use of this technique is within decision tree
analysis.
Expert Judgment. Judgment provided based upon expertise in an application
area, knowledge area, discipline, industry, etc., as appropriate for the activity
being performed. Such expertise may be provided by any group or person
with specialized education, knowledge, skill, experience, or training.
External Dependency. A relationship between project activities and non-
project activities.
Facilitated Workshops. An elicitation technique using focused sessions that
bring key cross-functional stakeholders together to define product
requirements.
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA). An analytical procedure in
which each potential failure mode in every component of a product is
analyzed to determine its effect on the reliability of that component and, by
itself or in combination with other possible failure modes, on the reliability of
the product or system and on the required function of the component; or the
examination of a product (at the system and/or lower levels) for all ways that
a failure may occur. For each potential failure, an estimate is made of its
effect on the total system and of its impact. In addition, a review is
undertaken of the action planned to minimize the probability of failure and to
minimize its effects.
Fallback Plan. Fallback plans include an alternative set of actions and tasks
available in the event that the primary plan needs to be abandoned because of
issues, risks, or other causes.
Fast Tracking. A schedule compression technique in which activities or
phases normally done in sequence are performed in parallel for at least a
portion of their duration.
Fee. Represents profit as a component of compensation to a seller.
Finish Date. A point in time associated with a schedule activity's completion.
Usually qualified by one of the following: actual, planned, estimated,
scheduled, early, late, baseline, target, or current.
Finish-to-Finish (FF). A logical relationship in which a successor activity
cannot finish until a predecessor activity has finished.
Finish-to-Start (FS). A logical relationship in which a successor activity
cannot start until a predecessor activity has finished.
Firm-Fixed-Price Contract (FFP). A type of fixed price contract where the
buyer pays the seller a set amount (as defined by the contract), regardless of
the seller's costs.
Fishbone diagram. See Cause and Effect Diagram.
Fixed Formula Method. An earned value method for assigning a specified
percentage of budget value for a work package to the start milestone of the
work package with the remaining budget value percentage assigned when the
work package is complete.
Fixed Price Incentive Fee Contract (FPIF). A type of contract where the
buyer pays the seller a set amount (as defined by the contract), and the seller
can earn an additional amount if the seller meets defined performance
criteria.
Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment Contracts (FP-EPA). A
fixed-price contract, but with a special provision allowing for predefined final
adjustments to the contract price due to changed conditions, such as inflation
changes, or cost increases (or decreases) for specific commodities.
Fixed-Price Contracts. An agreement that sets the fee that will be paid for a
defined scope of work regardless of the cost or effort to deliver it.
Float. Also called slack. See total float and free float.
Flowchart. The depiction in a diagram format of the inputs, process actions,
and outputs of one or more processes within a system.
Focus Groups. An elicitation technique that brings together prequalified
stakeholders and subject matter experts to learn about their expectations and
attitudes about a proposed product, service, or result.
Forecast. An estimate or prediction of conditions and events in the project's
future based on information and knowledge available at the time of the
forecast. The information is based on the project's past performance and
expected future performance, and includes information that could impact the
project in the future, such as estimate at completion and estimate to complete.
Forward Pass. A critical path method technique for calculating the early start
and early finish dates by working forward through the schedule model from
the project start date or a given point in time.
Free Float. The amount of time that a schedule activity can be delayed
without delaying the early start date of any successor or violating a schedule
constraint.
Functional Manager. Someone with management authority over an
organizational unit within a functional organization. The manager of any
group that actually makes a product or performs a service. Sometimes called
a line manager.
Functional Organization. A hierarchical organization where each employee
has one clear superior, and staff are grouped by areas of specialization and
managed by a person with expertise in that area.
Funding Limit Reconciliation. The process of comparing the planned
expenditure of project funds against any limits on the commitment of funds
for the project to identify any variances between the funding limits and the
planned expenditures.
Gantt Chart. A bar chart of schedule information where activities are listed
on the vertical axis, dates are shown on the horizontal axis, and activity
durations are shown as horizontal bars placed according to start and finish
dates.
Grade. A category or rank used to distinguish items that have the same
functional use (e.g., "hammer") but do not share the same requirements for
quality (e.g., different hammers may need to withstand different amounts of
force).
Ground Rules. Expectations regarding acceptable behavior by project team
members.
Group Creativity Techniques. Techniques that are used to generate ideas
within a group of stakeholders.
Group Decision-Making Techniques. Techniques to assess multiple
alternatives that will be used to generate, classify, and prioritize product
requirements.
Guideline. An official recommendation or advice that indicates policies,
standards, or procedures for how something should be accomplished.
Hammock Activity. See summary activity.
Hard Logic. See mandatory dependency.
Histogram. A special form of bar chart used to describe the central tendency,
dispersion, and shape of a statistical distribution.
Historical Information. Documents and data on prior projects including
project files, records, correspondence, closed contracts, and closed projects.
Human Resource Management Plan. A component of the project
management plan that describes how the roles and responsibilities, reporting
relationships, and staff management will be addressed and structured.
Idea/Mind Mapping. Technique used to consolidate ideas created through
individual brainstorming sessions into a single map to reflect commonality
and differences in understanding and to generate new ideas.
Identify Risks. The process of determining which risks may affect the project
and documenting their characteristics.
Identify Stakeholders. The process of identifying the people, groups, or
organizations that could impact or be impacted by a decision, activity, or
outcome of the project; and analyzing and documenting relevant information
regarding their interests, involvement, interdependencies, influence, and
potential impact on project success.
Imposed Date. A fixed date imposed on a schedule activity or schedule
milestone, usually in the form of a "start no earlier than" and "finish no later
than" date.
Incentive Fee. A set of financial incentives related to cost, schedule, or
technical performance of the seller.
Incremental Life Cycle. A project life cycle where the project scope is
generally determined early in the project life cycle, but time and cost
estimates are routinely modified as the project team's understanding of the
product increases. Iterations develop the product through a series of repeated
cycles, while increments successively add to the functionality of the product.
Independent Estimates. A process of using a third party to obtain and
analyze information to support prediction of cost, schedule, or other items.
Influence Diagram. A graphical representation of situations showing causal
influences, time ordering of events, and other relationships among variables
and outcomes.
Information Gathering Techniques. Repeatable processes used to assemble
and organize data across a spectrum of sources.
Information Management Systems. Facilities, processes, and procedures
used to collect, store, and distribute information between producers and
consumers of information in physical or electronic format.
Initiating Process Group. Those processes performed to define a new
project or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to
start the project or phase.
Input. Any item, whether internal or external to the project that is required by
a process before that process proceeds. May be an output from a predecessor
process.
Inspection. Examining or measuring to verify whether an activity,
component, product, result, or service conforms to specified requirements.
Inspections and Audits. A process to observe performance of contracted
work or a promised product against agreed-upon requirements.
Interpersonal Skills. Ability to establish and maintain relationships with
other people.
Interrelationship Digraphs. A quality management planning tool, the
interrelationship digraphs provide a process for creative problem-solving in
moderately complex scenarios that possess intertwined logical relationships.
Interviews. A formal or informal approach to elicit information from
stakeholders by talking to them directly.
Invitation for Bid (IFB). Generally, this term is equivalent to request for
proposal. However, in some application areas, it may have a narrower or
more specific meaning.
Issue. A point or matter in question or in dispute, or a point or matter that is
not settled and is under discussion or over which there are opposing views or
disagreements.
Issue Log. A project document used to document and monitor elements under
discussion or in dispute between project stakeholders.
Iterative Life Cycle. A project life cycle where the project scope is generally
determined early in the project life cycle, but time and cost estimates are
routinely modified as the project team's understanding of the product
increases. Iterations develop the product through a series of repeated cycles,
while increments successively add to the functionality of the product.
Lag. The amount of time whereby a successor activity is required to be
delayed with respect to a predecessor activity.
Late Finish Date (LF). In the critical path method, the latest possible point
in time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can finish based
on the schedule network logic, the project completion date, and any schedule
constraints.
Late Start Date (LS). In the critical path method, the latest possible point in
time when the uncompleted portions of a schedule activity can start based on
the schedule network logic, the project completion date, and any schedule
constraints.
Lead. The amount of time whereby a successor activity can be advanced with
respect to a predecessor activity.
Lessons Learned. The knowledge gained during a project which shows how
project events were addressed or should be addressed in the future with the
purpose of improving future performance.
Lessons Learned Knowledge Base. A store of historical information and
lessons learned about both the outcomes of previous project selection
decisions and previous project performance.
Level of Effort (LOE). An activity that does not produce definitive end
products and is measured by the passage of time. [Note: Level of effort is one
of three earned valued management (EVM) types of activities used to
measure work performance.]
Leveling. See resource leveling.
Life Cycle. See project life cycle.
Log. A document used to record and describe or denote selected items
identified during execution of a process or activity. Usually used with a
modifier, such as issue, quality control, action, or defect.
Logical Relationship. A dependency between two activities, or between an
activity and a milestone.
Majority. Support from more than 50 percent of the members of the group.
Make-or-Buy Analysis. The process of gathering and organizing data about
product requirements and analyzing them against available alternatives
including the purchase or internal manufacture of the product.
Make-or-Buy Decisions. Decisions made regarding the external purchase or
internal manufacture of a product.
Manage Communications. The process of creating, collecting, distributing,
storing, retrieving, and the ultimate disposition of project information in
accordance with the communications management plan.
Manage Project Team. The process of tracking team member performance,
providing feedback, resolving issues, and managing team changes to optimize
project performance.
Manage Stakeholder Engagement. The process of communicating and
working with stakeholders to meet their needs/expectations, address issues as
they occur, and foster appropriate stakeholder engagement in project
activities throughout the project life cycle.
Management Reserve. An amount of the project budget withheld for
management control purposes. These are budgets reserved for unforeseen
work that is within scope of the project. The management reserve is not
included in the performance measurement baseline (PMB).
Management Skills. The ability to plan, organize, direct, and control
individuals or groups of people to achieve specific goals.
Mandatory Dependency. A relationship that is contractually required or
inherent in the nature of the work.
Market Research. The process of gathering information at conferences,
online reviews, and a variety of sources to identify market capabilities.
Master Schedule. A summary-level project schedule that identifies the major
deliverables and work breakdown structure components and key schedule
milestones. See also milestone schedule.
Material. The aggregate of things used by an organization in any
undertaking, such as equipment, apparatus, tools, machinery, gear, material,
and supplies.
Matrix Diagrams. A quality management and control tool used to perform
data analysis within the organizational structure created in the matrix. The
matrix diagram seeks to show the strength of relationships between factors,
causes, and objectives that exist between the rows and columns that form the
matrix.
Matrix Organization. Any organizational structure in which the project
manager shares responsibility with the functional managers for assigning
priorities and for directing the work of persons assigned to the project.
Methodology. A system of practices, techniques, procedures, and rules used
by those who work in a discipline.
Milestone. A significant point or event in a project, program, or portfolio.
Milestone List. A list identifying all project milestones and normally
indicates whether the milestone is mandatory or optional.
Milestone Schedule. A summary-level schedule that identifies the major
schedule milestones. See also master schedule.
Monitor. Collect project performance data with respect to a plan, produce
performance measures, and report and disseminate performance information.
Monitor and Control Project Work. The process of tracking, reviewing,
and reporting the progress to meet the performance objectives defined in the
project management plan.
Monitoring and Controlling Process Group. Those processes required to
track, review, and regulate the progress and performance of the project;
identify any areas in which changes to the plan are required; and initiate the
corresponding changes.
Monte Carlo Analysis. A technique that computes or iterates the project cost
or project schedule many times using input values selected at random from
probability distributions of possible costs or durations, to calculate a
distribution of possible total project cost or completion dates.
Monte Carlo Simulation. A process which generates hundreds or thousands
of probable performance outcomes based on probability distributions for cost
and schedule on individual tasks. The outcomes are then used to generate a
probability distribution for the project as a whole.
Most Likely Duration. An estimate of the most probable activity duration
that takes into account all of the known variables that could affect
performance.
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis. This technique utilizes a decision matrix
to provide a systematic analytical approach for establishing criteria, such as
risk levels, uncertainty, and valuation, to evaluate and rank many ideas.
Near-Critical Activity. A schedule activity that has low total float. The
concept of near-critical is equally applicable to a schedule activity or
schedule network path. The limit below which total float is considered near
critical is subject to expert judgment and varies from project to project.
Negotiated Settlements. The process of reaching final equitable settlement
of all outstanding issues, claims, and disputes through negotiation.
Negotiation. The process and activities to resolving disputes through
consultations between involved parties.
Network. See project schedule network diagram.
Network Analysis. See schedule network analysis.
Network Logic. The collection of schedule activity dependencies that makes
up a project schedule network diagram.
Network Path. Any continuous series of schedule activities connected with
logical relationships in a project schedule network diagram.
Networking. Establishing connections and relationships with other people
from the same or other organizations.
Node. One of the defining points of a schedule network; a junction point
joined to some or all of the other dependency lines.
Nominal Group Technique. A technique that enhances brainstorming with a
voting process used to rank the most useful ideas for further brainstorming or
for prioritization.
Nonconformance Work. In the cost of quality framework, nonconformance
work is done to deal with the consequences of errors and failures in doing
activities correctly on the first attempt. In efficient quality management
systems, the amount of nonconformance work will approach zero.
Objective. Something toward which work is to be directed, a strategic
position to be attained, a purpose to be achieved, a result to be obtained, a
product to be produced, or a service to be performed.
Observations. A technique that provides a direct way of viewing individuals
in their environment performing their jobs or tasks and carrying out
processes.
Opportunity. A risk that would have a positive effect on one or more project
objectives.
Optimistic Duration. An estimate of the shortest activity duration that takes
into account all of the known variables that could affect performance.
Organizational Breakdown Structure (OBS). A hierarchical representation
of the project organization that illustrates the relationship between project
activities and the organizational units that will perform those activities.
Organizational Process Assets. Plans, processes, policies, procedures, and
knowledge bases that are specific to and used by the performing organization.
Organizational Project Management Maturity. The level of an
organization's ability to deliver the desired strategic outcomes in a
predictable, controllable, and reliable manner.
Output. A product, result, or service generated by a process. May be an input
to a successor process.
Parametric Estimating. An estimating technique in which an algorithm is
used to calculate cost or duration based on historical data and project
parameters.
Pareto Diagram. A histogram, ordered by frequency of occurrence, that
shows how many results were generated by each identified cause.
Path Convergence. A relationship in which a schedule activity has more than
one predecessor.
Path Divergence. A relationship in which a schedule activity has more than
one successor.
Payment Systems. The system used to provide and track supplier's invoices
and payments for services and products.
Percent Complete. An estimate expressed as a percent of the amount of
work that has been completed on an activity or a work breakdown structure
component.
Perform Integrated Change Control. The process of reviewing all change
requests; approving changes and managing changes to deliverables,
organizational process assets, project documents, and the project management
plan; and communicating their disposition.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis. The process of prioritizing risks for
further analysis or action by assessing and combining their probability of
occurrence and impact.
Perform Quality Assurance. The process of auditing the quality
requirements and the results from quality control measurements to ensure that
appropriate quality standards and operational definitions are used.
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis. The process of numerically analyzing
the effect of identified risks on overall project objectives.
Performance Measurement Baseline. An approved, integrated scope-
schedule-cost plan for the project work against which project execution is
compared to measure and manage performance. The PMB includes
contingency reserve, but excludes management reserve.
Performance Reporting. See work performance reports.
Performance Reports. See work performance reports.
Performance Reviews. A technique that is used to measure, compare, and
analyze actual performance of work in progress on the project against the
baseline.
Performing Organization. An enterprise whose personnel are most directly
involved in doing the work of the project or program.
Pessimistic Duration. Estimate of the longest activity duration that takes into
account all of the known variables that could affect performance.
Phase. See project phase.
Phase Gate. A review at the end of a phase in which a decision is made to
continue to the next phase, to continue with modification, or to end a project
or program.
Plan Communications Management. The process of developing an
appropriate approach and plan for project communications based on
stakeholder's information needs and requirements and available
organizational assets.
Plan Cost Management. The process that establishes the policies,
procedures, and documentation for planning, managing, expending, and
controlling project costs.
Plan Human Resource Management. The process of identifying and
documenting project roles, responsibilities, required skills, reporting
relationships, and creating a staffing management plan.
Plan Procurement Management. The process of documenting project
procurement decisions, specifying the approach, and identifying potential
sellers.
Plan Quality Management. The process of identifying quality requirements
and/or standards for the project and its deliverables, and documenting how
the project will demonstrate compliance with quality requirements.
Plan Risk Management. The process of defining how to conduct risk
management activities for a project.
Plan Risk Responses. The process of developing options and actions to
enhance opportunities and to reduce threats to project objectives.
Plan Schedule Management. The process of establishing the policies,
procedures, and documentation for planning, developing, managing,
executing, and controlling the project schedule.
Plan Scope Management. The process of creating a scope management plan
that documents how the project scope will be defined, validated, and
controlled.
Plan Stakeholder Management. The process of developing appropriate
management strategies to effectively engage stakeholders throughout the
project life cycle, based on the analysis of their needs, interests, and potential
impact on project success.
Planned Value (PV). The authorized budget assigned to scheduled work.
Planning Package. A work breakdown structure component below the
control account with known work content but without detailed schedule
activities. See also control account.
Planning Process Group. Those processes required to establish the scope of
the project, refine the objectives, and define the course of action required to
attain the objectives that the project was undertaken to achieve.
Plurality. Decisions made by the largest block in a group, even if a majority
is not achieved.
Policy. A structured pattern of actions adopted by an organization such that
the organization's policy can be explained as a set of basic principles that
govern the organization's conduct.
Portfolio. Projects, programs, subportfolios, and operations managed as a
group to achieve strategic objectives.
Portfolio Management. The centralized management of one or more
portfolios to achieve strategic objectives.
Practice. A specific type of professional or management activity that
contributes to the execution of a process and that may employ one or more
techniques and tools.
Precedence Diagramming Method (PDM). A technique used for
constructing a schedule model in which activities are represented by nodes
and are graphically linked by one or more logical relationships to show the
sequence in which the activities are to be performed.
Precedence Relationship. The term used in the precedence diagramming
method for a logical relationship. In current usage, however, precedence
relationship, logical relationship, and dependency are widely used
interchangeably, regardless of the diagramming method used. See also logical
relationship.
Precision. Within the quality management system, precision is a measure of
exactness.
Predecessor Activity. An activity that logically comes before a dependent
activity in a schedule.
Predictive Life Cycle. A form of project life cycle in which the project
scope, and the time and cost required to deliver that scope, are determined as
early in the life cycle as possible.
Preferential Logic. See discretionary dependency.
Preferred Logic. See discretionary dependency.
Preventive Action. An intentional activity that ensures the future
performance of the project work is aligned with the project management plan.
Prioritization Matrices. A quality management planning tool used to
identify key issues and evaluate suitable alternatives to define a set of
implementation priorities.
Probability and Impact Matrix. A grid for mapping the probability of each
risk occurrence and its impact on project objectives if that risk occurs.
Procedure. An established method of accomplishing a consistent
performance or result, a procedure typically can be described as the sequence
of steps that will be used to execute a process.
Process. A systematic series of activities directed towards causing an end
result such that one or more inputs will be acted upon to create one or more
outputs.
Process Analysis. A process analysis follows the steps outlined in the process
improvement plan to identify needed improvements.
Process Decision Program Charts (PDPC). The PDPC is used to
understand a goal in relation to the steps for getting to the goal.
Process Improvement Plan. A subsidiary plan of the project management
plan. It details the steps for analyzing processes to identify activities that
enhance their value.
Procurement Audits. The review of contracts and contracting processes for
completeness, accuracy, and effectiveness.
Procurement Documents. The documents utilized in bid and proposal
activities, which include the buyer's Invitation for Bid, Invitation for
Negotiations, Request for Information, Request for Quotation, Request for
Proposal, and seller's responses.
Procurement Management Plan. A component of the project or program
management plan that describes how a project team will acquire goods and
services from outside the performing organization.
Procurement Performance Reviews. A structured review of the seller's
progress to deliver project scope and quality, within cost and on schedule, as
compared to the contract.
Procurement Statement of Work. Describes the procurement item in
sufficient detail to allow prospective sellers to determine if they are capable
of providing the products, services, or results.
Product. An artifact that is produced, is quantifiable, and can be either an end
item in itself or a component item. Additional words for products are material
and goods. Contrast with result. See also deliverable.
Product Analysis. For projects that have a product as a deliverable, it is a
tool to define scope that generally means asking questions about a product
and forming answers to describe the use, characteristics, and other the
relevant aspects of what is going to be manufactured.
Product Life Cycle. The series of phases that represent the evolution of a
product, from concept through delivery, growth, maturity, and to retirement.
Product Scope. The features and functions that characterize a product,
service, or result.
Product Scope Description. The documented narrative description of the
product scope.
Program. A group of related projects, subprograms, and program activities
managed in a coordinated way to obtain benefits not available from managing
them individually.
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT). A technique for
estimating that applies a weighted average of optimistic, pessimistic, and
most likely estimates when there is uncertainty with the individual activity
estimates.
Program Management. The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and
techniques to a program to meet the program requirements and to obtain
benefits and control not available by managing projects individually.
Progressive Elaboration. The iterative process of increasing the level of
detail in a project management plan as greater amounts of information and
more accurate estimates become available.
Project. A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product,
service, or result.
Project-Based Organizations (PBOs). A variety of organizational forms that
involve the creation of temporary systems for the performance of projects.
PBOs conduct the majority of their activities as projects and/or provide
project over functional approaches.
Project Calendar. A calendar that identifies working days and shifts that are
available for scheduled activities.
Project Charter. A document issued by the project initiator or sponsor that
formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project
manager with the authority to apply organizational resources to project
activities.
Project Communications Management. Project Communications
Management includes the processes that are required to ensure timely and
appropriate planning, collection, creation, distribution, storage, retrieval,
management, control, monitoring, and the ultimate disposition of project
information.
Project Cost Management. Project Cost Management includes the processes
involved in planning, estimating, budgeting, financing, funding, managing,
and controlling costs so that the project can be completed within the approved
budget.
Project Funding Requirements. Forecast project costs to be paid that are
derived from the cost baseline for total or periodic requirements, including
projected expenditures plus anticipated liabilities.
Project Governance. The alignment of project objectives with the strategy of
the larger organization by the project sponsor and project team. A project's
governance is defined by and is required to fit within the larger context of the
program or organization sponsoring it, but is separate from organizational
governance.
Project Human Resource Management. Project Human Resource
Management includes the processes that organize, manage, and lead the
project team.
Project Initiation. Launching a process that can result in the authorization of
a new project.
Project Integration Management. Project Integration Management includes
the processes and activities needed to identify, define, combine, unify, and
coordinate the various processes and project management activities within the
Project Management Process Groups.
Project Life Cycle. The series of phases that a project passes through from
its initiation to its closure.
Project Management. The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and
techniques to project activities to meet the project requirements.
Project Management Body of Knowledge. An inclusive term that describes
the sum of knowledge within the profession of project management. As with
other professions, such as law, medicine, and accounting, the body of
knowledge rests with the practitioners and academics that apply and advance
it. The complete project management body of knowledge includes proven
traditional practices that are widely applied and innovative practices that are
emerging in the profession. The body of knowledge includes both published
and unpublished materials. This body of knowledge is constantly evolving.
PMI's PMBOK(R) Guide identifies a subset of the project management body of
knowledge that is generally recognized as good practice.
Project Management Information System. An information system
consisting of the tools and techniques used to gather, integrate, and
disseminate the outputs of project management processes. It is used to
support all aspects of the project from initiating through closing, and can
include both manual and automated systems.
Project Management Knowledge Area. An identified area of project
management defined by its knowledge requirements and described in terms
of its component processes, practices, inputs, outputs, tools, and techniques.
Project Management Office (PMO). An organizational structure that
standardizes the project-related governance processes and facilitates the
sharing of resources, methodologies, tools, and techniques.
Project Management Plan. The document that describes how the project
will be executed monitored, and controlled.
Project Management Process Group. A logical grouping of project
management inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. The Project
Management Process Groups include initiating processes, planning processes,
executing processes, monitoring and controlling processes, and closing
processes. Project Management Process Groups are not project phases.
Project Management Staff. The members of the project team who perform
project management activities such as schedule, communications, risk
management, etc.
Project Management System. The aggregation of the processes, tools,
techniques, methodologies, resources, and procedures to manage a project.
Project Management Team. The members of the project team who are
directly involved in project management activities. On some smaller projects,
the project management team may include virtually all of the project team
members.
Project Manager (PM). The person assigned by the performing organization
to lead the team that is responsible for achieving the project objectives.
Project Organization Chart. A document that graphically depicts the project
team members and their interrelationships for a specific project.
Project Phase. A collection of logically related project activities that
culminates in the completion of one or more deliverables.
Project Procurement Management. Project Procurement Management
includes the processes necessary to purchase or acquire products, services, or
results needed from outside the project team.
Project Quality Management. Project Quality Management includes the
processes and activities of the performing organization that determine quality
policies, objectives, and responsibilities so that the project will satisfy the
needs for which it was undertaken.
Project Risk Management. Project Risk Management includes the processes
of conducting risk management planning, identification, analysis, response
planning, and controlling risk on a project.
Project Schedule. An output of a schedule model that presents linked
activities with planned dates, durations, milestones, and resources.
Project Schedule Network Diagram. A graphical representation of the
logical relationships among the project schedule activities.
Project Scope. The work performed to deliver a product, service, or result
with the specified features and functions.
Project Scope Management. Project Scope Management includes the
processes required to ensure that the project includes all the work required,
and only the work required, to complete the project successfully.
Project Scope Statement. The description of the project scope, major
deliverables, assumptions, and constraints.
Project Stakeholder Management. Project Stakeholder Management
includes the processes required to identify all people or organizations
impacted by the project, analyzing stakeholder expectations and impact on
the project, and developing appropriate management strategies for effectively
engaging stakeholders in project decisions and execution.
Project Statement of Work. See statement of work.
Project Team. A set of individuals who support the project manager in
performing the work of the project to achieve its objectives.
Project Team Directory. A documented list of project team members, their
project roles, and communication information.
Project Time Management. Project Time Management includes the
processes required to manage the timely completion of the project.
Projectized Organization. Any organizational structure in which the project
manager has full authority to assign priorities, apply resources, and direct the
work of persons assigned to the project.
Proposal Evaluation Techniques. The process of reviewing proposals
provided by suppliers to support contract award decisions.
Prototypes. A method of obtaining early feedback on requirements by
providing a working model of the expected product before actually building
it.
Quality. The degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills
requirements.
Quality Audits. A quality audit is a structured, independent process to
determine if project activities comply with organizational and project
policies, processes, and procedures.
Quality Checklists. A structured tool used to verify that a set of required
steps has been performed.
Quality Control Measurements. The documented results of control quality
activities.
Quality Function Deployment (QFD). A facilitated workshop technique that
helps to determine critical characteristics for new product development.
Quality Management and Control Tools. They are a type of quality
planning tools used to link and sequence the activities identified.
Quality Management Plan. A component of the project or program
management plan that describes how an organization's quality policies will be
implemented.
Quality Management System. The organizational framework whose
structure provides the policies, processes, procedures, and resources required
to implement the quality management plan. The typical project quality
management plan should be compatible to the organization's quality
management system.
Quality Metrics. A description of a project or product attribute and how to
measure it.
Quality Policy. A policy specific to the Project Quality Management
Knowledge Area, it establishes the basic principles that should govern the
organization's actions as it implements its system for quality management.
Quality Requirement. A condition or capability that will be used to assess
conformance by validating the acceptability of an attribute for the quality of a
result.
Quantitative Risk Analysis and Modeling Techniques. Commonly used
techniques for both event-oriented and project-oriented analysis approaches.
Questionnaires and Surveys. Written sets of questions designed to quickly
accumulate information from a large number of respondents.
RACI. A common type of responsibility assignment matrix that uses
responsible, accountable, consult, and inform statuses to define the
involvement of stakeholders in project activities.
Records Management System. A specific set of processes, related control
functions, and tools that are consolidated and combined to record and retain
information about the project.
Regression Analysis. An analytic technique where a series of input variables
are examined in relation to their corresponding output results in order to
develop a mathematical or statistical relationship.
Regulation. Requirements imposed by a governmental body. These
requirements can establish product, process, or service characteristics,
including applicable administrative provisions that have government-
mandated compliance.
Reporting Systems. Facilities, processes, and procedures used to generate or
consolidate reports from one or more information management systems and
facilitate report distribution to the project stakeholders.
Request for Information (RFI). A type of procurement document whereby
the buyer requests a potential seller to provide various pieces of information
related to a product or service or seller capability.
Request for Proposal (RFP). A type of procurement document used to
request proposals from prospective sellers of products or services. In some
application areas, it may have a narrower or more specific meaning.
Request for Quotation (RFQ). A type of procurement document used to
request price quotations from prospective sellers of common or standard
products or services. Sometimes used in place of request for proposal and, in
some application areas, it may have a narrower or more specific meaning.
Requested Change. A formally documented change request that is submitted
for approval to the integrated change control process.
Requirement. A condition or capability that is required to be present in a
product, service, or result to satisfy a contract or other formally imposed
specification.
Requirements Documentation. A description of how individual
requirements meet the business need for the project.
Requirements Management Plan. A component of the project or program
management plan that describes how requirements will be analyzed,
documented, and managed.
Requirements Traceability Matrix. A grid that links product requirements
from their origin to the deliverables that satisfy them.
Reserve. A provision in the project management plan to mitigate cost and/or
schedule risk. Often used with a modifier (e.g., management reserve,
contingency reserve) to provide further detail on what types of risk are meant
to be mitigated.
Reserve Analysis. An analytical technique to determine the essential features
and relationships of components in the project management plan to establish
a reserve for the schedule duration, budget, estimated cost, or funds for a
project.
Residual Risk. A risk that remains after risk responses have been
implemented.
Resource. Skilled human resources (specific disciplines either individually or
in crews or teams), equipment, services, supplies, commodities, material,
budgets, or funds.
Resource Breakdown Structure. A hierarchical representation of resources
by category and type.
Resource Calendar. A calendar that identifies the working days and shifts on
which each specific resource is available.
Resource Histogram. A bar chart showing the amount of time that a resource
is scheduled to work over a series of time periods. Resource availability may
be depicted as a line for comparison purposes. Contrasting bars may show
actual amounts of resources used as the project progresses.
Resource Leveling. A technique in which start and finish dates are adjusted
based on resource constraints with the goal of balancing demand for
resources with the available supply.
Resource Optimization Techniques. A technique that is used to adjust the
start and finish dates of activities that adjust planned resource use to be equal
to or less than resource availability.
Resource Smoothing. A technique which adjusts the activities of a schedule
model such that the requirement for resources on the project do not exceed
certain predefined resource limits.
Responsibility. An assignment that can be delegated within a project
management plan such that the assigned resource incurs a duty to perform the
requirements of the assignment.
Responsibility Assignment Matrix (RAM). A grid that shows the project
resources assigned to each work package.
Result. An output from performing project management processes and
activities. Results include outcomes (e.g., integrated systems, revised process,
restructured organization, tests, trained personnel, etc.) and documents (e.g.,
policies, plans, studies, procedures, specifications, reports, etc.). Contrast
with product. See also deliverable.
Rework. Action taken to bring a defective or nonconforming component into
compliance with requirements or specifications.
Risk. An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or
negative effect on one or more project objectives.
Risk Acceptance. A risk response strategy whereby the project team decides
to acknowledge the risk and not take any action unless the risk occurs.
Risk Appetite. The degree of uncertainty an entity is willing to take on, in
anticipation of a reward.
Risk Audits. Examination and documentation of the effectiveness of risk
responses in dealing with identified risks and their root causes, as well as the
effectiveness of the risk management process.
Risk Avoidance. A risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to
eliminate the threat or protect the project from its impact.
Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS). A hierarchical representation of risks
according to their risk categories.
Risk Categorization. Organization by sources of risk (e.g., using the RBS),
the area of the project affected (e.g., using the WBS), or other useful category
(e.g., project phase) to determine the areas of the project most exposed to the
effects of uncertainty.
Risk Category. A group of potential causes of risk.
Risk Data Quality Assessment. Technique to evaluate the degree to which
the data about risks is useful for risk management.
Risk Management Plan. A component of the project, program, or portfolio
management plan that describes how risk management activities will be
structured and performed.
Risk Mitigation. A risk response strategy whereby the project team acts to
reduce the probability of occurrence or impact of a risk.
Risk Reassessment. Risk reassessment is the identification of new risks,
reassessment of current risks, and the closing of risks that are outdated.
Risk Register. A document in which the results of risk analysis and risk
response planning are recorded.
Risk Threshold. Measure of the level of uncertainty or the level of impact at
which a stakeholder may have a specific interest. Below that risk threshold,
the organization will accept the risk. Above that risk threshold, the
organization will not tolerate the risk.
Risk Tolerance. The degree, amount, or volume of risk that an organization
or individual will withstand.
Risk Transference. A risk response strategy whereby the project team shifts
the impact of a threat to a third party, together with ownership of the
response.
Risk Urgency Assessment. Review and determination of the timing of
actions that may need to occur sooner than other risk items.
Role. A defined function to be performed by a project team member, such as
testing, filing, inspecting, or coding.
Rolling Wave Planning. An iterative planning technique in which the work
to be accomplished in the near term is planned in detail, while the work in the
future is planned at a higher level.
Root Cause Analysis. An analytical technique used to determine the basic
underlying reason that causes a variance or a defect or a risk. A root cause
may underlie more than one variance or defect or risk.
Scatter Diagram. A correlation chart that uses a regression line to explain or
to predict how the change in an independent variable will change a dependent
variable.
Schedule. See project schedule and see also schedule model.
Schedule Baseline. The approved version of a schedule model that can be
changed only through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis
for comparison to actual results.
Schedule Compression. Techniques used to shorten the schedule duration
without reducing the project scope.
Schedule Data. The collection of information for describing and controlling
the schedule.
Schedule Forecasts. Estimates or predictions of conditions and events in the
project's future based on information and knowledge available at the time the
schedule is calculated.
Schedule Management Plan. A component of the project management plan
that establishes the criteria and the activities for developing, monitoring, and
controlling the schedule.
Schedule Model. A representation of the plan for executing the project's
activities including durations, dependencies, and other planning information,
used to produce a project schedule along with other scheduling artifacts.
Schedule Network Analysis. The technique of identifying early and late start
dates, as well as early and late finish dates, for the uncompleted portions of
project schedule activities. See also backward pass, critical path method,
critical chain method, and resource leveling.
Schedule Network Templates. A set of activities and relationships that have
been established that can be used repeatedly for a particular application area
or an aspect of the project where a prescribed sequence is desired.
Schedule Performance Index (SPI). A measure of schedule efficiency
expressed as the ratio of earned value to planned value.
Schedule Variance (SV). A measure of schedule performance expressed as
the difference between the earned value and the planned value.
Scheduling Tool. A tool that provides schedule component names,
definitions, structural relationships, and formats that support the application
of a scheduling method.
Scope. The sum of the products, services, and results to be provided as a
project. See also project scope and product scope.
Scope Baseline. The approved version of a scope statement, work breakdown
structure (WBS), and its associated WBS dictionary, that can be changed only
through formal change control procedures and is used as a basis for
comparison.
Scope Change. Any change to the project scope. A scope change almost
always requires an adjustment to the project cost or schedule.
Scope Creep. The uncontrolled expansion to product or project scope
without adjustments to time, cost, and resources.
Scope Management Plan. A component of the project or program
management plan that describes how the scope will be defined, developed,
monitored, controlled, and verified.
Secondary Risk. A risk that arises as a direct result of implementing a risk
response.
Selected Sellers. The sellers which have been selected to provide a
contracted set of services or products.
Seller. A provider or supplier of products, services, or results to an
organization.
Seller Proposals. Formal responses from sellers to a request for proposal or
other procurement document specifying the price, commercial terms of sale,
and technical specifications or capabilities the seller will do for the requesting
organization that, if accepted, would bind the seller to perform the resulting
agreement.
Sensitivity Analysis. A quantitative risk analysis and modeling technique
used to help determine which risks have the most potential impact on the
project. It examines the extent to which the uncertainty of each project
element affects the objective being examined when all other uncertain
elements are held at their baseline values. The typical display of results is in
the form of a tornado diagram.
Sequence Activities. The process of identifying and documenting
relationships among the project activities.
Seven Basic Quality Tools. A standard toolkit used by quality management
professionals who are responsible for planning, monitoring, and controlling
the issues related to quality in an organization.
Simulation. A simulation uses a project model that translates the
uncertainties specified at a detailed level into their potential impact on
objectives that are expressed at the level of the total project. Project
simulations use computer models and estimates of risk, usually expressed as a
probability distribution of possible costs or durations at a detailed work level,
and are typically performed using Monte Carlo analysis.
Soft Logic. See discretionary dependency.
Source Selection Criteria. A set of attributes desired by the buyer which a
seller is required to meet or exceed to be selected for a contract.
Specification. A document that specifies, in a complete, precise, verifiable
manner, the requirements, design, behavior, or other characteristics of a
system, component, product, result, or service and the procedures for
determining whether these provisions have been satisfied. Examples are:
requirement specification, design specification, product specification, and test
specification.
Specification Limits. The area, on either side of the centerline, or mean, of
data plotted on a control chart that meets the customer's requirements for a
product or service. This area may be greater than or less than the area defined
by the control limits. See also control limits.
Sponsor. A person or group who provides resources and support for the
project, program, or portfolio and is accountable for enabling success.
Sponsoring Organization. The entity responsible for providing the project's
sponsor and a conduit for project funding or other project resources.
Staffing Management Plan. A component of the human resource plan that
describes when and how project team members will be acquired and how
long they will be needed.
Stakeholder. An individual, group, or organization who may affect, be
affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision, activity, or
outcome of a project.
Stakeholder Analysis. A technique of systematically gathering and analyzing
quantitative and qualitative information to determine whose interests should
be taken into account throughout the project.
Stakeholder Management Plan. The stakeholder management plan is a
subsidiary plan of the project management plan that defines the processes,
procedures, tools, and techniques to effectively engage stakeholders in project
decisions and execution based on the analysis of their needs, interests, and
potential impact.
Stakeholder Register. A project document including the identification,
assessment, and classification of project stakeholders.
Standard. A document that provides, for common and repeated use, rules,
guidelines, or characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at the
achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given context.
Start Date. A point in time associated with a schedule activity's start, usually
qualified by one of the following: actual, planned, estimated, scheduled,
early, late, target, baseline, or current.
Start-to-Finish (SF). A logical relationship in which a successor activity
cannot finish until a predecessor activity has started.
Start-to-Start (SS). A logical relationship in which a successor activity
cannot start until a predecessor activity has started.
Statement of Work (SOW). A narrative description of products, services, or
results to be delivered by the project.
Statistical Sampling. Choosing part of a population of interest for
inspection.
Subnetwork. A subdivision (fragment) of a project schedule network
diagram, usually representing a subproject or a work package. Often used to
illustrate or study some potential or proposed schedule condition, such as
changes in preferential schedule logic or project scope.
Subproject. A smaller portion of the overall project created when a project is
subdivided into more manageable components or pieces.
Successor Activity. A dependent activity that logically comes after another
activity in a schedule.
Summary Activity. A group of related schedule activities aggregated and
displayed as a single activity.
SWOT Analysis. Analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats of an organization, project, or option.
Tailor. The act of carefully selecting process and related inputs and outputs
contained within the PMBOK(R) Guide to determine a subset of specific
processes that will be included within a project's overall management
approach.
Technique. A defined systematic procedure employed by a human resource
to perform an activity to produce a product or result or deliver a service, and
that may employ one or more tools.
Templates. A partially complete document in a predefined format that
provides a defined structure for collecting, organizing, and presenting
information and data.
Threat. A risk that would have a negative effect on one or more project
objectives.
Three-Point Estimate. A technique used to estimate cost or duration by
applying an average of optimistic, pessimistic, and most likely estimates
when there is uncertainty with the individual activity estimates.
Threshold. A cost, time, quality, technical, or resource value used as a
parameter, and which may be included in product specifications. Crossing the
threshold should trigger some action, such as generating an exception report.
Time and Material Contract (T&M). A type of contract that is a hybrid
contractual arrangement containing aspects of both cost-reimbursable and
fixed-price contracts. Time and material contracts resemble cost-reimbursable
type arrangements in that they have no definitive end, because the full value
of the arrangement is not defined at the time of the award. Thus, time and
material contracts can grow in contract value as if they were cost-
reimbursable-type arrangements. Conversely, time and material arrangements
can also resemble fixed-price arrangements. For example, the unit rates are
preset by the buyer and seller, when both parties agree on the rates for the
category of senior engineers.
Time-Scaled Schedule Network Diagram. Any project schedule network
diagram drawn in such a way that the positioning and length of the schedule
activity represents its duration. Essentially, it is a bar chart that includes
schedule network logic.
To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI). A measure of the cost
performance that is required to be achieved with the remaining resources in
order to meet a specified management goal, expressed as the ratio of the cost
to finish the outstanding work to the remaining budget.
Tolerance. The quantified description of acceptable variation for a quality
requirement.
Tornado Diagram. A special type of bar chart used in sensitivity analysis for
comparing the relative importance of the variables.
Tool. Something tangible, such as a template or software program, used in
performing an activity to produce a product or result.
Total Float. The amount of time that a schedule activity can be delayed or
extended from its early start date without delaying the project finish date or
violating a schedule constraint.
Tree Diagram. A systematic diagram of a decomposition hierarchy used to
visualize as parent-to-child relationships a systematic set of rules.
Trend Analysis. An analytical technique that uses mathematical models to
forecast future outcomes based on historical results. It is a method of
determining the variance from a baseline of a budget, cost, schedule, or scope
parameter by using prior progress reporting periods' data and projecting how
much that parameter's variance from baseline might be at some future point
in the project if no changes are made in executing the project.
Trigger Condition. An event or situation that indicates that a risk is about to
occur.
Unanimity. Agreement by everyone in the group on a single course of action.
Validate Scope. The process of formalizing acceptance of the completed
project deliverables.
Validated Deliverables. Deliverables that are result of executing quality
control process to determine correctness.
Validation. The assurance that a product, service, or system meets the needs
of the customer and other identified stakeholders. It often involves acceptance
and suitability with external customers. Contrast with verification.
Value Engineering. An approach used to optimize project life cycle costs,
save time, increase profits, improve quality, expand market share, solve
problems, and/or use resources more effectively.
Variance. A quantifiable deviation, departure, or divergence away from a
known baseline or expected value.
Variance Analysis. A technique for determining the cause and degree of
difference between the baseline and actual performance.
Variance At Completion (VAC). A projection of the amount of budget
deficit or surplus, expressed as the difference between the budget at
completion and the estimate at completion.
Variation. An actual condition that is different from the expected condition
that is contained in the baseline plan.
Velocity. A measure of a team's productivity rate at which the deliverables
are produced, validated, and accepted within a predefined interval. Velocity is
a capacity planning approach frequently used to forecast future project work.
Verification. The evaluation of whether or not a product, service, or system
complies with a regulation, requirement, specification, or imposed condition.
It is often an internal process. Contrast with validation.
Voice of the Customer. A planning technique used to provide products,
services, and results that truly reflect customer requirements by translating
those customer requirements into the appropriate technical requirements for
each phase of project product development.
WBS Dictionary. A document that provides detailed deliverable, activity, and
scheduling information about each component in the work breakdown
structure.
Weighted Milestone Method. An earned value method that divides a work
package into measurable segments, each ending with an observable
milestone, and then assigns a weighted value to the achievement of each
milestone.
What-If Scenario Analysis. The process of evaluating scenarios in order to
predict their effect on project objectives.
Work Authorization. A permission and direction, typically written, to begin
work on a specific schedule activity or work package or control account. It is
a method for sanctioning project work to ensure that the work is done by the
identified organization, at the right time, and in the proper sequence.
Work Authorization System. A subsystem of the overall project
management system. It is a collection of formal documented procedures that
defines how project work will be authorized (committed) to ensure that the
work is done by the identified organization, at the right time, and in the
proper sequence. It includes the steps, documents, tracking system, and
defined approval levels needed to issue work authorizations.
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). A hierarchical decomposition of the
total scope of work to be carried out by the project team to accomplish the
project objectives and create the required deliverables.
Work Breakdown Structure Component. An entry in the work breakdown
structure that can be at any level.
Work Package. The work defined at the lowest level of the work breakdown
structure for which cost and duration can be estimated and managed.
Work Performance Data. The raw observations and measurements
identified during activities being performed to carry out the project work.
Work Performance Information. The performance data collected from
various controlling processes, analyzed in context and integrated based on
relationships across areas.
Work Performance Reports. The physical or electronic representation of
work performance information compiled in project documents, intended to
generate decisions, actions, or awareness
Workaround. A response to a threat that has occurred, for which a prior
response had not been planned or was not effective.
About the Author
 Cynthia Snyder is a well-known project management speaker, consultant,
 and trainer. She was the project manager for the team that updated PMI's
 Project Management Body of Knowledge--Fourth Edition. She's also the
 author of many books, including A Project Manager's Book of Forms and A
 User's Manual to the PMBOK Guide (Wiley) as well as PMP Certification
 All-in-One For Dummies and Project 2013 For Dummies. Her books have
 been translated into several languages.
 Cynthia provides consulting and training services for government and private
 industry. Her consulting focuses on project management maturity, PMO
 startups, and positioning project management as a core competency for
 organizations.
Author's Acknowledgments
 Publishing a book is not a solo endeavor. It takes many people to get
 information from the author's head into the reader's hands. If you are reading
 this, it is because the following people at John Wiley & Sons, Inc. have been
 instrumental in getting you this information.
 Thank you to Connie Santisteban for stepping into the Dummies role and
 supporting me in completing the work.
 Mark Enochs is an extraordinary editor and has made working on this update
 as easy as it could possibly be. Thank you for being a pleasure to work with,
 Mark.
 Teresa Artman provided great feedback, with an amazing eagle-eye, and
 made sure all the updates stayed in sync! I am grateful to Teresa for her
 guidance and help.
 Joseph Kestel provided excellent feedback on the content. I am grateful to
 have had his expert guidance.
 Saving the best for last, thank you to my wonderful husband, Dexter Dionisio
 for ongoing and loving support.
Publisher's Acknowledgments
Acquisitions Editor: Connie Santisteban Senior Project Editor: Mark
Enochs Senior Copy Editor: Teresa Artman Special Help: Rebecca
Senninger
Technical Editor: Joseph Kestel
Editorial Assistant: Amanda Graham Sr. Editorial Assistant: Cherie Case
Project Coordinator: Katie Crocker Project Manager: Laura Moss-
Hollister Assistant Producers: Sean Patrick, Marilyn Hummel Cover
Image: (c) iStockphoto.com / ngkaki
To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book, go to
www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/pmpcertificationaio.




Find out "HOW" at Dummies.com
Take Dummies with you everywhere
           you go!

            Go to our Website




           Like us on Facebook




           Follow us on Twitter




           Watch us on YouTube




            Join us on LinkedIn




            Pin us on Pinterest
       Circle us on google+




    Subscribe to our newsletter




Create your own Dummies book cover




           Shop Online
