                                    Published by

                              AME Group, Inc.
                         Aileen Ellis, PMP, PgMP
                          175 Palm Springs Drive
                        Colorado Springs, CO 80921
                           Phone: 719-659-3658
                          www.amegroupinc.com
                         aileen@amegroupinc.com

                     (c) January 2016 AME Group, Inc.

This publication is a derivative work of A Guide to the Project Management Body of
Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide) - Fifth Edition, which is copyrighted material of and owned
by, Project Management Institute, Inc. (PMI), Copyright 2013. This publication has been
developed and reproduced with the permission of PMI. Unauthorized reproduction of this
material is strictly prohibited. The derivative work is the copyrighted material of and
owned by AME Group Inc., Copyright 2013.


PMP(R) Exam Simplified by AME Group Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this book may
be reproduced in any form whatsoever, by photography or xerography or by any other
means, without written permission from the author, except by a reviewer, who may quote
brief passages in critical articles or reviews.

Project Management Institute, A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK(R) Guide) - Fifth Edition, Project Management Institute, Inc., 2013. Copyright and
all rights reserved. Material from this publication has been reproduced with the permission
of PMI(R).

"PMI" is a service and trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is
registered in the United States and other nations.

"PMBOK" is a trademark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered in
the United States and other nations.

"PMP" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is registered
in the United States and other nations.

"CAPM" is a certification mark of the Project Management Institute, Inc., which is
registered in the United States and other nations.


Fifth Edition (5.1h)

ISBN - 978-1522989448
  I _________________________, will acquire my PMP(R)
      Credential by _________________(insert date).

      In preparation for this credential I will review
___________________ PMP(R) Sample Questions per day for
                  _____________ days.

In total I will complete a minimum of 1,000 sample questions
            before I attempt to pass the PMP(R) Exam.

With each and every sample question, I will not move past the
question until I understand why the right answer is correct and
            why the wrong answers are incorrect.


          ________________________ (signature)


             ________________________(date)
                            Preface
In the past 18 years, I have helped over 10,000 project managers
obtain their PMP(R) Credential through my workshops. Prior to
taking my workshop, these managers have often been studying
on their own using a wide variety of materials.

In many cases, the approaches they've been using were non-
productive. Some of these approaches included:
           * desperately trying to memorize all the material
         found in the PMBOK(R) Guide
           * reviewing the material knowledge area by
         knowledge area
           *   spending most of their study time reading

You'll find the approach I use in this program is very different.
For instance, let's address the items I listed above one at a time:
            * Passing the exam is not about memorizing the
          PMBOK(R) Guide. For the most part, you need to
          understand the material and not simply memorize the
          words. The only exception are lists of equations, which
          we do need to memorize. Also a lot of material on the
          PMP Exam is not found in the PMBOK(R) Guide.
           * If you review the material by knowledge area it
         won't make sense. In saying that, I am not saying that
         the PMBOK(R) Guide does not make sense. However, the
         PMBOK(R) Guide is a reference book and not a study
         guide. Since project managers manage projects by
         process group, project managers pass the exam by
         understanding process groups. Therefore, my approach
         presents the material according to process group and
         not knowledge area.
           * To pass a multiple-choice exam, you need to
         understand the content and also know how to select the
         correct answers presented in a multiple choice format.
         To be able to do this, you must practice on sample
         questions, and not just a few questions. Instead, we
         need to practice on, at a minimum, hundreds, and in
         some cases, over 1,000 sample questions.

I hope that this book will help you so much that you walk out of
the testing center with your PMP(R) Credential in hand smiling
and saying.....

" Wow.... that test was not too bad ...and now I am now a
PMP(R) ".
                             About the Author
                             Aileen Ellis, PgMP(R), PMP(R), is The PMP(R) Expert. Because
                             of her personal instruction, thousands of project managers
                             have gained the confidence and knowledge needed to pass
                             the PMP(R) Exam. Working with thousands of students from
                             dozens of countries has given Ms. Ellis a thorough
                             understanding of the ins and outs of the PMBOK(R) Guide, the
                             content of the exam and allowed her to develop proven test-
                             taking strategies. With her help, more than 10,000
                             professionals have obtained those coveted letters: PMP(R).

Ms. Ellis began teaching exam preparation courses in 1998. Her years of teaching have
given her an understanding of the lesson types and teaching methods that most effectively
promote learning. Her books, which employ these same methods, reflect her years of
experience in exam preparation as well as project management. With respect to project
management, her approach is based on understanding processes and interactions of
processes rather than mere memorization. Ms. Ellis leads workshops to help students study
for and pass the CAPM(R) , PMP(R), and PgMP(R) exams through content review and practice
with hundreds of sample questions.

Ms. Ellis lives in Colorado Springs with her husband, Terry, and their two children, Nick
and Alex. When not teaching, coaching, or writing, Ms. Ellis spends her days hiking in the
Colorado mountains.




Disclaimer: The purpose of this book is to help guide your
study efforts. AME Group, Inc. guarantees that every
attempt has been made to check the accuracy of all
information presented. Project management is both an art
and a science. You may at times encounter differing opinions
on the information presented in this and other review books.
In the end, your experience, education, test-taking ability,
and dedication will determine your probability of passing
the PMP (R) exam.
PMP (R) EXAM - OVERVIEW
AILEEN'S Materials to Help You Pass the PMP
 Connecting with AILEEN

STUDYING FOR THE EXAM
EQUATIONS TO KNOW FOR THE EXAM
AILEEN's GAME **(Extremely Important)**
NAMES TO KNOW FOR THE EXAM
EXAM QUESTION STRATEGY
INTRODUCTION
ORGANIZATIONAL INFLUENCES AND PROJECT
LIFE CYCLES
PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
INITIATING PROCESSES
 Develop Project Charter
 Identify Stakeholders
 INITIATING - Knowledge and Skills

PLANNING PROCESSES
 Develop Project Management Plan
 Plan Scope Management
 Collect Requirements
 Define Scope
 Create WBS
 Plan Schedule Management
 Define Activities
 Sequence Activities
 Estimate Activity Resources
 Estimate Activity Durations
 Develop Schedule
 Plan Cost Management
 Estimate Costs
 Determine Budget
 Plan Quality Management
 Plan Human Resource Management
 Plan Communications Management
 Plan Risk Management
 Identify Risks
 Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
 Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
 Plan Risk Responses
 Plan Procurement Management
 Plan Stakeholder Management
 PLANNING - Knowledge and Skills

EXECUTING PROCESSES
 Direct and Manage Project Work
 Perform Quality Assurance
 Acquire Project Team
 Develop Project Team
 Manage Project Team
 Manage Communication
 Conduct Procurements
 Manage Stakeholder Engagement
 EXECUTING- Knowledge and Skills

MONITORING AND CONTROLLING PROCESSES
 Monitor and Control Project Work
 Perform Integrated Change Control
 Control Scope
 Control Schedule
 Control Costs
   Earned Value Management
 Control Quality
 Validate Scope
 Control Communication
 Control Risks
 Control Procurements
 Control Stakeholder Engagement
 MONITORING and CONTROLLING -Knowledge and Skills

CLOSING PROCESSES
 Close Procurements
 Close Project or Phase
 CLOSING- Knowledge and Skills

Cross-Cutting Knowledge and Skills
 Quick Review - Sample Questions

FULL SAMPLE TEST
REFERENCES
             PMP(R) EXAM - OVERVIEW
The PMP(R) Exam is based on the PMBOK(R) Guide fifth edition as well as other current
project management references. However, reading the PMBOK(R) Guide does not guarantee
you will pass the exam. Passing the exam is not that simple; it requires a detailed
understanding of the PMBOK(R) Guide including how to use the information provided by the
PMBOK(R) Guide to answer multiple choice questions.


While the goal of the book is to help you pass the PMP(R) Exam, most people who study it
find that they have also learned a lot about being a good project manager. First work on
passing the exam, and then go back through the book to help improve your project manager
skills.

This book is intended for you if you want to:
                *    Pass the exam on the first try by practicing hundreds of sample exam
             questions
               *     Access a complete sample exam, including detailed explanations of
            the right and wrong answers:
                           Understand why the best answer is best
                        Review detailed explanations of why the wrong answers are
                  wrong
                           Practice systematically eliminating the wrong answers
              *     Reinforce your learning experience by continuously utilizing sample
            questions


Joining PMI(R) (the Project Management Institute)                                        -
Many people will decide to join PMI(R) before applying to take the exam. Membership in
PMI(R) has many advantages, including discounts on certification exam costs. Although we
at AME Group, Inc., believe in PMI(R) membership, the decision to join is completely up to
you. If you are going to join PMI(R) however, we strongly suggest that you do so prior to
applying to take the exam to receive the PMI(R) membership discount on the price of the
exam. To receive the discount, you'll need your PMI(R) membership number on the exam
application.
To join PMI(R), go to www.pmi.org and click on "Become a member" in the pull down menu
"for Membership".


To apply to take the PMP(R) Exam- Go to www.pmi.org and click on
"PMP(R)" under "get certified" in the pull down menu "Certification". You will be
instructed on how to open a PMP(R) online application. If you are a member of PMI(R), make
sure you have your membership number available. If you have applied for the PMP(R) Exam
but not yet paid for taking it, realize that you are at risk to be audited and will be notified of
the audit only after you make payment. Therefore, build this potential delay into your
schedule.


Qualifying for the PMP(R) Exam - To qualify to take the PMP(R) Exam,
at a minimum, you must have a secondary diploma (high school or the global equivalent),
35 hours of project management training/education and, in the last 8 years either:
               *     Three (3) years of project management experience with a bachelor's
             degree
  or
               *    Five (5) years of project management experience without a bachelor's
             degree
 What To Expect When Taking the Exam:
Time - You will have up to four hours to complete the PMP(R) exam. You may take a
break at any time. However, realize that the clock keeps running, even when you are taking
a break.
A recommended strategy with respect to time is to make sure you complete at least 50
questions per hour.


Number of questions - There will be 200 questions total on your exam.
However, only 175 of these questions figure into your exam pass/fail calculation. The other
25 questions are considered pre-release questions. These pre-release questions are
included in the exam so that PMI (R) can collect data on questions prior to their becoming
official exam questions. These pre-release questions will be placed randomly throughout
the exam.
A recommended strategy with respect to pre-release questions is to assume that every
question on your exam counts toward your passing grade. Don't try to guess which
questions count and which are pre-release.


Organization of questions - Questions will appear in random order on
your exam. They are not grouped by process group or by knowledge area.
A recommended strategy to study for random questions is to use the sample exam in the
back of this book to get used to questions appearing randomly with respect to process
group or knowledge area. Also you may decide to go to www.aileenellis.com for more
sample questions available in a random format.


Question format - Some of the questions on the exam will be short, just a
sentence, while others will consist of multiple sentences. There are no questions having
such answers as "all of the above" or "none of the above". Instead you will be directed to
select the best answer out of the selections given.
A recommended strategy for longer questions is to read the last sentence first, before
reading the entire question.


Strategy for selecting the best answer - Strategies to do this
will be discussed throughout this book. Stated succinctly, these strategies focus primarily
as much on eliminating the wrong answers as on selecting the best answer. This will be
discussed in greater detail later in the book.


Passing the exam - To pass the exam you must get a certain number of answers
of scored questions (that is, the questions that are not pre-release ones and so don't count
toward your grade) correct. You receive credit for each scored question you get correct.
There are no subtractions for wrong answers.


Strategy - Make sure you answer every question on the exam. Use a strategy that
involves eliminating wrong answers to increase the probability of passing the exam on the
first try.
               The Exam Blue Print
The exam has 200 total questions, of which 175 count toward
your pass/fail score. The table below shows approximately the
number of scored questions you will see from each of the five
process groups. You must pass the exam in total. You do not
need to pass the questions in every process group to pass the
exam.
AILEEN'S Materials to Help You Pass
       the PMP(R) EXAM

BOOKs Written by Aileen:

All of Aileen's books, which are shown below, are
available on Amazon.com in both print and e-book
format. All are current for those testing January
12, 2016, or later.
        * PMP (R) Exam Simplified 5th Edition (5.1
      completely revised for Jan 11, 2016 update)
       * How to get Every Earned Value question right
      on the PMP (R) Exam
        * How to get Every Network Diagram question
      right on the PMP (R) Exam
       * How to get Every Contract Calculation
      question right on the PMP (R) Exam

      Let us know what content you would like to see
      Aileen's next book be about.
PMP(R) Exam Online Self Study Program with
AILEEN:

Please visit http://aileenellis.com/pmp-exam-online-self-
study-program-with-aileen/ for more information

         * Aileen's face to face program - but presented
        online
          * Recorded videos of Aileen facilitating every
        aspect of exam preparation
          * Over 1,000 online sample questions and
        solutions




AILEEN's Live Face to Face Workshops:

Visit www.aileenellis.com for locations and dates.

Contact Aileen directly to bring her Face to Face Program to
your location.
Aileen has taught on Five Continents and is eager to come to
your location to work with you and your team.
         Connecting with AILEEN:
Website: www.aileenellis.com

Email: aileen@aileenellis.com or
aileen@amegroupinc.com

YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/aileenellis9
Subscribe to Aileen's Channel on YouTube for up to
date PMP Training Videos

Linkedin:
https://www.linkedin.com/in/pmpcertificationexpertai
Join Aileen's study group on Linkedin:
PMP (R) Exam Prep Tribe
https://www.linkedin.com/grps?
gid=6560819&trk=fulpro_grplogo

Facebook:
https://www.facebook.com/pmpexamexpert

Twitter: @aileenellis
Follow Aileen on Twitter and subscribe to her
Live Periscopes.

Blogs: www.aileenellis.com/blogs
           STUDYING FOR THE EXAM
The next few pages are the most important pages in this book. Do not take the ideas
presented here for granted. These suggestions entail a tremendous amount of work on your
part, but following these suggestions can often make the difference between passing and
failing the exam.
Before beginning them, please procure a set of index cards.


List of equations - Here you'll need a set of index cards. The equations
you'll need to know to pass the exam are listed below. For each equation, write the
equation's name of on the front of the card and the actual equation itself on the back as
shown in the example below. As part of your study time, practice these equations for five
minutes every day. After you know and understand these equations, practice data dumping
the entire list of equations on a blank sheet of paper.


Front of Card                               Back of Card
Cost Variance                               CV= EV-AC




My data dump of equations for the exam:
Pres Value= FV/(1+i)t
PERT= (P+4ML+O)/6
SD= |(P-O)/6|
Var= (SD)2
CV=EV-AC
CPI=EV/AC
SV=EV-PV
SPI=EV/PV
EAC=BAC/CPI
ETC= EAC-AC
VAC= BAC-EAC
TCPI= (BAC-EV)/(BAC-AC)
TCPI= (BAC-EV)/(EAC-AC)
# of channels= n(n-1)/2
PTA= TC + ((CP -TP)/BS)
See the next page for details on this list.
   EQUATIONS TO KNOW FOR THE
             EXAM

                             Pres Value= FV/(1+i)t
Present Value                FV-future value, i= interest rate, t=
                             time
                             PERT= (P+4ML+O)/6
PERT                         P= pessimistic, ML=Most Likely,
                             O= optimistic
One Standard Deviation       1 Standard Deviation= |(P-O)/6|
Variance                     Variance= (SD)2
                             CV=EV-AC
Cost Variance (CV)
                             EV=earned value AC= actual cost
Cost Performance     Index
                             CPI=EV/AC
(CPI)
                             SV=EV-PV
Schedule Variance(SV)        EV= earned value PV= planned
                             value
Schedule Performance Index
                           SPI=EV/PV
(SPI)
Estimate at Completion
(EAC)- assume we will EAC=BAC/CPI
continue to spend at the BAC= budget at completion
same rate                  CPI= cost performance index

Estimate    to   Complete
                             ETC= EAC-AC
(ETC)- assume we will EAC= estimate at completion
continue to spend at the AC= actual cost
same rate
Variance at Completion
                          VAC= BAC-EAC
(VAC)
TCPI-using BAC            TCPI= (BAC-EV)/(BAC-AC)
TCPI-using EAC            TCPI= (BAC-EV)/(EAC-AC)
Number of Communication # of channels= n(n-1)/2
Channels                  n= number of people
Point of Total Assumption PTA= target cost+ ((ceiling price-
(PTA)                     target price)/buyer's share ratio)
                           (It is less likely that the equations
                           below will be needed for the
Advanced equations         exam.) Therefore I recommend
                           most people not study these
                           equations.
EAC- assume the remaining
work will be accomplished EAC= AC + (BAC-EV)
at the original planned rate
EAC- assume both CPI and
                             EAC=      AC     + ((BAC-
SPI will influence the
                             EV)/(SPI*CPI))
remaining work
EAC- assume plan and
current spending do not EAC= AC + bottom-up ETC
represent future
ETC- assume need to re-
                             ETC= Bottom-up ETC
estimate
         AILEEN's GAME **(Extremely
                Important)**

Aileen's process game - Follow the process game described below
goal by goal. Start with goal one. Once you have achieved this, move to goal two. Once
this is easy, then move to goal three. Goal four may take several weeks to achieve. Make
this process game the first ten minutes of your study time every day. After the process
game, practice your equations for five minutes each day also.


First Goal (Part One of Game) - Know the 5
Process Groups
      See page 61 of the PMBOK(R) Guide to help you.
      Take five (5) index cards and write the name of each process group on the front of
      one card and its definition on the back as in the example for the Initiating process
      group shown below. Repeat for the Planning, Executing, Monitoring and Controlling,
      and Closing process groups. Note: If you choose not to write the definition on the
      back of the card, make sure you can recognize the definition.


Front of Card                                Back of Card
INITIATING                                   Processes used to start a project or phase




Second Goal (Part Two of Game) - Know the 10
Knowledge Areas
      Take ten (10) index cards and write the name of each knowledge area on the front of
      a card and its definition on the back. See the example for the Integration area shown
      below. Also create cards for knowledge areas Scope, Time, Cost, Quality, HR,
      Communications, Risk, Procurement, and Stakeholder. Again, if you choose not to
      write the definition on the back of the card, make sure you are able recognize this
      definition.


Front of Card                                Back of Card
INTEGRATION                                  Processes used to connect all the other project management
                                          processes



   Practice taking cards and building the table in the PMBOK(R) Guide shown on page
   61. Practice writing out knowledge areas and process groups in the appropriate
   orders on a blank piece of paper until this becomes easy.


Third Goal (Part Three of Game) - Know the 47
Processes
   Take 47 index cards and write the name of each process on the front of a card. Leave
   the back of the card blank for now as in the Collect Requirements example shown
   below. Do this for the other 46 processes.


Front of Card                            Back of Card
Collect Requirements                      (Leave blank for now.)

   Practice sorting cards to build the table on page 61 of the PMBOK(R) Guide. Then, on
   a blank sheet of paper try to write out the entire table shown on page 61 of the
   PMBOK(R) Guide. See my example below and notice my use of abbreviations.
For the knowledge areas:
I Saw Tom Call Quirky Harry a Crazy, Risky, Professional
Shepherd. (I-S-T-C-Q-HR-C-R-P-SH). (Send me a funny phrase
and I will include your phrase and your name in the next revision
of this book).

Fourth Goal (Part Four of Game) - Recognize the
tools and techniques for each process
    Take the 47 index cards whose fronts you wrote the process names on and write the
    names of the tools and techniques associated with each process on the back of each
    card as shown in the collect requirements example below. You can find these tools
    and techniques on the second or third pages of chapters four through thirteen of the
    PMBOK(R) Guide. The tools and techniques on the back of the requirements example
    show below are from Figure 5-1of the PMBOK(R) Guide.
    This goal may feel overwhelming at first. I suggest building just one card at a time as
    you go through each process.

    .


Front of Card                               Back of Card
                                            Interviews
                                            Focus groups
                                            Facilitated workshops
                                            Group creativity techniques (brainstorming,
                                            etc.)
                                            Group      decision   making     techniques
Collect Requirements                        (unanimity, etc.)
                                            Questionnaires and surveys
                                            Observations
                                            Prototypes
                                            Benchmarking
                                            Context diagrams
                                            Documentation analysis

    Practice looking at the back of each card and being able to name the process for
    those tools and techniques. When that becomes easy, practice explaining to others
    how each tool and technique would be used during that process. Do not write down
     inputs or outputs. Inputs and outputs are important, but putting too much information
     on the cards may make them overwhelming.


   EXAM TIP: Always have your cards with you. It is critical that you know the names
of all 47 processes and are able to sort the processes by knowledge area and process
group. Also critical is being able to recognize what tools and techniques go with which
processes. Also be sure that you know the examples the PMBOK(R) Guide lists for each
tool and technique.
 NAMES TO KNOW FOR THE EXAM
Goleman       Famous for Emotional Intelligence.
Goldratt      Famous for Critical Chain Method.
Parkinson's   Theory that states work expands so as to fill the time
Theory        available for its completion.
Juran         Defined quality as fitness for use.
              Defined quality as conformance to requirements. Famous for
Crosby        ideas such as: Quality is free and zero defects are achievable.
Deming     Developed Total Quality Management (TQM).
Shewhart Created the Plan-Do-Check-Act Cycle.
and Deming
              Another name for cause and effect diagrams. The first seven
Ishikawa      tools of quality are known as the Ishikawa tools.
              Defined the Taguchi loss function, which states that "loss" in
Taguchi       value progressively increases as variation increases from the
              targeted condition.
Pareto        Italian economist for whom the Pareto chart is named.
Tuckman       Famous for defining the five stages of team development.
Maslow        Defined the hierarchy of needs.
              Defined Theory X, which states that management views
              workers negatively and Theory Y, which states that
McGregor      management view of workers positively. A critical aspect of
              Theory X and Theory Y is that the theories are self-fulfilling.
              Defined Theory Z, which states that employee loyalty can be
Ouchi         increased by providing a job for life, etc.
              Defined the Acquired Needs Theory, which consists of the
McClelland    need for achievement, need for power, and need for
              affiliation.
                  Stated that meeting hygiene Factors is not enough to
Herzberg          motivate people. Their motivators must also be addresses to
                  motivate people.
                  Defined expectancy Theory which states that for people to be
                  motivated, they need to believe they can be successful, that
Vroom             they will be rewarded for their efforts, and that the reward is
                  something they value.


List of names for the exam - Review this list once a day at the
beginning of your study time. If you struggle with the list, you may need to build index
cards similar to the index cards you built for the equations.
      ORGANIZATION OF THIS BOOK
This book is organized by process group, not by knowledge area. The primary reasons for
this are as follows:
                 *   We, as project managers, manage projects by process group, not by
              knowledge area.
               *     On the exam, you will see questions describing situations and asking
            "what would you do next". These questions will be more logical and thus
            easier to answer if you study by process group and not by knowledge area.
Sample questions will be provided throughout the material. The primary reasons for this
are as follows:
                *     You will very quickly be able to assess if you are understanding the
                  (R)
             PMI point of view.
              *     Sample questions make the material more interesting. If the material is
            more interesting, you will be more involved and thus learn more.
               *    To pass the exam, you not only need to understand (but not memorize)
            the material but also be able to determine the best answer. Only by practicing
            on sample exam questions will you be able to do this.



   Exam tips will be provided throughout the materials.



PAIRS OF WORDS- We will often examine "pairs of words".
                          When one word in a pair represents the correct idea for the
                  exam question, the other word in the pair will often represent the wrong
                  answer.
                          See the example below to see how this idea, which will be
                  presented over one hundred times in this book, works.


INSPECTIONS                                  AUDITS
Related to deliverables and/or products.     Related to processes.
We inspect deliverables.                     We audit processes.
Sample Question:
1. We are planning to have an outside organization review our quality
processes and recommend improvements. The tool and technique we will
use is:
a. quality inspections
b. quality audits
c. product inspections
d. risk audits
Solution: Hopefully you were able to eliminate answer d since this question
is not about risk. Hopefully, you were able to eliminate answers a and c
since the question is about processes and not deliverables. Inspections are
associated with deliverables, not processes. Answer b is the correct answer.


FULL LENGTH EXAM- One full length exam can be found at the end of
this book. More sample exams can be found at my website at: www.aileenellis.com.


WRONG ANSWERS- We will discuss the "wrong answers" as much, if not
more, than the "right answers" in the sample questions discussions. Eliminating the wrong
answers, makes selecting the right answer easier.
         EXAM QUESTION STRATEGY
1. Read the question and ask yourself: "What process group am I in?" and "What
knowledge area am I in?" Once you can identify the knowledge area and the process group,
you may then be able to identify the actual process (see page 61 of the PMBOK(R) Guide).
Consider the objective of the process as well as its inputs, tools and techniques, and
outputs for a clue.

2. Look for qualifier words in the question. Frequently used qualifier words include: every,
always, never, all, etc.

There are both "bad words" and "good words" on the exam. For example:

             Bad words                        Good words
             Always                           Often
             Punish                           Coach
             Force                            Encourage

3. Identify the type of question.

                *     Input/output vs. tool and technique questions
                *     Definitional questions
                *     Situational questions

4. As you practice for the exam, read each question and write the question number on a
piece of paper. Identify and eliminate any wrong answers. It is better to "guess" between
two choices than between four choices. When in doubt, remember that words from the
PMBOK(R) Guide are more likely to be correct than non-PMBOK(R) Guide words. Use
definitions, common sense, etc. Let's take a look at an example:


1. What is the right answer?
a. this answer I know is wrong, so I will put a line through "a"
b. this answer I am not sure of, so I will put a "?" next to "b"
c. this answer I know is wrong, so I will put a line through "c"
d. this answer I am not sure of, so I will put a "?" next to "d"

Your handwritten page should look something like this:
1. a
  ? b
    c
  ? d

Now go back and look at "b" and "d" and see if there is a way to eliminate
one of these two answers.
Special note on Inputs, Tool and Techniques, and
Outputs Questions
The PMBOK(R) Guide uses terms such as inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs. The
outputs of one process are often the input of another process.




INPUTs and OUTPUTs are documents or documentable items. Learn to
recognize this list of typical inputs and outputs. This list is not all inclusive, but it provides
a good beginning.
                *      organizational process assets
                *      enterprise environmental factors
                *      policies and plans
                *      deliverables and product transition
                *      project documents
                *      constraints and assumptions
                *      PMIS (tricky one)
                *      change requests
                *      lesson learned
                *      reports and forecasts
                *      descriptions
                *      charter
                *      approved changes
                *      baselines
                *      lists
                *      diagrams
                *      estimates
                *      data and information
                *      formal acceptance
                *      registers
                *      requirements and matrices
                *      calendars
                *      updates
                *      structures (WBS, RBS, OBS, etc.)
                *      checklists
               *     measurements
               *     metrics
               *     assessments
               *     communications
               *     logs (issue, change, etc.)


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs                               are mechanisms applied to INPUTs to
create OUTPUTs. Tools and techniques are what we do or what we use on inputs to create
outputs. Learn to recognize this list of typical tools and techniques. This list is not all
inclusive but provides a good beginning.

               *     facilitation techniques
               *     PMIS (be careful of this tricky one)
               *     Expert judgment
               *     techniques
               *     skills and knowledge
               *     estimating
               *     systems
               *     EVM
               *     meetings
               *     procedures
               *     management
               *     measurement
               *     analysis (any kind)
               *     identification
               *     flowcharts
               *     diagrams
               *     methods
               *     templates
               *     decomposition
               *     additional planning
               *     inspections
               *     simulation
               *     software

Many questions concerning inputs and outputs as well as tools and techniques will ask
questions such as "Which of the following is an input of ...?" or, "Which of the following
is a tool and technique of...?" If you can identify whether each answer is an input
(document) or a tool and technique (things we do to documents to create other documents),
you may be able to easily eliminate one, two, or three of the wrong answers.

Let's take some sample questions. Yes, you are going to do some questions and get them
right before even seeing the content of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


Input, Tool and Technique, Output - Sample Question #1
Which of the following is an input of the control costs process?
                        a. project management plan
                        b. reserve analysis
                        c. project management software
                        d. forecasting
Of course, we have not covered control costs yet, but use the ideas above to help you
deduce the right answer.
Step one: Since the question refers to "control costs", we are definitely in the control
costs process. The process control costs deals with controlling changes to the project
budget.
Step two: There are no qualifying words such as "not" or "only".
Step three: This is definitely an input, tool and techniques, output question. Knowing
that, in general, inputs are documents, look for an answer that is a document.

In this example, "a" is a document. Answers "b", "c", and "d" are all tools and
techniques. The book is using the word `analysis' and the word `forecasting' as verbs,
i.e., we are performing analysis, we are forecasting. Therefore these answers are tools
and techniques. Software is always a tool and technique. Therefore, "a" must be the right
answer.


Input, Tool and Technique, Output - Sample Question #2
Which of the following is a tool and technique of the define scope process?
                     a. product analysis
                     b. scope management plan
                     c. scope statement
                     d. communications methods
Again, we have not yet covered the define scope process yet, but let's give this a try
anyway.
Step one: Since the question includes the words "define scope" we know we are in the
planning process group. In fact, we are in the scope knowledge area, more specifically,
the define scope process. Define scope deals with creating the scope statement.
Step two: There are no qualifying words such as "not" or "only".
Step three: This is definitely an input, tool and technique, output question. Tools and
techniques are things we do to documents to create other documents.
In this example, answers "a" and "d" are both tools and techniques; we will come back
to them. Answer "b" and "c" are both documents and, therefore, not tools and techniques
of any process. Therefore, we are left with "a" and "d". Which one is more likely to be
associated with scope? Hopefully you will select "a". Once we cover the material, "a"
should be an easier answer to determine.
ASSUMPTIONS TO MAKE FOR THE
           EXAM
     *    You are the project manager for the project. You are not a program
   manager. You are not a portfolio manager.
      *    The project manager manages only one project at a time (not groups
   of projects)
     *     The project will span several years
     *     The team has hundreds if not thousands of members
     *     The project will cost millions of US dollars or the equivalent
      *    The project manager has access to historical documents from
   previous projects
     *    The organization has documented processes that the project
   management team will use to guide the current project
      *     The customer is internal to your organization and there is most likely
   an internal agreement (not a contract) in place between your internal customer
   and your project team.
                                INTRODUCTION
The PMBOK(R) Guide provides ideas for managing a single project, not a group of
interrelated projects (called programs). Within the exam, the focus is on a single project,
typically a large project. A project could be something as simple as planning and hosting a
party to the complex design and construction of the Sydney Opera House. As you go
through this material think of a project that you are currently involved in. Take the material
and try to relate it to your own work, and the work of others involved in the project.


Life cycle - The phrase "life cycle" is often a source of confusion. In this book, we
will discuss several life cycles.


The project management life cycle                            The project life cycle
                                                            The phases of your project. Some project's will have a life
The five process groups of initiating, planning, executing,
                                                            cycle of just one phase. Larger projects will have multiple
monitoring and controlling and closing
                                                            phases in their project life cycle.
All projects will go through the project management
                                                          Specific to your organization or your industry.
lifecycle regardless of the organization or the industry.
The project management life cycle will be repeated in each
phase of your project.




Standards and regulations - The PMBOK(R) Guide contains the standard
for our profession of project management. Most professions include standards, which are
good practices within the profession. As an example, what might be a good practice within
the medical profession? Interviewing a patient and performing tests before administering
treatment might be good standard practices for the medical profession. Regulations are
documents that must be followed. The PMBOK(R) Guide itself is not a regulation.


STANDARD                                                     REGULATION
Not mandatory to follow                                      Mandatory to follow
Represents good practice                                     Comes from Government
Purpose of the PMBOK(R) Guide                                                -
        The PMBOK(R) Guide describes good practices for the profession of project
        management. This does not mean we should follow the book blindly. Rather we
        should take the ideas given in the book and tailor them so they make sense for our
        projects.
        The PMBOK(R) Guide provides a lexicon (common vocabulary) of project
        management terminology. Having a common vocabulary within a profession makes
        communication easier and reduces the chances of a misunderstanding.
        The PMBOK(R) Guide is a guide not a methodology. As stated earlier, we should not
        expect to follow the book process by process. Instead, we should evaluate our
        project and select the appropriate processes needed for it. These processes should
        be applied to the appropriate level of rigor that adds value, not busy work, to the
        project.
        The PMBOK(R) Guide references the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.
        This code
                       *     describes the ethical expectations for project managers
                           *     mandates compliance with laws, regulations and organizational
                         and professional practices


   EXAM TIP: The categories of the code: responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty.


What is a project?
Most organizations carry out two types of activities: operations, which sustain the
organization, and projects, which change or grow the organization.


   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between projects and operations.


PROJECTS                                               OPERATIONS
Temporary- Has a beginning and an end                  On-going
Produces unique product(s), capabilities or results    Produces standard products or repetitive service
Ends when its objectives have been met or when the project Does not end but is generally a repetitive process -
is terminated                                              following organization's existing procedures
Purpose is to meet objectives and then complete        Purpose is to sustain the business
What is project management?
   Project management is utilizing processes to accomplish the needs of the project's
   stakeholders. A process is a group of related activities performed to create a product
   or result. The PMBOK(R) Guide lists 47 processes in five process groups. These five
   process groups are sometimes called the "project management lifecycle".

   Project management includes turning the needs of the project stakeholders into
   requirements and then planning and managing a project so as to meet those
   requirements. To do this, we must actively engage our stakeholders, including
   actively communicating with them.

   Projects are affected by constraints. Constraints may compete against one another. If
   one of the six primary constraints changes, others may (but don't necessarily have to)
   also change. The six constraints are as follows:

                  *     Scope
                  *     Risk
                  *     Resources
                  *     Quality
                  *     Schedule
                  *     Budget


   These six constraints are based on the original triple constraint - scope, time, and
   cost. Think about your current project. What would happen if a stakeholder wanted
   to add more scope? Would you need to increase the budget, extend the schedule,
   etc.? A big part of project management is managing change requests as they occur.

   Progressive elaboration - allows for improving and adding detail to the plan as
   more information becomes available. Adding additional objectives, requirements, or
   scope is not considered progressive elaboration. Progressive elaboration is adding
   detail to what we already have, not adding new objectives.


Relationship           with         portfolio          management                 and
program management
Organizational Project Framework utilizing project,          program, and portfolio management. Also links to
Management (OPM)       organizational enablers.
                              Group of programs, projects, sub-portfolios, and operations (not necessarily
                              interdependent). Focus is on achieving strategic objectives of the organization.
Portfolio                     Selects the right projects and programs, prioritizes the work, and provides the needed
                              resources.
                              Group of related projects and additional work. Goal is to obtain benefits and control
Program                       not available if projects are managed separately. Manages the interdependencies
                              between projects.
Project                       Deliverable management.




Project Management Office (PMO) - The term PMO may have
different meanings in different organizations. In general, a PMO is a structure within the
organization that can provide governance of the project and aids in the sharing of resources
(people, knowledge, etc.) across projects. There are three (3) types of project management
offices (PMOs) although there may be overlap.

                              Provides low control. This structure provides the support the project needs including
Supportive PMO
                              training, etc.
Controlling PMO               Provides moderate control. This structure provides support and requires compliance.
Directive PMO                 Provides high control. This PMO actually manages the projects.




Relationship between project management and
operations management - Projects and operations may interact in
different ways.

PROJECTS                      OPERATIONS
Requires project management   Requires business process management and operations management
Temporary                     Permanent, process related work



       Often, resources (including people) are transferred from operations to a project at
       the beginning of the project or from the project to operations at the end of a project.
      Operational stakeholders may be very important to project success.
      Project objectives should always be aligned with the overall business objectives.


Role of the project manager - Know that good project managers must
possess all of the following type of skills:




      Area specific skills relate to the functional area of the project. For example, a
      project manager managing a construction project should possess construction skills.
      General management proficiencies include accounting, marketing, and finance.


Project management body of knowledge -                                    Although the
PMBOK(R) Guide contains much useful information, it is not all inclusive. Tailoring the
PMBOK(R) Guide s to fit our projects will increase their likelihood of success. Other
standards exist related to program management and portfolio management. An
organization's project management process capabilities are addressed in PMI's
Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R)).
INTRODUCTION - Sample Questions

1. You are managing the development of a new piece of exercise equipment that will
require a person to exercise for only 30 minutes a day to achieve the same benefits
that another piece of equipment requires 60 minutes per day to achieve. There is
discussion of terminating the project. Projects often terminate because:
a. their objectives have been met
b. additional stakeholders have been added to the stakeholder register
c. new customers have entered the market
d. the project's requirements are not achievable with current technology or funding

2. After a long day of work, you are socializing with other project managers in your
organization. It seems that most of the other project managers are managing one
large project whereas you are managing a group of related projects. Therefore your
goal is to achieve certain benefits that could not be achieved if the projects were
managed separately. Therefore, you:
a. should be paid more since you have more responsibility
b. are a portfolio manager since you are managing a group of related projects
c. should be promoted to senior management since you have so much responsibility
d. are a program manager since you are managing a group of related projects

3. The six competing constraints on a project include?
a. budget, quality, scope, resources, risk, and cost
b. quality, scope, budget, schedule, resources, and time
c. budget, schedule, scope, quality, resources, and risk
d. budget, scope, cost, quality, resources, and risk

4. Managing a project usually includes:
a. identifying requirements
b. selecting the right project
c. prioritizing the work across multiple projects
d. controlling dependencies across projects

5. Projects within a program are related by:
a. shared client
b. common technology
c. shared supplier
d. common outcome


6. The PMBOK(R) Guide describes all of the following except:
a. integration management
b. operations management
c. project management processes
d. quality management

7. Your organization has a long and successful history as a manufacturing company.
Project management is just being introduced and it is your responsibility to make
sure everyone is clear on what project management is and is not. You explain that
managing a project includes all the following except:
a. identifying requirements
b. addressing the needs, concerns, and expectations of the stakeholders
c. balancing the competing needs of the project constraints
d. on-going production of goods and services

8. All of the following are types of PMOs (project management offices) except:
a. analytical
b. supportive
c. controlling
d. directive

9. Your coffee distribution project was a huge success. The senior staff focused on
the tangible elements of business value. For you, which of the following intangible
elements of business value was most important?
a. monetary assets
b. stockholder equity
c. brand recognition
d. utility

10. An organization's project management process capabilities are addressed in:
a. Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R))
b. The PMBOK(R) Guide
c. The Standard for Program Management
d. The Standard for Portfolio Management
11. Projects and operations share which of the following characteristics?
a. planned, executed, and controlled
b. temporary
c. unique products
d. have a definite beginning and end
12. A portfolio is a:
a. group of related projects
b. group of related programs
c. group of related projects and programs that are managed together
d. group of projects or programs that may not necessarily be related
13. You have received acceptance of your last deliverable and are beginning to close
out the project. Your sponsor now informs you that he wants you to add another
phase to the project for operations and maintenance. Operations and maintenance
should:
a. be the last phase of your project
b. be a separate project
c. be a new project
d. be considered work outside of the project
14. One of your fellow project managers comes to you for advice. Instead of
managing one big project, he feels he is managing the same small project over and
over again, sometimes over 100 times a week. No planning is required and he
struggles to follow the project management methodologies set up by the PMO. Most
likely, he is struggling because:
a. he does not have the experience to be managing so many projects
b. project managers should only manage one project at a time
c. he is really involved in operations, not projects
d. the PMO has not developed a good methodology to support different projects
15. Your organization has been struggling with project management for years.
Finally a PMO has been set-up and a project management methodology developed.
You are a member of the PMO for your organization. Your project is to determine
the maturity of your organization as it relates to project, program, and portfolio
management. The standard(s) most likely to help you are:
a. The Standard for Program Management
b. The Standard for Portfolio Managemen
c. The PMBOK(R) Guide
d. Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R))t
INTRODUCTION - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.2
Y         d. We terminate projects when the objectives cannot be met.
N         a. Projects successfully close when their objectives have been met.
N         b. Additional stakeholders may not be a reason to terminate a project.
N         c. Additional customers would not cause us to terminate.


          PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4.1 d. Program managers manage groups of related
2. Yd.    projects to obtain benefits that may not be obtained if the projects were managed
          separately.
          a. and c. Answers related to being promoted or being paid more money generally
N
          will not be the right answers on the exam.
          b. Since your focus is on benefits, most likely you are a program manager. If the
          question stated that you were managing a group of programs and that your focus
N
          was on achieving strategic objectives, `portfolio manager' might be a better
          answer.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.3
          c. The competing constraints are budget, schedule, scope, quality, resources, and
Y
          risk.
N         a. and d. Schedule is missing.
N         b. Risk is missing.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 1.3 and 1.4
Y         a. Identifying requirements is an early part of managing a project.
N         b. Selecting the right projects is part of portfolio management.
N         c. Prioritizing work across multiple projects is part of program management.
N         d. Controlling dependencies across projects is part of program management.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4.1
Y         d. We define related projects as projects with a common (or related) outcome.
          a., b., and c. Having a shared client, common technology, or a shared supplier
N
          does not make projects related to each other.
6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.5.1
          b. Operations management is not part of project management and therefore is not
Y
          contained in the PMBOK(R) Guide.
          a. and d. Integration and quality management are knowledge areas in the
N
          PMBOK(R) Guide.
N         c. Most of the PMBOK(R) Guide is a discussion of the 47 processes.


7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.5.1.1
          d. On-going production is the objective of operations, which are typically on
Y
          going, and not of projects.
N         a. Identifying requirements is an early part of managing a project.
          b. Addressing the needs, concerns, and expectations of the stakeholders is a
N
          significant part of managing a project.
          c. Balancing competing constraints can be a very difficult part of project
N
          management.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4.4
Y         a. There is no such thing as an analytical PMO.
N         b. A supportive PMO provides training, templates, etc.
          c. A controlling PMO ensures conformance to a project management methodology,
N
          etc.
N         d. A directive PMO manages the projects.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.6
Y         c. Brand recognition is an intangible example of business value.
          a., b., and d. Monetary assets, stockholder equity, and utility are all tangible
N
          examples of business value.


10. a.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.8
Y         a. The Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R))
          addresses process capabilities.
N         b. The PMBOK(R) Guide addresses project management processes.
          c. The Standard for Program Management addresses program management
N
          processes.
          d. The Standard for Portfolio Management addresses portfolio management
N
          processes.
11. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.2 (implied)
         a. Projects and operations are performed by people, constrained by limited
Y
         resources, and are planned, executed, and controlled.
N        b. Projects are temporary; operations are on-going.
         c. Projects produce unique products; operations produce multiple units of the
N
         same product.
         d. Progressive elaboration is associated with project scope, product scope, and
N
         assumptions, not with operations.


12. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4.2
         d. A portfolio is a collection of projects or programs and other work that are
         grouped together to facilitate effective management of that work to meet strategic
Y
         business objectives. The projects or programs of the portfolio may not
         necessarily be interdependent or directly related.
         a. A program is a group of related projects managed in a coordinated way to
         obtain benefits and control not available from managing them individually.
N
         Programs may include elements of related work outside of the scope of the
         discrete projects in the program.
         b. and c. The projects and programs in a portfolio may not necessarily be
N
         interdependent or directly related.


13. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.5.1
         d. Operations and maintenance are not parts of a project. They should be
Y
         considered work outside of the project since they are not temporary.


14. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.5.1
         c. Most likely your friend is involved in operations. There are two key ideas in
         the question that lead us to this conclusion. The first is that he is managing over
Y        100 projects a week. Most likely they are not really projects. The second idea;
         the question states that no planning is required. If no planning is required, then he
         is not managing projects.


15. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.8
         d. The Organizational Project Management Maturity Model (OPM3(R)) helps us
Y        understand the maturity of our organization as it relates to project, program, and
         portfolio management.
    ORGANIZATIONAL INFLUENCES
     AND PROJECT LIFE CYCLES
The culture of your organization influences your project and the likelihood of success of
your project. The organizational structure influences the culture and the culture influences
the structure. Know the differences between these different structures.




Organizational process assets and enterprise
environmental factors - know the difference between these ideas for the
exam.


Enterprise Environmental Factors              Organizational Process Assets
May be Internal or external, conditions not under the control
                                                              Plans, processes,      policies,   procedures,   organizational
of the project team that influence, constrain, or direct the
                                                              knowledge bases
project
                                                            Examples include: processes, templates, guidelines, project
Examples include: organizational culture, marketplace
                                                            files, historical information and lessons learned.
conditions, stakeholder risk tolerances, project management
                                                            Databases and knowledge bases that contain
information system (PMIS), systems
                                                            organizational... not commercial data.




Project Stakeholders - any person, group or organization who may affect,
be affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision, action or outcome of a
project.


STAKEHOLDER                               KEY WORDS
Customer/users                            Will use the project's product, result, or service
Sponsor                                   Provides money, champions the project, navigates the political environment
Portfolio Managers/Review Board           High level governance, organizations executives, project selection committee
                                          Manage group of interrelated projects- provide benefits not achievable if
Program Manager
                                          projects are managed separately
Project Management Office                 Support and/or manage projects under the PMO's domain
Project Manager                           Responsible for achieving project objectives
Functional Managers                       Provides management oversight to an administrative area
                                          Responsible for an area of the core business. Deals directly with the
Operational Management
                                          organization's salable products or services
Sellers                                   External companies providing components or services
                                          External companies that fill a specified role such as installation, customization,
Business partners
                                          training, or support



   EXAM TIP: Questions may describe situations in which you will need to be able to
differentiate one stakeholder from another.


Project governance                 is the framework in which the project operates. It
includes the structure, processes, and decision-making models for running a successful
project. The project management plan should describe the project's governance.


Project success should be measured against the most up-to-date baselines that
include all project constraints.
Project Team -
     The project team includes:
                     *    The project manager - Always considered the leader of the
                  team regardless of how much authority the project manager actually
                  exerts.
                    *    The project management staff - A core team that helps the
                 project manager manage the work of the project
                    *    Other team members - The people who do the work of the
                 project

     There are several types of team compositions. Two to know for the exam:
                           *    Dedicated - Most and perhaps all of the team members
                        work full-time on the team. The lines of authority are clear. This
                        is often a more expensive structure since the project manager has
                        all resources full-time even if he does not need to use them all
                        full-time.
                                  We often see dedicated team members used in a
                              projectized structure
                                 Dedicated team members could also be used in a
                              matrix structure although this would most likely be a strong
                              matrix structure
                           *     Part-time - Most team members, including the project
                        manager, are part-time on the project. They may spend the rest of
                        their time supporting operations and/or other projects.
                                  Part-time team members are most often used in a
                              functional structures.
                                  Part-time team members could be used in a matrix
                              structure although this would be most likely be in a weak
                              matrix structure.


Project Life Cycle - Project characteristics may vary over the life of the
project.
See examples below.
                                               Low at the start, peak during intermediate phases, drops off
Cost and Staffing Levels                       quickly
Stakeholder influence, risk and uncertainly    High at the start and gets progressively lower
Cost of changes                                Low at the start and gets progressively higher
Ability to influence product characteristics   High at the start and gets progressively lower




We want to try to identify and include stakeholders
as early as possible.
      Not identifying the right stakeholders early enough and not engaging them strongly
      enough may result in:
                     *     More changes than expected
                      *    Changes that cost more than expected
                      *    Achieving requirements but having the product/deliverables
                   being rejected


   Exam Tips:
                *     If you see a question that states you are experiencing more changes
             than expected, look for an answer stating that you did not identify
             stakeholders, did not identify stakeholders early enough, or did not identify
             the right stakeholders.
                *    If you see a question that states your changes are costing more than
             expected, look for an answer stating that you did not identify stakeholders,
             did not identify stakeholders early enough, or did not identify the right
             stakeholders.
               *     If you see a question that states you have met the requirements but
             your product is still being rejected, look for an answer stating that you did
             not identify stakeholders, did not identify stakeholders early enough, or did
             not identify the right stakeholders.


Project Phases and Project Process Groups                                                   are not the
same thing.
The five (5) process groups are repeated in each of the phases. The example below shows
four (4) typical phases in a construction project. Notice how the five (5) process groups
are repeated in each phase.
Types of Life Cycles - Most likely the predictive life cycle is the only life
cycle you will need for this exam.
ORGANIZATIONAL INFLUENCES AND THE
PROJECT LIFE CYCLE - Sample Questions

1. You have just been hired by a government agency. Although your title is
electronics systems engineer, your primary role seems to be ensuring different
functional groups such as electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and
structural engineering are communicating with one other. With respect to this
organization's projects you are really operating as the:
a. project manager
b. project coordinator
c. project expeditor
d. functional manager

2. Your organization has been in the market of producing high sugar drinks for over
40 years. Now, people are putting more focus on health. Your project is to develop
and produce a new product based on historical products made without sugar. For the
most part your project plan will be based on historical project plans and lessons
learned. Many people will be involved with the project although the team make-up
will change dramatically from phase to phase. Most likely you will use a(n):
a. predictive life cycle
b. iterative life cycle
c. incremental life cycle
d. adaptive life cycle


3. You have spent years managing small and midsize projects for your organization.
Based on your success, you are managing your first large scale project with what
seems like an unending list of project stakeholders. The large number of change
requests makes it difficult to make progress. The most likely reason for this is:
a. not enough money in the budget
b. not enough time in the schedule
c. not enough focus on stakeholder identification and analysis
d. no quality assurance department assigned to the project

4. Your project is to design and build the stadium for a local university. The stadium
will be used by both the university and local sports teams. It is important that the
project adopt the tone of a modern city while not losing the charm of an established
university. Suggestions have been made to overlap many of the project phases so as
to save time and have the stadium ready for a critical soccer tournament. You
realize that overlapping phases often leads to:
a. improved resource optimization
b. buffers to account for project uncertainty
c. activity rework
d. decreased risk

5. The framework that provides the project manager and the team with the
structure, processes, decision-making models, and tools for managing the project is
called:
a. the project management plan
b. project governance
c. change control system
d. project management information system

6. For years your organization has believed that project management is all about
schedules and budgets. Based on many failed projects, stakeholder management is
now being viewed as much more important. Management wants you to focus on
positive stakeholders who can aid in the success of the project. You remind
management that a primary reason you must also focus on negative stakeholders is:
a. stakeholder classification can be very difficult
b. overlooking negative stakeholders can decrease the probability of project success
c. stakeholders must be identified and their requirements determined
d. society at large may be a stakeholder on your project

7. Part-time team members are most likely seen in all of the following types of
structures except:
a. functional structure
b. balanced matrix
c. weak matrix
d. projectized structure

8. If a product is required to be delivered in full in order to have value to its
stakeholder groups, we will most likely utilize what type of life cycle?
a. predictive
b. iterative
c. incremental
d. adaptive
9. To ensure benefits realization, we will often include:
a. extra money in the budget
b. extra risk mitigation techniques
c. a test period, such as a soft launch in services
d. more monitoring during the execution phase

10. If our project requires very rapid iterations, on-going stakeholder involvement,
and high levels of change, we will most likely utilize what type of life cycle?
a. predictive
b. iterative
c. incremental
d. adaptive


11. You have been hired to be the program manager over all of the project managers
who work at the help desk. Most of the projects relate to technical issues and are
resolved within a 24 hour period. Sometimes the solution to one problem leads to the
solution of another problem. The project managers usually do no planning and spend
most of their time trouble shooting one technical problem after another. Their
success rate is very high. The best way to describe this situation is as a:
a. great example of a successful PMO
b. great example of successful program management on your part
c. great example of an operational type organization
d. great example of portfolio management since the solutions are often interrelated

12. The primary role of a project expeditor is to:
a. ensure communication happens quickly
b. set a good example for communication
c. bring parties together that need to communicate
d. escalate communication issues
ORG INFLUENCES AND LIFE CYCLES:
Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.1.3
Y         c. The project expeditor's role on a project is to serve as a communications link.
          a. The project manager's role is to manage the project, not just serve as a
N
          communications link.
          b. The project coordinator is similar to a project expeditor but has some
N
          authority.
          d. The functional manager directs the work of the individuals in his functional
N
          area.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.4.2.2
          a. In a predictive life cycle, the product to be delivered is often well understood,
Y         and a wide base of industry practice exists. The work of each phase is usually
          different requiring a different team make-up for each phase.
          b., c., and d. Interactive, incremental, and adaptive life cycles are not fully plan
N
          driven. Activities are intentionally repeated.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.4.1 (implied but not explicitly stated)
          c. Change requests are often initiated by stakeholders who were not involved in
Y
          early project planning.
          a. Nothing in the question suggests that the project is in trouble from a cost
N
          standpoint. Don't draw conclusions that are not present in the question.
          b. Nothing in the question that suggests that the project is in trouble from a
N
          schedule standpoint. Don't draw conclusions that are not present in the question.
          d. Quality assurance is the application of quality activities to ensure the project
N         will meet requirements. Quality assurance is about applying processes. This
          answer is not related to the question.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.4.2.1
Y         c. Fast tracking may increase the risk of rework.
          a. Resource leveling and resource smoothing may lead to increased resource
N
          optimization.
          b. The critical chain method may lead to the use of buffers to account for project
N
          uncertainty.
          d. Fast tracking often leads to increased project risk as we are performing
N
          activities in parallel that we would prefer to perform in series.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.2.2
Y         b. Governance is a project framework in which decisions are made.
          a. The project plan describes the plan and baselines for the project. As an
N         example, it would not include the decision-making models. These more likely
          would be part of governance.
          c. The change control system describes the process for making changes to the
N
          project.
          d. The project management information system is an environmental factor that
N
          links us to other systems on the project such as the scheduling tool.


6. b.     PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.2.1
          b. A focus on negative stakeholders is necessary because ignoring
Y                                                                                      these
          stakeholders increases the risk of not achieving project success.
          a. Stakeholder classification can be difficult but this does not explain why
N                                                                                      need
          we a focus on negative stakeholders.
          c. The statement that stakeholders must be identified and their requirements
N         determined is true. This does not explain why we need to focus on negative
          stakeholders.
          d. Society at large may be a stakeholder on our project yet this does not
N
          explain why we need to put a focus on negative stakeholders.


7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.3.1
          d. Notice that this question is asking for the exception. In a projectized structure
Y
          team members are full-time.
          a., b., and c. In functional, balanced matrix, and weak matrix structures, project
N         team members are often only part-time. They spend the remainder of their time
          supporting other projects or performing non-project work.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.4.2.2
          a. In a predictive (fully plan-driven) life cycle, the project is often divided into
Y         sequential phases. The product is often delivered and ownership transitioned at
          the end of the last phase.
          b., c., and d. Interactive, incremental, and adaptive life cycles are not fully plan
N         driven. Incremental deliverables are often useful to the project stakeholders. An
          incremental deliverable might be several pages for a website. These pages might
          be useful as other pages are being developed.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.2.3
          c. A soft launch, such as the opening of a restaurant for family members of the
Y
          staff only, is often used to ensure proper operation of a service.
          a. and b. "Extra" is not a good word from the standpoint of project management.
N         We should develop the appropriate budget including contingency funds based on
          risk management, but this would not be considered extra.
          d. We should monitor and control appropriately. Think of the phrase "quality
N         should be planned in, not inspected in." Even though this question is not directly
          about quality, the same ideas apply.


10. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.4.2.4
          d. The key phrase in the question is "rapid iterations". This leads us to an
Y
          adaptive (Agile) life cycle.
          a. A predictive (fully plan-driven) life cycle is designed for projects in which we
N
          fully understand the product and do not want rapid iterations.
          b. and c. While iterative and incremental life cycles allow for many iterations it
N
          is the inclusion of the word "rapid" that makes these the wrong answers.


11. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.5
          c. The critical phrase in the question is to "no planning". This phrase tells us we
Y         are not talking about project management, program management, or portfolio
          management.


12. c.    Verma, Organizing Projects for Success, page 148
Y         c. A communications expeditor is one that brings parties together to communicate.
          a., b., and d. The expeditor may do all these things, but none of these is the
N
          primary role of the expeditor.
            PROJECT MANAGEMENT
                 PROCESSES
     This chapter is an overview of the five (5) process groups presented in the
     PMBOK(R) Guide. These five (5) process groups contain 47 project management
     processes which may be repeated in each of the phases of your project.

     As a project manager, two types of processes are of interest to you:
                    *The               47          project          management
                 processes
                    *     Product-oriented processes                           which are
                 specific to the product, service, or result your project is chartered to
                 produce. While these are important to your particular project, these
                 differ from project to project and are therefore not included on the exam
                 and are not covered in this book.


   Exam Tip: Review and understand Figure 3-1 (page 50) of the PMBOK(R) Guide.
Notice how the monitoring and controlling process group surrounds the other process
groups. Visualize monitoring and controlling as continuous over the life of the project.


     The five (5) process groups are as follows:


                    *     Initiating process group                      - These processes
                 help us to begin a project or a phase of a project. There are two
                 initiating processes. The first initiating process, develop project
                 charter, occurs outside the boundaries of the project.

                    *     Planning process group                 - These processes are
                 used in developing a plan for the project, including developing the
                 project baselines (i.e. scope, time, and cost).
                     *     Executing process group                    - These processes
                  create the project's deliverables through the acquisition, development
                  and management of human resources. A majority of the project budget is
                  spent during executing.

                    * Monitoring and controlling process
                  group - These processes track the project's progress as well as
                  initiate and manage changes to the project. These processes are
                  occurring continuously throughout the life of the project, even while the
                  processes belonging to the other groups are occurring. Notice in Figure
                  3-1of the PMBOK(R) Guide how the monitoring and controlling process
                  group surrounds the other process groups.

                     *     Closing process group                    - These processes are
                  used to close out a project or a phase of a project or a procurement.


     Project Information-                    Much data, information and reports will be
     collected and created on the project.

                                This is the raw data that comes from the direct and manage project work
Work performance data           process. No other process produces work performance data.
                                Data generated by the project are analyzed and compared to the project
                                baselines to create useful information. Decisions are based off on this
Work performance information    information and, not on the raw data itself. Only processes in the monitoring
                                and controlling process group transform work performance data into work
                                performance information.
                                The product created (physical or electronic) from the work performance
Work performance reports        information. Be aware that different stakeholders will need different reports.
   Exam Tip: Know the following:
              *    work performance data are an output of the direct and manage
           project work process
               *     work performance data are an input to most controlling processes
               *     work performance information is an input of monitor and control
             project work
               *     work performance reports are an output of monitor and control
             project work



Role of the knowledge areas - The 47 processes are not only grouped
into the five (5) process groups but they are also grouped into ten (10) knowledge areas.
See page 61 from the PMBOK(R) Guide for the five process groups, the ten knowledge
areas, and the 47 processes.
Exam Tips: For the Exam:
           *     Be able to reproduce page 61 of the PMBOK(R) Guide from memory.
        This includes:
                       Names of ten (10) knowledge areas and what processes are in
               each knowledge area
                       Names of five (5) process groups and what processes are in
               each process group
           *    Know the tools and techniques (in detail) for each of the 47
         processes
           *    Know the inputs and outputs (in less detail) for each of the 47
         processes
PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROCESSES -
Sample Questions

1. The five project management process groups include:
a. initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling
b. integration, scope, time, cost, and quality
c. initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing
d. concept, planning, execution, controlling, and closeout

2. Implementation status for change requests is an example of:
a. an element of the project plan
b. work performance reports
c. work performance information
d. work performance data

3. Work performance data are:
a. an input to project executing
b. an output of project executing
c. an input into close project or phase
d. an output of overall project control

4. Large and complex projects are often separated into distinct phases. The five
process groups are:
a. the same as these project phases
b. normally repeated in each of these phases
c. related to the product and, therefore, not related to the project phases
d. related to project management and therefore not related to the project phases

5. The processes of which process group are normally performed external to the
project's level of control?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. monitoring and controlling

6. In multi-phase projects, the initiating processes occur:
a. only during the concept phase
b. in every phase
c. only in the early phases
d. only when the sponsor requests them

7. The project becomes officially authorized through the:
a. approval of the concept phase gate
b. approval of the project charter
c. approval of the WBS
d. approval of the scope statement


8. Work performance information is often:
a. an input into project executing
b. an output of project executing
c. an output of controlling processes
d. an output of closing processes

9. The process group that must provide feedback to implement corrective or
preventive action is:
a. planning
b. executing
c. monitoring and controlling
d. implementation

10. The processes that specify and create the project's product are called:
a. project management processes
b. scope management processes
c. product management processes
d. quality management processes

11. The processes of which process group occur at the same time as the processes of
all the other process groups?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. monitoring and controlling

12. The project statement of work is an input to which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. closing

13. The project charter is an input to which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. closing


14. Deliverables are an input to which process group?
a. monitoring and controlling
b. planning
c. executing
d. closing

15. Accepted deliverables are an input to which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. closing

16. Approved change requests are an input into which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. closing

17. Actual start and finish dates of schedule activities are an example of:
a. elements of the project plan
b. work performance reports
c. work performance information
d. work performance data

18. The stakeholder register is an input into which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. closing

19. The vast majority of the project budget is spent during which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. monitoring and controlling

20. Electronic dashboards are an example of:
a. deliverables
b. work performance reports
c. work performance information
d. work performance data
PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROCESSES:
Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 3 - Introduction
          c. The five project management process groups are initiating, planning, executing,
Y
          monitoring and controlling, and closing.
          a. Monitoring and controlling together are the fourth process group; they are not
N
          two separate groups. Closing is not on this list.
          b. Integration, scope, time, cost, and quality are knowledge areas, not process
N
          groups.
          d. Concept, execution, and closeout are often names for phases of a project life
N
          cycle, not the five project management process groups.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.8
          c. Work performance information includes performance data that have been
Y
          analyzed.
          a. The project plan includes sub-plans and baselines. It does not include collected
N
          performance data.
N         b. Work performance reports are documents (physical or electronic).
N         d. Work performance data are raw observations and measurements, not in context.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-5
          b. Work performance data are the raw observations and measurements produced
Y         from executing. This is the name of the data before they have been processed
          through the controlling processes and turned into work performance information.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.2
          b. The five process groups are normally repeated in each project phase. The
Y
          process groups are not the project phases themselves.
N         a. The project life cycle typically defines the product oriented processes.
          c. The five project management process groups are related to the project, not the
N
          product itself.
          d. Projects are managed through the five process groups, and the five process
N
          groups are repeated in each of the project phases.
5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.3
          a. Initiating concerns the formal authorization to start a new project or project
Y         phase. Develop project charter is performed outside of the project's scope of
          control. This, at times, may blur the project's boundaries.
          b., c., and d. The planning, executing, and monitoring and controlling processes
N
          are all completed internal to the project's scope of control.


6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.3
          b. The initiating processes are repeated at the start of every phase. Reviewing the
Y         initiating processes at the beginning of every phase helps to keep the project
          focused.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.3
Y         b. The project charter authorizes the project or the project phase.
          a. Approval of the concept phase gate signifies that the work of the concept phase
N
          is complete.
          c. The approval of the WBS, and of the scope statement before it, signifies that
N
          we have a scope baseline, which is completed after the project is authorized.
          d. The scope statement is the definition of the project, which is completed long
N
          after the project is authorized.


8.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-5
          c. Work performance information consists of the performance data that have been
Y         analyzed and integrated in context during many of the controlling processes.
          Therefore, it is an output of the controlling processes.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.6
          c. The monitoring and controlling process group provides feedback to implement
Y         corrective or preventive actions to bring the project into compliance with the
          project management plan or to appropriately modify the project management plan.
          a. The planning process group defines the course of action required to attain the
N
          objectives and the scope the project was undertaken to address.
          b. The executing process group integrates people and other resources to carry out
N
          the project management plan for the project.
N         d. There is no such thing as an implementation process group.
10. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 3 - Introduction
         c. The product management processes are the processes used to create the
Y
         project's product.
         a. The 47 project management processes are associated with the project. These
N        47 processes are often repeated in each of the project phases, regardless of the
         project's product.
         b. The scope processes are used to ensure we perform all the work, and only the
N
         work required, on the project.
N        d. The quality processes are used to ensure we achieve the project's objectives.


11. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.1
         d. This may be a confusing idea. Many people think that we monitor and control
Y        only after executing. Don't think of monitoring as a phase of the project. It is not,
         but rather is something that we are continuously doing over the life of the project.


12. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-3
         a. The project statement of work describes the output the customer (or sponsor)
Y        wants from the project. The document is written before the project begins.
         Therefore, it is an input to the initiating process group.


13. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-3
         b. The project charter is an output of the process develop project charter. It is an
         output of the initiating process group and therefore an input of the planning
Y
         process group. The charter lists the project objectives. These objectives need to
         be defined before project planning can begin.


14. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-3
         a. The deliverables are an output of the executing process group. They are the
         reason we have projects. The deliverables lead to the objectives. The
         deliverables are an input to the monitoring and controlling process group. In the
Y        monitoring and controlling process group, they go to control quality to be tested
         for correctness. After that, they go to the validate scope process so the customer
         (or sponsor) can inspect them for acceptance. Accepted deliverables are an input
         to the closing process group.


15. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-3
         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of the process validate scope, which is
         part of the monitoring and controlling process group. Once accepted deliverables
Y        leave the monitoring and controlling process group, they become an input to the
         closing process group. The output of the closing process group is the final
         product, service, or result transition.

16. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-3
         c. Change requests are an output of most of the executing processes and all of the
         monitoring and controlling processes. The change requests are an input to the
Y        integrated change control process. If the requests are approved, they are fed back
         into the direct and manage project work process for implementation.


17. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.8
Y        d. Actual start and finish dates are raw data.
         a. The planned start and finish dates, not the actual start and finish dates, are in
N
         the project plan.
         b. Work performance reports are the physical representation of the work
N
         performance information.
         c. Work performance information contrasts the actual start and finish dates for a
N        particular context with the planned start and finish dates.

18. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-3

         b. The stakeholder register is an output of the process identify stakeholders,
Y        which is part of the initiating process group. It becomes an input to the planning
         process group. As an example the stakeholder register becomes an input to the
         process collect requirements which is a process belonging the planning process
         group.
19. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.5

Y        c. The executing process group is where a majority of the project budget is spent.
N        a. More money is spent during executing than during initiating.
         b. The planning processes develop the project plan. More money is spent
N
         executing the project plan than developing the project plan.
         d. The monitoring and controlling processes observe project execution. Potential
N        problems are analyzed and corrective action taken. More money is spent in
         general on executing than monitoring and controlling.
20. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 3.8
         b. Electronic dashboards are a way of reporting information. Therefore, they are
Y
         an example of work performance reports.
                INITIATING PROCESSES
Initiating Process Group - Based on the PMBOK(R) Guide, two initiating
processes are performed to define a new project or a new phase of a project. Although the
work involved in developing the project charter occurs outside the project boundaries, it
constitutes a first, critical initiating process, and the project becomes official only when its
charter is approved. The second initiating process, identify stakeholders, consists of
identifying, analyzing, and prioritizing the project's stakeholders.

The primary outputs of the initiating process group are twofold:
              *     The project charter
                *     The stakeholder register


Based on the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) there are eight (8)
tasks of initiating, and these represent 13% of the exam's content. Certain key phrases are
associated with each task:

            Task                                             Key Phrases
           Task 1                                     Perform project assessment
           Task 2                                      Identify key stakeholders
           Task 3                                    Perform stakeholder analysis
           Task 4                        Identify high level risks, assumptions, and constraints
           Task 5                         Participate in the development of the project charter
           Task 6                          Obtain project charter approval from the sponsor
           Task 7                                       Conduct benefit analysis
           Task 8                              Inform stakeholders of approved charter



The PMBOK(R) Guide, the most often selected reference in studying for the PMP(R) Exam,
does not list the tasks comprising the Initiating process group but emphasizes processes
instead. Although not as robust as the PMBOK(R) Guide for in-depth study, the PMP(R)
Examination Content Outline presents the tasks shown in the table above. Although
memorizing these tasks for the exam is not necessary, reviewing them from time to time is
recommended because they form the basis of the PMP(R) Exam's questions on project
initiating. As we cover the two processes in the Initiating Process Group in the upcoming
pages, you can see how these tasks relate to the processes.
Develop Project Charter


  Exam Tip: Review Figure 4-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     A project charter formally declares that the project has been approved. It names the
     project manager and states the level of authority the project manager has on this
     project. Typically, the project sponsor signs the charter.


INPUTs of develop project charter

   EXAM TIP: The project statement of work (PSOW), which is often confused with the
scope statement, describes what the project is intended to accomplish. The scope
statement, which the project manager and other team members develop, describes the
work on the project required to deliver what the PSOW describes.


     Project Statement of Work (PSOW) -                                    Describes the
     project's output.
                     *    For internal projects, this document originates with the project
                  sponsor
                     *    For external projects, this documents originates with the
                  customer


     The Business Case - This document describes the return on investment
     expected from the project, which may be in terms of money or some other measure
     such as employee satisfaction.


     Agreements -            This document defines an agreement between the project
     organization and another group. For external customers, the agreement would be in
     the form of a contract.


     Organizational process assets                          - These are organizational
     assets, which may consist of plans, processes , procedures and other assets involved
     in developing the project charter. Examples include the following:
                     *    A process, which defines the procedures used to develop a
                 project charter
                     *    A template for a project charter, which saves the organization
                 from having to write a charter from scratch
                     *    Historical information, e.g., past project charters which the
                 organization can follow in writing the current charter


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of develop project
charter

     Expert Judgment - An expert can be anyone who has knowledge that
     can aid in the successful completion of a project. Finding ways to add the expertise
     of such an individual can increase the project's probability of success.


     Facilitation techniques - These techniques can be used to facilitate
     interactions with stakeholders and the development of the charter.


OUTPUTs of develop project charter

     Project Charter - This document, issued by the project sponsor, puts the
     organization on notice that the project has official standing. Its existence is critical to
     the success of the project. It should list the project's objectives, the key deliverables
     and identify the project manager. Most of the other information contained in the
     document are at a relatively high level of detail.


   EXAM TIP: The work needed to develop the charter is completed outside of the
project's boundaries. Although the project manager participates in its development, the
sponsor usually signs the project charter.


A few other ideas concerning project selection may
be on the exam but are not presented in the
PMBOK(R) Guide, including:
Such constrained optimization methods as linear programming.


   EXAM TIP: Any project selection method that ends with the word "programming" is
a constrained optimization method. You need to be able only to recognize such items as
constrained optimization methods; you do not need to be able to explain them.


Cost-benefit analysis, an accounting method used to determine if investing in a project is
worthwhile and to compare the values of different projects.


  EXAM TIP: For the exam, be aware that a higher benefit/cost ratio, sometimes
abbreviated as B/C, is preferable to a lower one.


Internal Rate of Return (IRR), an accounting method used to compare the relative
profitability of investments.


   EXAM TIP: For the exam, be aware that a higher IRR is preferable to a lower one.


Payback period, an accounting method used to determine the breakeven point of a project.


  EXAM TIP: For the exam, be aware that a shorter payback period is preferable to a
longer one.


Economic value added (EVA) is the profit earned less its cost of financing capital.

Present value (PV), an accounting concept used to translate the value of one future cash
inflow or outflow into today's dollars.
Equation:


PV= FV/(1 + i)t
FV = future value, i = interest rate, t = time


Net Present Value (NPV). This term is similar to the one above except that it contains the
word "net". Whereas a present value looks at the value of one future cash flow translated
into today's dollars, net present value translates a stream of future cash flows into today's
dollars. With respect to a project, these flows consist of the project's benefits (future
inflows) and the project's investment (outflows at the beginning and possibly throughout
the life of the project).


  EXAM TIP: For the exam, be aware that a higher net present value is better than a
lower one. Net present value is calculated with the equation shown in the following
example:

NPV Example:
Project A has an initial investment at the start of the project of $100,000. At the end of
year one, the project will yield a benefit of $50,000, and at the end of year two it will
yield another benefit of $50,000. The project will yield no other benefits. Assuming a
discount rate (interest rate) of 10%, what is the net present value of Project A?

NPV Solution:
The only investment in the project, $100,000, was made at its beginning. Since we are
translating the project to current dollars and since this investment represents an outflow,
the investment's present value is a negative $100,000.

The present value of the $50,000 received at the end of Year 1 is calculated as follows:


PV= FV/(1 + i)t
PV= $50,000/(1.1)1
PV= $45,454.55

The present value of $50,000 received at the end of Year 2:
PV= FV/(1+ i)t
PV= $50,000/(1.1)2
PV= $41,322.31

Therefore, the NPV for Project A = -$100,000 + $45,454.55 + $41,322.31
NPV for Project A = -$13,223.14

The answer is negative because the benefits are of less value than the investment. Here,
net present value was the difference between the benefits received over the longer term
and the initial investment.
Develop Project Charter - Sample Questions

1. What document formally authorizes a project?
a. the project statement of work
b. the contract
c. the project charter
d. the business case

2. Who authorizes a project?
a. the project manager
b. the project sponsor
c. the project stakeholders
d. the customer

3. Which of the following is usually included in a project charter?
a. project risk register
b. project work breakdown structure
c. detailed project deliverables
d. project objectives

4. If someone requests a change to the project charter, who most likely would need
to approve this change?
a. the project manager
b. the project sponsor
c. the project stakeholders
d. the customer

5. Which document is a narrative description of the products or services to be
delivered by the project?
a. the project statement of work
b. the contract
c. the project charter
d. the business case

6. A project's cost-benefit analysis is usually contained in what document?
a. the project statement of work
b. the contract
c. the project charter
d. the business case

7. Which of the following is a legal document between the organization performing
the work and an external customer?
a. the organizational process assets
b. the contract
c. the project charter
d. the business case

8. The project charter includes:
a. the project objectives
b. detailed cost estimates
c. the risk management methodology
d. a list of project team members

9. Which of the following is an organizational asset?
a. government standards
b. industry standards
c. marketplace conditions
d. a lessons-learned knowledge base

10. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor?
a. government standards
b. organizational processes
c. templates
d. historical information

11. All of the following are examples of facilitation techniques except:
a. expert judgment
b. brainstorming
c. conflict resolution
d. problem solving

12. When a project is being performed for an external customer, the most likely
form of agreement is what?
a. service level agreement
b. memorandum of understanding
c. letter of intent
d. contract

13. The portfolio review board is conducting its yearly project selection meeting.
Which of the following projects is the review board most likely to choose? Project A
with an IRR of 12%, Project B with an IRR of 18%, Project C with an IRR of 9%,
or Project D with an IRR of 14%?
a. Project A
b. Project B
c. Project C
d. Project D


14. The portfolio review board is conducting its yearly project selection meeting.
Which of the following projects is the review board most likely to choose? Project F
with an NPV (net present value) of $235Mil, Project G with an NPV of $282Mil,
Project H with an NPV of $821Mil, or Project I with an NPV of $183Mil?
a. Project F
b. Project G
c. Project H
d. Project I

15. The portfolio review board is conducting its yearly project selection meeting.
Which of the following projects is the review board most likely to choose? Project J
with a payback period of 23 months, Project K with a payback period of 18 months,
Project L with a payback period of 42 months, or Project M with a payback period
of 38 months?
a. Project J
b. Project K
c. Project L
d. Project M

16. The portfolio review board is conducting its yearly project selection meeting.
Which of the following projects is the review board most likely to choose? Project N
with a benefit cost ratio of 1.2, Project M with a benefit cost ratio of 1.5, Project P
with a benefit cost ratio of .8, or Project Q with a benefit cost ratio of .92?
a. Project N
b. Project M
c. Project P
d. Project Q

17. The portfolio review board is conducting its yearly project selection meeting.
The most likely item not to be reviewed during selection is:
a. sunk costs
b. benefit-cost analysis
c. net present value
d. payback period

18. The portfolio steering committee is considering selecting Project A. The
committee expects the project to produce a one-time benefit of $900,000 three
years from now. The interest rate at a local bank is 10% per year. How much would
need to be invested in the bank now to obtain the same benefit?
a. $ 900,000
b. $ 676,183
c. $ 1,197,900
d. $ 743,801

19. The portfolio review board is conducting a project selection review. They are
going to make their decision based on the net present value (NPV) estimates for the
projects. The organization has only $100,000 available for investment. Based on the
following information, which project should they select?

Assume an interest rate of 5%.
Project A - Initial investment of $100,000. Benefit at end of Year 1 of $40,000.
Additional benefit at end of Year 2 of $70,000. No other benefits.
Project B - Initial investment of $100,000. No benefit at the end of Year 1.
Benefit of $42,000 at end of Year 2. Additional benefit of $70,000 at end of Year 3.
a. Project A
b. Project B
c. Both projects since they each have a positive net present value.
d. Neither project since they each have a negative net present value.
DEVELOP PROJECT CHARTER - Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.3.1
Y         c. The charter is the official document that signifies we have an approved project.
          a. The project statement of work is a narrative description of the output the
N
          customer would like from the project.
          b. The contract is a legal document between an external customer and our
N         organization. We still need an internal document (i.e., the charter) to show that we
          have an approved project. A contract many be split into many projects.
          d. The business case shows the return on investment for the project. It does not
N
          signify that a project has been approved.


2.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1
Y         b. The sponsor is the best answer.
          a. The project manager can not authorize his own project. Instead, this must be
N
          done by someone higher up in the organization.
          c. The answer "project stakeholders" is too broad. Although the sponsor is a
N
          stakeholder, this is not the best answer.
          d. The customer could be external and so would not be able to authorize the
N         project. Even if the customer were internal, they could most likely not authorize
          the project.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.3.1
Y         d. The primary item documented in the charter is the project objective(s).
          a., b., and c. These documents are too detailed. They would be created later
N
          during planning.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1
          b. Think of the sponsor as the owner of the charter and so the only one who could
Y
          approve changes to it.
          a. The charter names the project manager and describes this individual's level of
N
          authority. Therefore, the project manager could not authorize changes to it.
          c. The answer "project stakeholders" is too broad. Although the sponsor is a
N
          stakeholder, this is not the best answer.
          d. The customer most likely would never even see the project charter, let alone be
N         able to approve changes to it. (For the exam, make sure you understand the
          difference between the sponsor and the customer.)


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.1.1
          a. The project statement of work is a narrative description of the output the
Y
          customer would like from the project.
          b. The contract is a legal document between the external customer and our
N
          organization. It may reference the project statement of work.
          c. The charter is the official document signifying that we have an approved
N
          project. It should contain the project objectives.
N         d. The business case shows the return on investment for the project.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.1.2
          d. The business case shows the return on investment for the project. This may be
Y
          based on a cost-benefit analysis, its payback period, its net present value, etc.
          a. The project statement of work is a narrative description of the output (products
N
          or services) the customer expects from the project.
          b. The contract is a legal document between the external customer and our
N
          organization. It will include the contract price but not the cost-benefit analysis.
          c. The charter is the official document signifying that we have an approved
N
          project. It may include a summary budget but not the cost-benefit analysis.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 4.1 and 4.1.1.3
          b. The contract is the official, legal document between our organization and our
Y
          external customer.
          a., c., and d. These documents are internal documents and are not legal
N
          documents.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.3.1
Y         a. The primary item documented in the charter is the project objective(s).
          b., c., and d. These ideas are too detailed. They would be created later during
N
          planning.


9.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.1.5
          d. Organizational assets are assets owned by the organization that help us manage
Y         processes. Examples include processes, templates, past project documents, and
          lessons learned.
N        a., b., and c. These examples are enterprise environmental factors, not
         organizational process assets.


10. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.1.4
         a. Government standards exist in the environment and do not belong to the
Y
         organization and therefore are considered enterprise environmental factors.
         b., c., and d. These are organizational process assets, not enterprise
N
         environmental factors.


11. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 4.1.2.1 - 4.1.2.2
         a. Expert judgment is used to help with many processes, although it is not
Y        considered a facilitation technique. A facilitation technique helps us design and
         run our meetings so that they are more productive.
N        b., c., and d. These are all facilitation techniques.


12. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.1.3
         d. A contract is a legal document between an external customer and our
Y
         organization.
         a. Service level agreements may be legally binding or not legally binding (i.e., to
N
         define internal relationships).
         b. In general, a memorandum of understanding defines a future relationship or a
N        relationship wherein the parties do not want (or need) a legally binding
         agreement (i.e., a contract).
N        c. Letters of intent are often considered pre-contracts.


13. b.   Any accounting book
Y        b. Select the project with the highest IRR (internal rate of return).


14. c.   Any accounting book
Y        c. Select the project with the highest NPV (net present value).


15. b.   Any accounting book
Y        b. Select the project with the shortest payback period.


16. b.   Any accounting book
Y        b. Select the project with the highest benefit cost ratio.


17. a.   Any accounting textbook or web search
         a. Sunk costs are costs that have already been expended and cannot be recouped.
Y
         Consequently, these should not be taken into account during project selection.
         b. Since we would normally select those projects having the highest benefit-cost
N
         ratio, we should take these into account during project selection.
         c. In general, we want the present value of a project's inflows to be greater than
N        the present value of its outflows (i.e., a positive net present value) when selecting
         a project. Thus, we should take into account net present value.
         d. In general, we want the payback period (the time required for the project to
N        repay its initial investments) to be as short as possible. Thus, we should take into
         account the payback period.


18. b.   Any accounting textbook or web search
         b. This question is actually asking us to determine the present value of $900,000,
         which we calculate using PV = FV/(1 + i)t
         Present Value = (Future Value) divided by ((one plus the interest rate) to the t
Y        power) where t equals the number of time periods.
         PV = $900,000/(1+.1)3= $900,000/(1.1)3= $676,183. The question is asking us
         about present value (PV), though nowhere in the question is the term present value
         (PV) used.


19. a.   Any accounting textbook or web search
         a. Project A has a higher NPV than Project B, and its NPV is positive, showing
Y
         that our forecasts are that we will make money on the project.

Project A:
The Present Value of $40,000 received at the end of Year 1:


PV = FV/(1 + i)t
PV = $40,000/(1.05)1
PV = $38,095.23

The Present Value of $70,000 received at the end of Year 2:
PV = FV/(1 + i)t
PV = $70,000/(1.05)2
PV = $63,492.06
Therefore, the NPV for Project A = -$100,000 + $38,095.23+$63,492.06 = +$1,587.29

Project B:
The Present Value of $42,000 received at the end of Year 2:
PV= FV/(1+ i)t
PV = $42,000/(1.05)2
PV = $38.095.23

The Present Value of $70,000 received at the end of Year 3:
PV = FV/(1 + i)t
PV = $70,000/(1.05)3
PV = $60,468.61

Therefore, the NPV for Project B = -$100,000 + $38,095.23 + $60,468.61= -$1,436.16
Identify Stakeholders
Some of you may be wondering why this process is presented next in this book. The reason
is that the book's organization is based on process groups and not knowledge areas. There
were several reasons for our adopting this organization, but the primary one was to make
the material in the study guide more realistic and more representative of real world
projects and of those presented on the exam. You may find reviewing page 61 of the
PMBOK(R) Guide helpful at this point. Review the columns in the table to clearly see the
processes of each process group.


   Exam Tip: Review Figure 13-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


      Identifying and analyzing project stakeholders early allows us to develop a plan that
      focuses the appropriate amount of attention on each stakeholder(s). Not all
      stakeholders are the same, and we want our primary focus to be on the most
      important relationships that drive project success.


INPUTs of identify stakeholders (not all listed)

      Project charter - This document lists the name(s) of the sponsor, the
      project manager, and possibly other key stakeholders. It also would include the
      project objectives, key deliverables and many other elements.


      Procurement documents - These documents are an output of plan
      procurement management and so may list key project stakeholders such as vendors,
      contractors, etc. If our customer is external, the contract may also list key
      stakeholders from within our customer's organization.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of identify stakeholders
(not all listed)
   Stakeholder analysis - This is a tool and technique used to gather
   and analyze data about our stakeholders so that we know which stakeholders warrant
   the most focus. At the same time, we want to think about existing relationships and
   how we can use those relationships to the benefit of the project.

   Often this stakeholder analysis is a three (3) step process:

                   1. Identify all stakeholders and everything we know about them
                   2. Analyze the impact or support each stakeholder could provide
                   3. Perform scenario planning - thinking about how each
                stakeholder would react if different situations occur.

   Several models can help us with this. For instance, the Salience Model, shown
   below, is based on three factors:

                   *   Power - A stakeholder's level of authority
                   *   Urgency - The level to which the stakeholder requires
                immediate attention
                   *   Legitimacy - The appropriateness of the stakeholder's level of
                involvement




 Exam Tips: Recognize the three factors.


OUTPUTs of identify stakeholders
The stakeholder register -                      This document lists the project's
stakeholders and pertinent information about them. Because the nature of the project
may make some elements more important than others and because these elements
may change over time, the register is a living document, probably requiring update
on a very regular basis as stakeholders join and leave the project or their levels of
interest and influence change.
IDENTIFY STAKEHOLDERS - Sample Questions

1. Which of the following statements concerning stakeholders is true?
a. all stakeholders are customers
b. all stakeholders are positive
c. all stakeholders should be classified
d. all stakeholders should be treated the same

2. A failure to identify stakeholders or to not identify them early enough in the
project may increase the risk of all of the following except:
a. more requested changes
b. changes costing more money than they should
c. the deliverable or product being rejected by the customer
d. a smoother running project

3. The project sponsor is usually identified in what document?
a. the project statement of work
b. the project scope statement
c. the project charter
d. the project management plan

4. Which of the following is an organizational process asset?
a. government standards
b. industry standards
c. organizational culture
d. stakeholder register templates

5. Which of the following is an enterprise environmental factor?
a. company culture
b. lessons learned
c. stakeholder register templates
d. historical information from previous projects

6. Which of the following is an input to identify stakeholders?
a. project statement of work
b. business case
c. procurement documents
d. stakeholder register

7. A stakeholder register includes all of the following except:
a. strategy to interact with stakeholders
b. stakeholder classification
c. assessment information
d. identification information

8. Which of the following is a tool and technique for identify stakeholders?
a. stakeholder analysis
b. communications methods
c. organizational theory
d. negotiations

9. One of the key reasons for prioritizing stakeholders is to ensure that:
a. all stakeholders are treated the same
b. communicating with stakeholders is efficient use of effort
c. each stakeholder gets the same level of focus
d. no stakeholders are overlooked

10. Which classification model describes classes of stakeholders based on their
power over the project, urgency, and stakeholder legitimacy?
a. power/interest grid
b. power/influence grid
c. influence/impact grid
d. salience model

11. The legitimacy of a stakeholder is often defined as:
a. their ability to impose their will
b. their need for immediate attention
c. the appropriateness of their involvement with the project
d. their level of concern
IDENTIFY STAKEHOLDERS - Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1
Y         c. All stakeholders should be classified so as to better manage their expectations.
N         a. All customers are stakeholders but not all stakeholders are customers.
N         b. We wish all stakeholders would be positive but reality tells us differently.
          d. We want to treat all stakeholders fairly. They may have different needs and
N
          different impacts and therefore should not be treated the same.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.4.1
          d. The earlier we identify and involve our stakeholders, the more likely our
Y
          project will run smoothly.
          a. The earlier we identify and involve our stakeholders, the fewer requested
N
          changes we should expect.
          b. The earlier we identify and involve our stakeholders, the less likely changes
N
          will cost more than expected.
          c. The earlier we identify and involve our stakeholders, the less likely the product
N
          will be rejected.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.1.1
          c. The project charter, which is issued by the sponsor, should identify both the
Y
          sponsor and the project manager.
          a. The project statement of work defines the output the customer is looking for
N
          from the project.
          b. The scope statement describes both the product and the project scope. d. The
N
          project management plan includes the baselines as well as the management plans.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 13.1.1.3 and 13.1.1.4
Y         d. In general, templates are considered organizational process assets.
          a., b., and c. Standards and culture are considered enterprise environmental
N
          factors.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 13.1.1.3 and 13.1.1.4
Y         a. Company culture is an enterprise environmental factor.
          b., c., and d. Lessons learned: stakeholder register templates and historical
N         information are considered organizational process assets.



6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.1.2
Y         c. Procurement documents are an input of identify stakeholders.
          a. and b. The project statement of work and the business case are an input to
N
          develop project charter.
N         d. The stakeholder register is an output of identify stakeholders.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.3.1
          a. The stakeholder management plan, not the stakeholder register, describes the
Y
          strategy for interaction with the project stakeholders.
          b., c., and d. The stakeholder register addresses: classification, assessment, and
N
          identification information.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.2.1
Y         a. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique of identify stakeholders.
          b. Communication methods are a tool and technique of both plan communications
N
          and manage communications.
          c. Organizational theory is a tool and technique of plan human resource
N
          management.
N         d. Negotiation is a tool and technique of acquire project team.


9.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1
          b. We want to prioritize our stakeholders to ensure that each stakeholder receives
Y
          the appropriate amount of attention.
          a. and c. We want to treat all stakeholders fairly. They may have different needs
N         and different impacts and therefore should not be treated the same or given the
          same amount of focus.
          d. We identify all stakeholders to ensure that no one is overlooked. We prioritize
N
          stakeholders to ensure that each receives the appropriate level of focus.


10. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.2.1
Y         d. The salience model prioritizes based on power, urgency, and legitimacy.
N         a. The power/interest grid prioritizes based on power and interest.
N         b. The power/influence grid prioritizes based on power and influence.
N        c. The influence/impact grid prioritizes based influence and impact.


11. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.2.1
         c. Legitimacy of stakeholders is defined based on the appropriateness of their
Y
         involvement.
N        a. Power is defined as a stakeholder's ability to impose his/her will.
N        b. Urgency is defined as the stakeholder's need for immediate attention.
N        d. Interest is defined as a stakeholder's level of concern.
INITIATING - Knowledge and Skills
These ideas discussed below are based on information provided by the PMP(R) Exam
Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) and may or may not be directly referenced in the
PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Analytical skills -                  include the ability to visualize, articulate,
     conceptualize, and/or solve both complex and relatively simple problems by making
     decisions that are reasonable given the information available. These skills include
     demonstrable abilities to apply logical thinking to the gathering and analysis of
     information, to design and test problem solutions, and to formulate plans.
     Although one common use of analytical techniques is to forecast potential outcomes,
     analytical techniques are used in many project management processes.


     Benefits analysis techniques -                           may include five related
     domains.
                    1. Benefits identification. The purpose of benefits identification is
                 to analyze the available information to identify and quantify the benefits
                 the project stakeholders expect to realize. A key output of benefits
                 identification is the benefits register. The benefits register should list
                 the planned benefits and is used to communicate and measure the
                 delivery of benefits throughout the project (and or program).
                    2. Benefits analysis and planning. The purpose of benefits
                 analysis and planning is to establish the project (or program) benefits
                 realization plan, the benefits metrics and the framework for monitoring
                 and controlling the benefits. Key outputs include:
                           a. Benefits realization plan- documents the strategy to
                        achieve benefits.
                           b. Benefits metrics - which consists of the key performance
                        indicators (KPIs) associated with each benefit. These may be
                        included in the benefit realization plan.

                     3. Benefits delivery. The purpose of benefits delivery is to ensure
                 the project (or program) delivers the expected benefits, as defined in
                 the benefits realization plan.
                     4. Benefits transition. Since a project's benefits have value only
                 if their intended recipients are able to utilize them, how they are to be
            operationalized must be defined. Thus, the purpose of this domain is to
            ensure these benefits are transitioned to operational areas and can be
            sustainable over time.
               5. Benefits sustainment. The purpose of this domain is to ensure
            that the intended recipients of the project's benefits continue to enjoy
            these benefits on an ongoing basis.


Elements of a project charter -                         The following are typical
elements found in a project's charter.
               *     Project purpose and justification
               *     Measurable project objectives
               *     Key Deliverables
               *     Project manager, including name and authority level
               *     Sponsor, including name and authority level
               *     Other elements. Since most of these elements are at a high or
            summary level, they will become increasingly more detailed as project
            planning progresses. Keep in mind that, although the project manager
            participates in developing the project charter, he or she does not own
            the development or have authority to approve the project's charter.


Estimating tools and techniques -                                An estimate is a
quantitative assessment of the likely amount of outcome. Estimates are outputs of
many project processes specifically in the cost and time knowledge areas. Estimates
should always include some indication of the degree of their accuracy.

The Practice Standard for Project Estimating (Project Management Institute, 2011)
describes a four-stage life cycle in project estimation:
                1. Prepare to estimate - This step includes such actions as
             determining the estimation approach, defining the team tasked with
             formulating estimates, constraints to the estimation process, etc.
                2. Create estimates - In this step, actual time and dollar estimates
             are formulated, including those associated with the resources needed to
             complete processes.
                3. Manage estimates - This step occurs after work on the project
             has begun. It involves modifying estimates as new information becomes
             available, comparing actual to estimated costs and durations, and
             calibrating project cost and duration forecasts.
                4. Improve the estimating process - Lessons learned throughout the
            estimating process during the project's lifecycle should be preserved
            for use in future project estimates.


Strategic Alignment                   - We assure that program and project
implementation support the organization's strategic objectives. Involved in this
alignment process are the organization's vision, the desired future state of the
organization; its mission, the organization's overarching purpose; and its
organizational values, the important and fundamental beliefs the organization holds
over time on which it bases its decisions. A project or program undertaken by the
organization must be compatible with and support these elements.
MINI TEST after INITIATING PROCESSES -
Sample Questions

It is strongly recommended that you not write the answers next to the questions below so
you may attempt them again later if necessary. These questions are drawn from all areas
of the PMP(R) Exam, and many are not included in the PMBOK(R) Guide. After completing
each of the other process groups, come back and try to answer these questions again.

1. As a young and inexperienced project manager, you work very hard to follow
your organization's policies and procedures. However, not all work seems to follow
policy. You are working to understand the organization's culture and style. To
accomplish this, it very important that you identify:
a. who are the most experienced technical people in the organization
b. who are the decision makers and influencers within the organization
c. who occupies what position on the organizational chart
d. who occupies what position on the organizational breakdown structure

2. Many models exist for stakeholder analysis. However, our sponsor has requested
that we use the salience model to initiate the project. This particular model views
stakeholders on the basis of:
a. legitimacy, power, and influence
b. power, interest, and impact
c. influence, impact, and power
d. power, urgency, and legitimacy

3. The document that lists the project's planned benefits, including a status or
progress indicator for each benefit, is the:
a. benefits realization plan
b. benefits register
c. benefits transition plan
d. benefits sustainment plan

4. During project initiation, a project assessment should be performed based upon
available information, including lessons learned from previous projects. These
lessons learned are often found in the:
a. organizational process assets
b. enterprise environmental factors
c. project charter
d. stakeholder register

5. All of the following are examples of project or program benefits except:
a. improved morale
b. increased market share
c. training class delivered
d. reduction in competitor strength

6. Kanban is based on a pull system, one of whose characteristics, as opposed to a
push system, is:
a. less inventory on hand
b. inventory level based on historical ordering patterns rather than demand
c. longer response time to changing market demands
d. more likely to deal with product obsolescence issues

7. During the implementation phase of a project you are working on, many
deliverables have been produced on time and within budget. At this point, the
prjoect's deliverables are to be tested to determine if the customer will accept the
deliverables being produced. We are most likely to determine this during which of
the following processes?
a. collect requirements
b. perform quality assurance
c. control quality
d. validate scope

8. Knowledge transfer can be a very costly and time-consuming activity, and so
assessing the benefits of the knowledge to be transferred is important. One way to
do so is with:
a. HR systems tracking of competence, expertise, etc.
b. knowledge transfer-related software resources
c. inventory of knowledge assets
d. project success rates

9. While using key performance indicators (KPI), many organizations focus on the
number of issues identified by customers. This KPI would be considered a:
a. qualitative indicator
b. financial indicator
c. leading indicator
d. lagging indicator

10. The process of active listening is simple in theory but in reality may be more
difficult. The proper use of active listening has many benefits excluding:
a. a shift response
b. a resolved conflict
c. avoiding misunderstanding
d. building trust


11. Alexandra has been a successful project manager for over ten years. Wanting
her to continue to progress, Alexandra's mentor has recommended that she
develops business acumen skills. An example of business acumen is:
a. spending time with business leaders at social events
b. cutting project costs so as to protect the business
c. learning more about the organization's financial goals
d. using "business buzz words" when interacting with members of business units

12. An organization scoring low on Hofstede's dimension for masculinity believes in:
a. equal opportunities in jobs and education
b. a need to be in charge
c. increased job stress
d. traditional sex roles

13. You are a project manager in an organization that provides 360-degree feedback
for all project managers, meaning that not only does your manager review your
performance but that your team members also provide feedback on your
interactions with them. Assume that your team states that you do not consider their
feelings, especially during decision-making. Based on Daniel Goleman's mixed model
for emotional intelligence, you need to increase your mastery of:
a. self-awareness
b. self-regulation
c. social skills
d. empathy

14. As a project manager, you are attempting to establish essential practices for
decision-making. In simplistic terms, you want to ensure all of the following except:
a. decision makers have the right information with which to make decisions
b. all project stakeholders have a voice in project decisions
c. your organization allocates sufficient attention to risk management
d. decision makers are familiar with organizational strategy

15. You and your project management team are deeply immersed in project
planning. You have decided to bring in a facilitator from another part of the
organization to facilitate a critical meeting. A facilitator is often employed in order
to:
a. have an outside party support our position
b. allow us to be an active participant in the meeting
c. force the use of such meeting tools as the nominal group technique
d. ensure that we mix meeting types to save time and effort

16. Our project management department collectively represents a large amount of
project management experience but individual members of the department are felt
to be lacking in experience. Therefore, peer-reviews will begin being held prior to
publication of important reports. One of the primary outcomes of a peer-review is:
a. the project manager feels threatened
b. participants in discussions become highly defensive
c. some participants take comments personally
d. documents or projects continue to improve with each implementation

17. Which of the following is true about project processes?
a. all processes should be repeated in every project phase
b. the level of rigor applied for each process may be adjusted for different projects
c. the project charter is the first of seven processes forming the group of initiating
processes
d. work performance reports are employed as an input in monitoring and controlling
work on projects

18. Work performance data is an output of which process?
a. develop project management plan
b. direct and manage project work
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

19. Work performance reports are an output of which process?
a. develop project management plan
b. direct and manage project work
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

20. Expert judgment is:
a. an input of all integration processes
b. an output of all integration processes
c. a tool and technique within all integration processes
d. an input and an output of all integration processes


21. The project management information system is a tool and technique of which
process(es)?
a. develop project charter and develop project management plan
b. develop project management plan and direct and manage project work
c. direct and manage project work and monitor and control project work
d. monitor and control project work and close project or phase

22. Change control tools are a tool and technique of which process?
a. develop project management plan
b. direct and manage project work
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

23. Historically, your organization has struggled with scope management. Thus,
during projects, the members of the project team are often confused as to what
work is part of the project and what work is not part of the project. To address this
issue in your current project, you have decided to focus much more strongly on
scope management. At an early team meeting, the members of the core team argue
as to what is the first thing to do to address this issue. Your response is that the team
needs first to focus on:
a. working with stakeholders to understand their real needs before developing
requirements
b. developing a scope management plan
c. defining in detail what is in scope and what is out of scope
d. building a solid work breakdown structure that represents 100% of the project work

24. A customer accepts project deliverables as part of what process?
a. plan scope management
b. validate scope
c. define scope
d. create the WBS

25. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of which process?
a. plan scope management
b. validate scope
c. define scope
d. control scope


26. Completion of project scope is measured against:
a. the project charter
b. the project management plan
c. the project schedule
d. the project budget

27. Product analysis is a tool and technique of which process?
a. plan scope management
b. validate scope
c. define scope
d. create the WBS

28. Completion of the product scope is measured against which of the following?
a. the scope management plan
b. the requirements management plan
c. the project management plan
d. the product requirements

29. Historically, your organization has struggled with schedule management. Thus,
during projects, team members are often confused as to what work should begin
when and how the project's various activities interact with one other. Therefore,
during your current project, you decide to focus much more strongly on schedule
management. At an early team meeting, as members of the core team are arguing
as to what is the first thing to do to address this issue, your response is to focus first
on which of the following:
a. developing a strong schedule model using schedule-related data and a scheduling tool
b. understanding dependencies between project activities
c. assigning resources to project activities
d. building the schedule management plan

30. Examples of scheduling methods include:
a. activity list, bar chart, network diagram
b. WBS, activities, resources, dependencies
c. critical path method, critical chain method
d. define activities, sequence activities, estimate activity resources

31. Examples of project schedule presentations include:
a. activity list, bar chart, network diagram
b. WBS, activities, resources, dependencies
c. critical path method, critical chain method
d. define activities, sequence activities, estimate activity resources

32. Examples of a project's schedule-related data or information include:
a. activity list, bar chart, network diagram
b. WBS, activities, resources, dependencies
c. critical path method, critical chain method
d. define activities, sequence activities, estimate activity resources

33. The document that defines the scheduling method and scheduling tool, as well as
sets the format for the schedule, is called:
a. the activity list
b. the project schedule network diagram
c. the schedule baseline
d. the schedule management plan

34. The schedule model:
a. is the scheduling tool populated with project data
b. identifies the scheduling method and scheduling tool
c. is the same as the schedule presentation
d. is developed from the project schedule
MINI TEST after INITIATING PROCESSES -
Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 2.1.1
          b. As the project manager, you should identify the decision makers and
Y         influencers in the organization and work with them to increase the probability of
          the project's success.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 13.1.2.1
          d. The salience model analyzes stakeholders based on power (ability to impose
Y         their will), urgency (need for immediate attention), and legitimacy (the
          appropriateness of their involvement).


3.   b.
          b. The benefits register lists the project's planned benefits, including a status or
Y         progress indicator for each benefit. Not all projects have a benefits register. The
          benefits register is often maintained at the program level.
          a. The benefits realization plan describes the strategy adopted to realize the
N
          project's benefits.
          c. The benefits transition plan describes the strategy adopted to transition
N
          ownership of the benefits to another organization.
          d. The benefits sustainment plan describes the strategy adopted to maintain the
N
          project's benefits over the long term.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 2.1.4
          a. Lessons learned should be viewed as part of the organization's knowledge base
Y
          and therefore should be treated as organizational process assets.


5.   c
Y         c. Delivery of a training class is an example of a deliverable and not a benefit.


6.   a.
          a. Under a pull system, an organization carries less inventory, which is based on
Y
          demand rather than on history.
7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 5.5
          d. During the validate scope process, the customer tests the product to determine
Y
          if we have built and delivered the correct product.
          c. Control quality can include testing to determine whether we have built the
N
          product correctly.


8    d.
          d. Project success rates are one means by which to measure the benefits of
Y
          knowledge transfer.
          a, b and c. These are all technologies used to apply transferred knowledge and
N
          are not methods for assessing the value of knowledge transfer benefits.


9.   d.
          d. Number of issues identified by customers during a month is a lagging indicator,
Y
          which informs us of past performance.
          a. A qualitative indicator cannot be measured numerically and so is often
N
          descriptive in nature or is simply an opinion.
N         b. A financial indicator is measured in monetary terms.
N         c. A leading indicator is forward looking and helps predict the future.


10. a.
          a. A shift response is a general tendency of a participant in a conversation to turn
          the focus of the conversation on themselves and not display sustained interest in
Y
          the what the other participant in the conversation has to say. This should not occur
          in correct application of active listening.


11. c.    Web search on "Business Acumen"
          c. An example of business acumen is learning more about an organization,
Y
          including its financial goals.


12. a.    Web search on "Geert Hofstede"
          a. A low score on Hofstede's dimension for masculinity indicates greater support
Y
          of stereotypical feminine ideas.
          b. c. and d. A high score on Hofstede's dimension for masculinity indicates
N
          greater support of stereotypical masculine ideas.
13. d.   Wikipedia on "Emotional Intelligence"
         d. Empathy is the ability to understand and share the feelings of others. In this
Y
         example, our team is telling us that we do not demonstrate empathy.


14. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section X3.6
         b. This question is asking for the exception. At times, a project manager should
         make certain decisions alone, but at other times certain stakeholders should have
Y        a voice in project decisions. Option b is the exception specifically because it
         includes the term "all", an absolute term. Since a project may have thousands of
         stakeholders, including all in decision-making may at times be impossible.


15. b.
         b. One reason for project managers to employ facilitators in conducting meetings
Y
         is so that the project managers can be active participants in the meetings.
N        a. The facilitator should be neutral and not support or weaken our positions.
         c. I would eliminate this answer because of the term "force". Nominal group
N
         technique is not appropriate in every meeting.
N        d. Mixing meeting types should not be done. This is a standard rule for meetings.


16. d.
         d. The goal of a peer review is for the project manager to learn from his peers
Y
         and thus be able to improve documents or projects.
         a., b. and c. All three of these answers are negative. On the exam, if asked about
N
         the outcome of implementing a best practice, look for the positive answer.


17. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 4 - Introduction
         b. The project manager and the project management team should determine the
Y
         amount of rigor to be applied to each process.
         a. We should use only the processes we need. As an example, all procurement
N
         processes may not be needed in every phase.
         c. The project charter is the first of two (not seven) processes in the initiating
N
         process group.
         d. Work performance reports are an output (not an input) of monitor and control
N
         project work.


18. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
Y        b. As we perform the project's work (i.e., direct and manage project work), work
         performance data is an output.


19. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1


         c. Information concerning work performance is an input of the monitor and control
Y        project work process. During this process, that information is translated into
         work performance reports.


20. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
         c. If expert judgment is part of a process, it is always a tool and technique and
Y
         never (never ever) an input or an output.


21. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
         c. This question is more difficult. Remember that the PMIS helps us execute and
Y        control the plan, not write the charter or identify stakeholders (initiating) and not
         set up the plan (planning).


22. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
         d. Even if you don't remember the answer to this question, you can use common
         sense to determine the correct answer. The tool and technique described is
         related to change control, and one of the answers is related to change control. All
Y
         change requests become an input into the process of perform integrated change
         control, during which we use change control tools to aid us in approving or
         rejecting change requests.


23. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-1
         b. We need a scope management plan to tell us how to collect requirements, set
Y
         project boundaries, build the WBS, etc.
         a., c., and d. The scope management plan is an input to each of the processes
N
         described.


24. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-1
         b. After deliverables have been tested for correctness as part of control quality,
         they are sent to the customer as part of the validate scope process, during which
         the customer accepts or rejects them.
N        a. The scope management plan is the output of plan scope management.
         c. The scope statement is the output of define scope. This document may also
N
         define some of the deliverables.
         d. The WBS and WBS dictionary and eventually the scope baseline are outputs of
N
         the create WBS process. The WBS lists our planned project deliverables.


25. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-1
         d. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of control scope and control costs.
Y
         Variance and trend analysis is a tool and technique of control risks.
         a. and c. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of only the monitoring and
N        controlling processes, never of the planning process. Thus, answers a. and c. are
         eliminated.
         b. During validate scope, the customer (or sponsor) inspects the deliverables to
N        determine whether to accept them. Inspection, not variance analysis, is therefore
         the tool and technique.


26. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 5 - Introduction (top of page 106)
         b. Since the question is asking about project scope, the best answer is the project
Y
         plan.
         a. Completion of project objectives would be measured against the project
N
         charter.
N        c. Performance with respect to time would be measured against the schedule.
N        d. Performance with respect to cost would be measured against the budget.


27. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-1


Y        c. During define scope, we define the project and the product.
         a. Expert judgment and meetings are tools and techniques of plan scope
N
         management.
         b. Inspections and group decision-making techniques are tools and techniques of
N
         validate scope.
         d. Decomposition and expert judgment are tools and techniques of the create
N
         WBS process.


28. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 5 - Introduction
Y        d. Product scope completion is measured against the product requirements.
         a. The scope management plan describes the scope processes. No product
N
         requirements are listed in this document.
         b. The requirements management plan describes the plan for collecting and
N
         managing the requirements. No product requirements are listed in this plan.
         c. The project management plan describes the plan for the project. No product
N
         requirements are listed in this plan.


29. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 6 - Introduction
         d. The schedule management plan provides guidance with respect to all other
Y
         schedule processes.
         a., b., and c. The schedule management plan provides guidance in accomplishing
N        each of these activities. Therefore, the schedule management plan must precede
         these.


30. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide : Chapter 6 - Introduction
Y        c. These are examples of scheduling methods.
N        a. These are examples of scheduling presentations.
N        b. These are examples of project information.
         d. These are examples of processes in the project time management knowledge
N
         area.


31. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-2
Y        a. These are examples of scheduling presentations.
N        b. These are examples of project information.
N        c. These are examples of scheduling methods.
         d. These are examples of processes in the project time management knowledge
N
         area.


32. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-2
Y        b. These are examples of project information.
N        a. These are examples of scheduling presentations.
N        c. These are examples of scheduling methods.
         d. These are examples of processes in the project time management knowledge
N
         area.
33. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 6 - Introduction
Y        d. This is a definition of the schedule management plan.
         a. The activity list, which is the output of the define activities process, lists the
N
         activities that will become inputs of schedule development.
N        b. The network diagram shows the logical relationships between activities.
N        c. The schedule baseline is the approved version of the project schedule.


34. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 6 - Introduction
Y        a. The schedule model is the scheduling tool populated with the schedule data.
N        b. This is the definition of the schedule management plan.
N        c. The schedule model generates the schedule.
N        d. Project schedule presentations are developed from the project schedule.
                    PLANNING PROCESSES
Planning Process Group Based on the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are 24
planning processes. These processes are performed to define the total scope of the project
and refine the objectives. These processes develop the complete project management plan
required to meet the project objectives.
There are two primary outputs of the planning process group:
                *     The project management plan (includes the management plans and the
             baselines)
                *     The project documents (examples include the risk register, the issue
             log, etc.)
Based on the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) there are thirteen
(13) tasks of planning. These tasks represent 24% of your exam content. Key phrases
associated with each task are:


           Task                                             Key Phrases
                            Review and assess detailed project requirements, constraints and assumptions with
           Task 1
                                                              stakeholders
           Task 2                                  Develop a scope management plan
           Task 3                                   Develop a cost management plan
           Task 4                                     Develop the project schedule
           Task 5                                  Develop the human resource plan
           Task 6                            Develop the communications management plan
           Task 7                              Develop the procurement management plan
           Task 8                    Develop the quality management plan and the quality standards
           Task 9                                Develop the change management plan
          Task 10                                      Plan for risk management
          Task 11           Present the project management plan to relevant stakeholders and obtain approval
          Task 12                                      Conduct a kick-off meeting
          Task 13                              Develop the stakeholder management plan



The PMBOK(R) Guide, the most often selected reference in studying for the PMP(R) exam,
does not list the tasks comprising the planning process group but emphasizes processes
instead. Although not as robust as the PMBOK(R) Guide for in-depth study, the PMP(R)
Examination Content Outline presents the tasks shown in the table above. Although
memorizing these tasks for the exam is not necessary, reviewing them from time to time is
recommended because they form the basis of the PMP(R) exam's questions on project
planning. As we cover the 24 processes in the planning process group in the upcoming
pages, you can see how these tasks relate to the processes.


Develop Project Management Plan

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 4-5 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Think of this process as integrating the other 23 planning processes. The project plan
     should include the project baselines, the subsidiary plans, as well as other items
     such as the project life cycle, the change management plan, and the configuration
     management plan. The first time we go through this process we are planning how to
     plan. As we go through the other planning processes we will pull outputs from those
     other processes into our project plan. The further we get with the planning processes
     the more robust our project plan will become.


INPUTs of develop project management plan

     Project charter - provides us the initial data to help us build the project
     plan.


     Outputs from other planning processes - this includes
     the management plans (scope management plan, schedule management plan, etc.) and
     baselines (scope baseline, schedule baseline, cost baseline) developed in the other
     planning processes. Later, we will discuss each of the subsidiary plans and
     baselines. The first time we go through this process we don't have the other
     documents but eventually they all will be pulled together in this process to create a
     comprehensive project management plan. Also, as these documents are updated, the
     updates are incorporated into the project management plan so as to keep the project
     management plan up-to-date.


     Enterprise environmental factors -                           this is your project
     environment. A great example is the PMIS (project management information system).
     This system includes our configuration management system, our change management
      system, our project management software tool, etc.


      Organizational assets - hopefully we have a documented process,
      templates, and lessons learned to help us build our project plan.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of develop project
management plan

      Expert judgment and Facilitation Techniques

OUTPUTs of develop project management plan

      Project Management Plan - this is the plan that we use to guide
      all the work of the project. It should include many items. The level of detail in each
      of these items depends on the complexity of your project. The first time through this
      process we are really creating the framework for the plan. As we move through
      other planning processes the project management plan becomes more robust.


   Element of Project Management Plan                  Process where element created
Change management Plan and Configuration Management
                                                         Develop project management plan
                       Plan
Scope management plan and Requirements management
                                                             Plan scope management
                       plan
             Schedule management plan                       Plan schedule management
               Cost management plan                           Plan cost management
Quality management plan and Process improvement plan         Plan quality management
          Human resource management plan                 Plan human resource management
          Communication management plan                  Plan communications management
               Risk management plan                           Plan risk management
           Procurement management plan                    Plan procurement management
            Stakeholder management plan                    Plan stakeholder management
                   Scope baseline                                 Create WBS
                 Schedule baseline                              Develop schedule
                   Cost baseline                                Determine budget
     The three baselines integrated together are often called the performance
     measurement baseline.


  EXAM TIP: Make sure you have a basic understanding of what the elements are of the
project plan versus what documents are considered project documents. Please review
Table 4-1 of the PMBOK(R) Guide. The left column of this table lists the documents that
are usually considered part of the project plan. The right two columns are project
documents not usually considered part of the project plan. The rows of this table have no
meaning.
DEVELOP PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN -
Sample Questions

1. As a project manager, you have learned that technology can be both a positive
and a negative on projects. You need an automated tool that will help you to be
successful. Which enterprise environmental factor might you focus on as you are
developing your project plan?
a. configuration management knowledge base
b. change control procedures
c. guidelines and criteria for tailoring the organizations set of standard processes
d. project management information system (PMIS)

2. Typical items found in the project management plan include all of the following
except:
a. the contract
b. the schedule baseline
c. the procurement management plan
d. the process improvement plan

3. The project plan should contain at least 3 baselines. Which baseline below is not
typically one of the three?
a. scope baseline
b. risk baseline
c. schedule baseline
d. cost baseline

4. The configuration management system is an example of a(n):
a. enterprise environmental factor
b. organizational process asset
c. government standard
d. industry standard

5. The configuration management knowledge base is an example of a(n):
a. enterprise environmental factor
b. organizational process asset
c. government standard
d. industry standard

6. You have been very successful as a project manager. You have been asked to
move into an organization that struggles to maintain accurate versions and baselines
of official organizational standards, policies, and project documents. History tells
you that version control of these documents is critical for project success. As you
develop your project management plan, which organizational asset may help you the
most:
a. project management body of knowledge for your vertical market
b. project management information system
c. organizational infrastructure
d. configuration management knowledge base
DEVELOP PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN -
Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.1.3 and 4.2.1.4
          d. The PMIS is an enterprise environmental factor. It may be an automated tool
Y
          such as scheduling software.
          a., b., and c. These examples are all organizational process assets not enterprise
N
          environmental factors.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.3.1
          a. The contract is a stand-alone document between our external customer and our
Y
          organization. It would not be part of the project plan. It is a legal document.
N         a., b., and c. These are likely elements of the project plan.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.3.1
Y         b. There are normally three baselines on our project: scope, schedule, and cost.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.1.3 and 4.2.1.4
          a. The PMIS ( project management information system) is considered an
Y         enterprise environmental factor (EEF). The configuration management system is a
          subset of the PMIS.
          b. Systems are usually considered EEFs. The databases inside of these systems
N
          are usually considered the organizational assets.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.1.3 and 4.2.1.4
          b. Databases and knowledge bases belonging to the organization (containing
Y         organizational data, not commercial data) are usually considered the
          organizational assets (OPAs).


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.1.3 and 4.2.1.4
          d. The configuration management knowledge base contains versions and baselines
Y
          of critical documents.
          a., b., and c. These examples are usually considered enterprise environmental
N
          factors (EEFs).
Plan Scope Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 5-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process the scope management plan and the requirements management plan
   are developed.


INPUTs of plan scope management

   Project management plan - the project plan most likely is not
   fully developed yet. Elements of the project plan though may help develop the scope
   management plan.


   Project charter -                  this document provides high level information
   including the project context to help start planning for scope.


   Enterprise environmental factors -                             ex. Organizational
   culture- the culture of our organization may affect the process we use to define
   scope. As an example, a culture that is dominated by functional groups and not
   project teams may lead the work breakdown structure to be organized by function.


   Organizational process assets -                                ex. Templates- our
   organization may have work breakdown structure templates that organize the WBS
   by phases and therefore we are more likely to organize the current WBS by phases.


TOOLs and                TECHNIQUEs                     of      plan        scope
management

   Expert judgment and Meetings
OUTPUTs of plan scope management
                                            Provides guidance on how the project scope will be defined, validated,
      Scope Management Plan                 and controlled.
                                               EXAM TIP: It does not describe what is in or out of scope.
                                               EXAM TIP: It is not the scope baseline or part of the scope
                                            baseline.
                                            It is a subset plan of the project management plan.



      Requirements            Management Provides    guidance on how the requirements will be analyzed,
      Plan                                  documented, and managed.
                                            Defines configuration management of the product.
                                            Defines traceability structure.
                                               EXAM TIP: It does not describe what is in or out of scope.
                                               EXAM TIP: It is not the scope baseline or part of the scope
                                            baseline.
                                            It is a subset plan of the project management plan.



   EXAM TIP: This process is one of only two processes that has two plans as outputs.


Product Scope                               Project Scope
Features and functions of the product       The work to deliver the product
Measured against the product requirements   Measured against the project plan
Defined before the project scope            Defined after the product scope



   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between project and product scope.
PLAN SCOPE MANAGEMENT - Sample
Questions

1. The scope management plan is an input to all of the following processes except?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. create WBS
d. develop schedule

2. The requirements management plan is an input into which of the following
processes?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. create WBS
d. develop schedule

3. The requirements management plan describes:
a. process for preparing a detailed project scope statement
b. process that enables the creation of the WBS
c. configuration management activities
d. marketplace conditions

4. The scope management plan describes:
a. requirements prioritization process
b. process that enables the creation of the WBS
c. configuration management activities
d. marketplace conditions

5. Completion of the project scope is measured against?
a. the scope management plan
b. the requirements management plan
c. the project management plan
d. the product requirements
PLAN SCOPE MANAGEMENT- Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-3
          d. The scope management plan will be input to scope processes, not schedule
Y
          processes.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-3
          a. The requirements management plan describes how we will collect and manage
Y
          the requirements.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.1.3.2
          c. Configuration management is a process for setting up and maintaining
          consistency related to the product. It includes the management of system
Y         information and changes to that information. Configuration management is used to
          manage requirements and therefore it may be addressed in the requirements
          management plan.
          a. The scope management plan describes the process for preparing a scope
N
          statement.
N         b. The scope management plan describes the processes for creating the WBS.
N         d. Marketplace conditions are examples of enterprise environmental factors.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.1.3.1
Y         b. The scope management plan describes the processes for creating the WBS.
          a. The requirements prioritization process is described in the requirements
N
          management plan.
          c. Configuration management is used to manage requirements and therefore it may
N
          be addressed in the requirements management plan.
N         d. Marketplace conditions are examples of enterprise environmental factors.

5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 5 - Introduction
Y         c. Completion on the project scope is measured against the project plan.
          a. The scope management plan describes the processes to define the scope, create
N
          the WBS, validate scope, and control scope.
          b. The requirements management plan describes how we will collect and manage
N         the requirements.
N         d. Completion of the product scope is measured against the product requirements.
Collect Requirements

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 5-5 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   This is the process of turning the needs of the project stakeholders into requirements.
   This process has 11 tools and techniques. As you study each tool and technique make
   sure you know when you would want to use one versus another.



Project requirements and project failure:
    Early and frequent involvement with stakeholders is needed for accurate
    requirements collection. On some projects the requirements are met but the project
    still fails, because:
                     *    the wrong requirements were collected
                     *    the requirements were collected from the wrong stakeholders
                     *    many other reasons


INPUTs of collect requirements

   Scope management plan - this plan describes the process for
   knowing which requirements to collect and not collect


   Requirements management plan - this plan describes the
   process for collecting requirements


   Stakeholder management plan -                         this plan describes the
   process to engage stakeholders. It may describe how to engage stakeholders to
   participate in collecting requirements


   Project charter - contains high level project requirements
       Stakeholder register - organizes the information you currently have
       about your project stakeholders. Remember the requirements for the project come
       from the project stakeholders


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of collect requirements
       There are eleven tools and techniques. It is important to understand each tool and
       technique as well as be able to differentiate one tool and technique from another.


Focus Groups                                  Facilitated Workshops
                                              usually more technical than focus groups as you are now working on
Talking with a group of stakeholders
                                              developing the requirements
                                            Examples include:
                                            *  JAD sessions- joint application design/development sessions-
                                                associated with software industry
working on expectations, attitudes, and not
                                            *  QFD- quality function deployment- associated with manufacturing-
usually the requirements themselves.
                                                begins with understanding the VOC-voice of the customer
                                            *  Agile method- utilizes collecting user stories- short descriptions of
                                                the user's requirements




       Group Creativity Techniques -
                           *     Brainstorming- group of people share ideas with no
                        prioritization
                                        A positive of this technique is that lots of ideas are
                               collected.
                                        Potential negative-group think
                           *     Nominal group technique- voting technique to rank ideas.
                        Usually used after brainstorming.
                           *     Ideas/mind maps- visual of ideas generated during
                        brainstorming
                           *     Affinity diagrams- these diagrams sort or group "like" ideas
                           *     Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA)- explicitly considers
                        multiple criteria in decision-making environments.


       Group Decision-making techniques -                                   when making
       decisions make sure the decision-making process is clear to all stakeholders before
       work begins on requirements.
                              *     Unanimity- In this decision-making technique everyone agrees
                           to the same course. Often the Delphi method (we will discuss this later)
                           is used to reach this type of decision.
                              *     Majority- In this decision-making technique the option that has
                           over 50% support will be chosen. Be careful not to have an even
                           number of members voting as you risk a tie.
                              *     Plurality- In this decision-making technique the option that has
                           the most support wins, even if that option does not have over 50% of
                           the support. This does not make sense when deciding between only 2
                           options and therefore we must have 3 or more options for this technique
                           to make sense.
                              *     Dictatorship- in this decision-making technique only one person
                           makes the decision for the group.


INTERVIEWS                                           QUESTIONAIRES
Face-to-face, verbal, slow                           Written- statistical analysis often performed
Used when       only   a     limited   number   of
                                                     Used when lots of respondents and/or lots of information to be collected
respondents




       Observations- job shadowing. Used when:
                             *    The person has a hard time describing their requirements
                             *    The person does not want to describe their requirements
                           The person collecting the observations may be:
                                         Watching someone else perform the work- job shadowing
                                         Performing the work themselves- participant observer


       Prototypes - we use this method when we want to capture requirements as
       early as possible from our stakeholders. The stakeholders really feel they are part of
       defining the requirements. A prototype is a mock-up of the actual product. It is not
       the actual product. One of the risks with prototypes is that stakeholders often want to
       take the prototype and begin using it as a real product. This is not possible. Key
       terms:
                       *     Tangible - the prototype is something the stakeholders may be
                    able to touch and manipulate
                       *     Progressive elaboration - the requirements are elaborated
                    through a series of prototypes
                       *     Story boards - used to navigate through a series of interfaces
                    (think agile PM).
    Benchmarking - we use this method to compare our practices to other
    organizations. The goal is to help us set standards and identify strategies to reach
    those standards.


    Context diagrams -                 show the relationship between the business
    system, and the relationship of everything and everyone who interacts with the
    system.


    Documentation analysis - at this point we should evaluate the
    documents that we have related to the project.


OUTPUTs of collect requirements

    Requirements documentation - These documents contain the
    requirements and supporting detail for the requirements.
    Key terms:
    Unambiguous- meaning the requirements should be measureable and testable
    Progressive elaboration- the requirements may be more detailed as the project
    moves forward


    Requirements traceability matrix - (see PMBOK(R) Guide:
    Figure 5-6). The primary purpose of this matrix is to ensure that only requirements
    that add business value are included in the project.


  EXAM TIP: There are many tools and techniques in this process. Make sure you
understand why you would use one over another when collecting requirements.
COLLECT REQUIREMENTS - Sample Questions

1. One of the reasons to use prototypes when collecting requirements is:
a. provide the customer with a tangible mock-up to collect early feedback
b. provide the customer with the actual product to collect early feedback
c. provide the customer with statistical outputs to collect early feedback
d. provide the customer with abstract representations to collect early feedback

2. Functional requirements describe:
a. the behaviors of the product
b. security
c. safety
d. level of service

3. What document is used to identify the people who can provide information to help
develop detailed requirements:
a. the requirements documentation
b. the stakeholder register
c. the work breakdown structure
d. the project charter

4. We often talk with stakeholders one-on-one to help collect requirements. This is
called:
a. interviews
b. questionnaires
c. facilitated workshops
d. prototypes

5. A Joint Application Development (JAD) session is an example of what tool and
technique:
a. interviews
b. focus groups
c. facilitated workshops
d. benchmarking

6. Configuration management activities such as how changes to the product will be
initiated are found in what document:
a. requirements management plan
b. requirements traceability matrix
c. scope management plan
d. requirements documentation

7. There are many group creativity techniques used to collect requirements. The
technique that groups like ideas is called:
a. brainstorming
b. the Delphi method
c. nominal group technique
d. affinity diagrams


8. While collecting requirements we realize that a statistical analysis needs to be
performed. We are most likely to use what method below:
a. prototypes
b. questionnaires
c. observations
d. brainstorming

9. Joint Application Development (JAD) sessions are most often associated with
what industry:
a. construction
b. marketing
c. software
d. manufacturing

10. Another name for job shadowing when collecting requirements is:
a. observations
b. prototypes
c. questionnaires
d. focus groups

11. The document that demonstrates that each requirement adds business value is:
a. the requirements documentation
b. the stakeholder register
c. the work breakdown structure
d. the requirements traceability matrix
12. Quality Function Deployment (QFD) sessions are most often associated with
what industry:
a. construction
b. marketing
c. software
d. manufacturing

13. Transition requirements include:
a. data conversion and training requirements
b. security requirements
c. safety requirements
d. supportability requirements


14. A trained moderator is often used to guide a group of people through a
discussion on their expectations of a proposed product. This method is called:
a. interviews
b. focus groups
c. facilitated workshops
d. prototypes

15. High level requirements are included in what document:
a. the requirements management plan
b. the stakeholder register
c. the work breakdown structure
d. the project charter

16. Your project management team is working with the stakeholders to generate,
classify, and prioritize product requirements. Decisions are being reached based on
the opinions that receive more support than other opinions. This method is called:
a. unanimity
b. majority
c. plurality
d. dictatorship

17. The project team is working with stakeholders to identify product and project
requirements. You are using a voting process to rank the most useful ideas. This
voting process is called:
a. brainstorming
b. nominal group technique
c. the Delphi technique
d. idea/mind mapping

18. An example of a scope model is:
a. prototype
b. questionnaire
c. context diagram
d. job shadowing

19. The process of comparing planned or actual practices to those of other
organizations is:
a. context diagrams
b. job shadowing
c. benchmarking
d. prototypes

20. The requirements traceability matrix is an input to:
a. define scope and validate scope
b. validate scope and control scope
c. control scope and create WBS
d. create WBS and define scope
COLLECT REQUIREMENTS - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.8
          a. A prototype is a tangible mock-up that customers may try out in order to give us
Y
          early feedback on a product.
N         b. A prototype is not the actual product. It is a working model of the product.
N         c. A prototype does not contain statistical outputs. It is a mock-up.
N         d. A prototype is not an abstract representation. It is a mock-up.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2
          a. The functional requirements describe the intended behavior we want from the
Y
          product.
N         b. Security is a nonfunctional requirement.
N         c. Safety is a nonfunctional requirement.
N         d. Level of service is a nonfunctional requirement.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.1.5
          b. The stakeholder register identifies the stakeholders for the project, including
Y
          those stakeholders who need to be involved with collect requirements.
          a. The requirements documentation describes the requirements, not the people
N
          who are involved in defining the requirements.
          c. The work breakdown structure organizes the deliverables of the project. It does
N
          not provide a stakeholder list.
          d. The project charter will list the sponsor and the project manager. This is not a
N
          complete list of people who need to be involved in collecting the requirements.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.1
Y         a. Interviews are talking with stakeholders one-on-one.
          b. Questionnaires are documents. They do not involve talking with the
N
          stakeholders.
          c. Facilitated workshops include groups of people, not talking one-on-one like
N
          interviews.
N         d. Focus groups include groups of people, not talking one-on-one like interviews.


5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.3
Y         c. A JAD session is a meeting, or series of meetings, where knowledge workers,
          often IT professionals work together to develop the requirements.
          a. Interviews are conducted one-on-one. JAD sessions are always are a group
N
          setting.
          b. A focus group is often considered less technical than a JAD session. With a
N
          focus group, people are asked their opinion on some aspect of the product.
          d. Benchmarking is looking at another organization to get ideas on where to set
N
          our quality standards or how to achieve our quality standards.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.1.3.2
          a. Configuration management ideas are found in the requirements management
Y
          plan, and the configuration managements plan.
          b. The requirements traceability matrix ensures that every requirement adds
N         business value. We do not want to have requirements, and complete the work to
          meet those requirements, if it does not provide business value.
          c. The scope management plan does not address configuration management. The
N         scope plan describes the processes to define the scope, create the WBS, validate
          scope, and control scope.
          d. The requirements documentation describes the requirements, not configuration
N
          management.


7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.4
Y         d. Affinity diagrams sort similar ideas together into groups.
N         a. Brainstorming generates ideas, though it does not group like ideas together.
N         b. The Delphi method is used to help us reach a consensus.
N         c. Nominal group technique ranks ideas.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.6
          b. Questionnaires are often used when we want to collect lots of information or
Y
          collect information from lots of people so as to perform a statistical analysis.
          a. Prototypes are not about statistics. They are mock-ups so we may collect early
N
          feedback on requirements.
          c. Observations are used to collect data as someone is using, or needs to use a
N
          product.
          d. Brainstorming is used to collect lots of ideas, but not to perform a statistical
N
          analysis.
9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.3
          c. JAD sessions are most often associated with developing an information system
Y
          for an organization.
          a. While JAD sessions may have many applications, we most often associate JAD
N
          with software, not construction.
          b. While JAD sessions may have many applications, we most often associate JAD
N
          with software, not marketing.
          d. QFD (quality function deployment) is more often associated with
N
          manufacturing than a JAD session.


10. a.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.7
          a. Observation is the method of watching someone as they perform their job (job
Y
          shadowing) so as to collect requirements.
          b. A prototype is a tangible mock-up that customers may try out in order to give us
N
          early feedback on a product.
          c. Questionnaires are often used when we want to collect lots of information or
N         collect information from lots of people so as to perform a statistical analysis.
          They are in written form.
          d. A focus group is often considered less technical than a JAD session. With a
N
          focus group, people are asked their opinion on some aspect of the product.


11. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.3.2
          d. The requirements traceability matrix is critical. Its role is to ensure that we
Y
          have no requirements that do not add business value.
N         a. The requirements documentation list and describe the requirements.
N         b. The stakeholder register lists and organizes our project stakeholders.
          c. The work breakdown structure organizes the deliverables for the project in a
N
          hierarchical format.


12. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.3
          d. QFD (quality function deployment) is more often associated with
Y
          manufacturing than a JAD session.
          a. While QFD may have many applications, we most often associate QFD with
N
          manufacturing, not construction.
          b. While QFD may have many applications, we most often associate QFD with
N
          manufacturing, not marketing.
          c. JAD sessions are most often associated with developing an information system
N        for an organization.



13. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2
         a. Transitional requirements describe the requirements to move us from where we
Y
         are to where we want to be.
N        b. Security is a nonfunctional requirement.
N        c. Safety is a nonfunctional requirement.
N        d. Supportability is a nonfunctional requirement.


14. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.2
         b. With focus groups a moderator asks a group of people questions to understand
Y
         their expectations of a product.
         a. With interviews we meet with the stakeholders one-on-one to ask them
N
         questions.
         c. Think of a facilitated workshop as being much more technical than a focus
N
         group. It is truly developing the product requirements.
         d. A prototype is a tangible mock-up that customers may try out in order to give us
N
         early feedback on a product.


15. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.3.1
         d. This is a trickier question. The high level requirements are in the project
Y
         charter. The detailed requirements are in the requirements documentation.
         a. There are no requirements listed in the requirements management plan. It is a
N
         plan of how to collect and manage the requirements.
N        b. The stakeholder register is an organized list of project stakeholders.
         c. The WBS is a structure that shows the project deliverables in a hierarchical
N
         format.


16. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.5
         c. Plurality is a decision-making technique where we Select the option that has
Y
         the most votes, even if it is not the majority.
         a. Unanimity is a decision-making technique in which all voters must agree on the
N
         same option.
         b. Majority is a decision-making technique in which we Select that option that
N
         receives more than 50% of the votes.
         d. Dictatorship is a decision-making technique in which only one person gets to
N        decide for a group of people.


17. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.4
Y        b. Nominal group technique is a voting technique often used after brainstorming.
         a. Brainstorming is a method to obtain many ideas. Voting is not considered part
N
         of brainstorming.
         c. The Delphi technique involves working with experts in an anonymous way to
N
         reach a consensus.
         d. Idea/mind mapping is a way to visualize ideas from brainstorming. It often
N
         leads to new ideas.


18. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.10
Y        c. A context diagram is a visual of the product scope.
         a. A prototype is a tangible mock-up that customers may try out in order to give us
N
         early feedback on a product.
         b. Questionnaires allow us to perform statistical analysis when we collect lots of
N
         information or collect information from lots of people.
         d. Job shadowing is the method of watching someone as they perform their job so
N
         as to collect requirements.


19. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.9
         c. Benchmarking is used to identify new ideas as well as best practices. We often
Y        associate benchmarking with the quality processes. We do this by comparing our
         processes to those of other organizations.
         a. A context diagram is a visual of the product scope, often depicting an entire
N
         system.
         b. Job shadowing is the method of watching someone as they perform their job so
N
         as to collect requirements.
         d. A prototype is a tangible mock-up that customers may try out in order to give us
N
         early feedback on a product.


20. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-5
Y        b. The traceability matrix is an input to validate scope and control scope.
N        a., c., and d. The matrix is not an input to create WBS or define scope.
Define Scope

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 5-8 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Define scope is the process of creating the project scope statement. Another key
     element of this process is that the final project requirements are selected from the
     project requirements list generated during the previous process (collect
     requirements).

     Think of define scope and collect requirements (the last process we discussed) as
     being very iterative. As we get into the details of defining scope, this may lead us
     back to the requirements we have just collected.


   EXAM TIP: It is a best practice when we are defining scope to be explicit about what
is out of scope. Better to be proactive in letting the stakeholders know what not to expect
than to have them expect something and we not deliver.


INPUTs of define scope

     Scope management plan - this plan describes how the scope
     statement (as well as other scope documents) will be developed and managed.


  EXAM TIP: Since we are in the scope knowledge area it is a good assumption that the
scope (not time, not cost, etc.) management plan will be an input.


     Project charter - the charter may describe the product and the project at
     a high level. We will use this now to create the details of the project scope
     statement.


     Requirements documentation -                      remember that not all the
     requirements that were just developed will become part of the project. In the
   process of define scope we need to determine what requirements the project will
   satisfy and what requirements the project will not satisfy.


   Organizational process assets - these assets will continue to
   be inputs during planning. We will not highlight them each time. As we are preparing
   a scope statement it makes sense to look back at the assets for processes, templates,
   previous project scope statements and lessons learned that will help us develop the
   current scope statement.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of define scope

   Expert judgment - is a tool of many though not all planning processes.
   On the project it makes sense to connect with experts who can make our work easier
   and our output better.


   Product analysis- - we have no product yet. We are analyzing what our
   product (or service) needs to be, including the deliverables, to meet the
   requirements identified.


   Alternative generation - there are often multiple ways to do the
   work on the project to get to the same result (product). Of course, each option has its
   own risks and rewards. Different ways to generate alternatives include:
                  *     Brainstorming- sharing lots of ideas
                  *     Lateral thinking- solving problems through a unique and/or
               creative approach. Looking at problem solving from a different angle.


   Facilitated workshops - this is also a tool and technique of collect
   requirements. These sessions may be very technical and very intense.


OUTPUTs of define scope
       Project scope statement - this document is usually in paragraph
       form (not a hierarchy). It describes both the project and product scope. A good
       practice is to also describe what work will be considered out of scope.


   EXAM TIP: At this point in your studying, make sure you can differentiate between
the project charter and the project scope statement. (See PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 5-1 to
help). If a question is asking about something high level (or summary level) most likely
they are asking about the project charter.


CHARTER                             SCOPE STATEMENT
High level                          Detailed
Comes from sponsor                  Comes from project manager and key members of team
Describes project output            Describes work to achieve output
Output of develop project charter   Output of define scope
INTEGRATION Knowledge area          SCOPE Knowledge area
INITIATING Process group            PLANNING Process group




       Project documents updates - this will be an output of many
       planning processes. Remember that nothing is under baseline control yet. As we
       create one document (ex. scope statement), this may lead us back to updating other
       documents (requirements documentation).
DEFINE SCOPE - Sample Questions

1. The detailed descriptions of the product and project scope can be found in what
document:
a. the scope statement
b. the requirements documentation
c. the work breakdown structure
d. the scope management plan

2. An example of a product analysis technique is:
a. brainstorming
b. lateral thinking
c. pair wise comparisons
d. systems engineering

3. Which of the following is a tool and technique of define scope?
a. interviews
b. focus groups
c. facilitated workshops
d. prototypes

4. Product acceptance criteria is found in what document?
a. the scope statement
b. the requirements documentation
c. the work breakdown structure
d. the scope management plan

5. An example of an alternative generation technique is:
a. value engineering
b. lateral thinking
c. systems analysis
d. functional analysis

6. Your product development project is wrapping up and your management asks
where you stand as far as product scope. Completion of product scope is measured
against the:
a. project management plan
b. scope statement
c. WBS
d. product requirements

7. Which management plan is an input into define scope?
a. requirements management plan
b. scope management plan
c. schedule management plan
d. configuration management plan

8. In iterative life cycles the project's detailed scope is determined:
a. as an output of the concept phase
b. as part of the develop project charter process
c. one iteration at a time
d. never

9. There is often confusion between the project charter and the project scope
statement. Which overall statement is true?
a. the project charter contains more high level information, the project scope statement
contains more detailed information
b. the project scope statement contains more high level information, the project charter
statement contains more detailed information
c. the project charter is developed after the project scope statement
d. the project scope statement gives the project manager authority to utilize project
resources

10. Measurable project objectives are included in which document?
a. the project scope statement
b. the project charter
c. the work breakdown structure
d. the scope management plan
DEFINE SCOPE - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.3.1
Y         a. The scope statement describes both the project and the product scope.
N         b. The requirements documentation describe the requirements, not the scope.
N         c. The WBS is a structure that organizes the deliverables in a hierarchical form.
          d. The scope management plan describes the processes to define and manage
N
          scope. The scope itself is not in the plan.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.2.2
          d. There are many examples of product analysis including system engineering,
Y
          value engineering, etc.
N         a. Brainstorming is a group creativity technique.
N         b. Lateral thinking is an example of an alternative generation technique.
          c. Pair wise comparisons is a technique that compares ideas in pairs, to decide
N
          which is the preferred idea.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.2.4
          c. Facilitated workshops are a tool and technique of both collect requirements
Y
          and define scope.
N         a. Interviews are a tool and technique of collect requirements.
N         b. Focus groups are a tool and technique of collect requirements.
N         d. Prototypes are a tool and technique of collect requirements.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.3.1
          a. The scope statement describes the project scope, the product scope, the
Y
          acceptance criteria, etc.
          b. The requirements documentation describe the project and product
N
          requirements, etc.
N         c. The WBS is a structure that organizes the deliverables in a hierarchical form.
          d. The scope management plan describes the processes to define and manage
N
          scope.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.2.3
          b. Lateral thinking is an example of an alternative generation technique. It
Y         includes solving problems in an indirect way.

          a. Value engineering is a product analysis technique that optimizes the value of a
N
          product.
          c. Systems analysis is a product analysis technique that studies interacting
N
          entities.
N         d. Functional analysis is a product analysis technique.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 5 - Introduction
Y         d. Product scope is measured against the product requirements.
N         a. The project scope is measured against the project management plan.
          b. The project scope is measured against the project management plan including
N
          the scope statement.
          c. The project scope is measured against the project management plan including
N
          the WBS.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-6 and Section 5.3.1.1
          b. Since the process is called define scope, it makes sense that the scope
Y
          management plan is the input.
N         a. The requirements management plan is an input to collect requirements.
          c. The schedule management plan is an input into several processes in the time
N
          knowledge area.
N         d. The configuration management plan is a subset of the project management plan.


8.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3
          c. In iterative life cycles the scope is not all developed upfront, but one iteration
Y
          at time.
          a. In a predictive life cycle, the detailed scope may be an output of an earlier
N
          phase.
          b. Usually the project objectives, not the project scope are part of the project
N
          charter process.
N         d. At some point on every project the scope needs to be defined.


9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 5-1 and Section 5.3.3.1
Y         a. The charter is more high level, the scope statement is more detailed.
N         b. This statement is reversed.
N         c. This charter is developed before the scope statement.
N        d. The charter gives the project manager authority to use project resources.


10. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 5-1
Y        b. The charter contains the project objectives.
N        a. The scope statement describes the project and product scope.
         c. The WBS is a structure that shows the project deliverables in a hierarchical
N
         format.
         d. The scope management plan describes the processes to define and manage
N
         scope.
Create WBS

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 5-10 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Create WBS (work breakdown structure) is the process of taking the deliverables
     listed in the scope statement and subdividing them into small deliverables. This is a
     critical process of planning as much of the other work in planning is based off of the
     WBS. Put a real focus on understanding the ideas surrounding the WBS.


     Work package level- the lowest level of the WBS

     Control account (cost account)- the level above the work
     package level


INPUTs of create WBS (not all listed)

     Scope management plan - this plan describes how the WBS (and
     other scope documents) will be defined and managed.


  EXAM TIP: Since we are in the scope knowledge area it is a good assumption that the
scope (not time, not cost, etc.) management plan will be an input.


     Project scope statement - this document lists in paragraph form
     the deliverables of the project. In create WBS we will take these deliverables and
     subdivide them into smaller more manageable deliverables.


     Requirements documentation - as we develop the WBS we
     need to ensure that we have all the deliverables needed to meet the requirements.
TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of create WBS

    Decomposition -                 we use this tool to break larger deliverables into
    smaller more manageable deliverables. The WBS should be decomposed to the
    appropriate level. Excessive decomposition of the WBS is bad. It may lead to:
                   *     wasted management effort
                   *     inefficient use of resources
                   *     decreased efficiency in performing the work


    Expert judgment- this tool may be referring to people who can provide
    the details to breakdown deliverables into even smaller deliverables or the use of
    templates to help us do this.


100% rule -           the WBS should represent all the work for the project. If a
    deliverable is not in the WBS, there is no plan to create it. This rule is not a tool and
    technique but often associated with the tools and techniques for the create WBS
    process.


  EXAM TIP: The most likely question on this relates to project management work.
Make sure that you list all your project management deliverables in the WBS.



OUTPUTs of create WBS (not all listed)

    Scope baseline - the timing of this output may be a little confusing. We
    do not have a scope baseline yet, at least not in its approved form. After we finish
    planning we will get approval on our documents and baseline the following scope
    documents. All three should exist, just not in their approved form yet.
                   *     Project scope statement - describes project
                 and product scope
                    *    Work breakdown structure (WBS -                             )
                 the work breakdown structure will be a critical input to future planning
                 processes. The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical
                  decomposition of the work to be performed by the project team so as to
                  meet the objectives of the project charter and the deliverables of the
                  project scope statement. Below is a sample WBS.


  EXAM TIP: The control account is not always the second level, it is always the level
above the work package level. The work package level is not always the third level, it is
always the lowest level.




     WBS dictionary- provides details about each control account or work
     package in the WBS. Here is an example of one page from a dictionary.
  EXAM TIP: At this point we may not have all the information that goes into the WBS
dictionary. As an example we may not have estimated resource effort or costs.
CREATE WBS - Sample Questions

1. The WBS should be :
a. a list of activities
b. a hierarchy of activities
c. a list of deliverables
d. a hierarchy of deliverables

2. Planning the near term deliverables in more detail and the far term deliverables
in less detail or waiting until later to plan the far term deliverables is called:
a. rolling wave planning
b. 100% rule
c. 80 hour rule
d. scope creep

3. The 100% rule for WBSs includes all of the following except:
a. the WBS represents all the project management work
b. the WBS represents all the product work
c. nothing extra is in the WBS
d. the WBS includes planned start and finish dates for all deliverables

4. The lowest level of the WBS is called:
a. the work package level
b. the activity level
c. the control account level
d. the cost account level

5. A WBS is used for all of the following except:
a. to help us communicate
b. to help us build the team
c. to show planned start and finish dates
d. to organize the project deliverables

6. The level above the work package level is called:
a. the work package level
b. the activity level
c. the control account level
d. the dictionary level

7. The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) should be:
a. deliverable oriented
b. activity oriented
c. both deliverable and activity oriented
d. neither deliverable or activity oriented

8. The document that provides details of the WBS components is called:
a. the scope statement
b. the WBS dictionary
c. the control account
d. the requirements document

9. The scope baseline includes:
a. the project scope statement
b. the scope management plan
c. the requirements management plan
d. the requirements traceability matrix

10. The WBS level used for earned value management is:
a. the work package level
b. the activity level
c. the control account level
d. the planning package level

11. The project manager has been busy with the core team developing all of the
baselines required to manage the project. A status meeting is being held and the
customer is reviewing all of the baselines. One reason to review the scope baseline
is to see:
a. the planning dates for each of the work packages
b. the sequencing of the activities of the project
c. the estimated cost broken down by deliverable
d. the deliverables of the project

12. The code of accounts is:
a. a numbering system used to uniquely identify each component of the WBS
b. a numbering system used to monitor project costs by category
c. based on the corporate chart of accounts of the performing organization
d. the level of the WBS above the work package level

13. The WBS should be decomposed to as detailed a level as:
a. possible based on the scope of the work
b. money allows in the project budget
c. time allows in the project schedule
d. the ability to plan, manage, and control the work is enhanced
CREATE WBS - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
Y         d. The WBS is a hierarchy of deliverables.
N         a. The WBS is not a list and does not include activities.
N         b. The WBS is a hierarchy but not of activities.
N         c. The WBS is not a list.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.2.2
          a. Rolling wave planning is planning the near term activities in great detail and
Y
          activities further out with a lot less detail.
          b. The 100% rule states that the WBS should represent 100% of the work of the
N
          project.
          c. The 80 hour rule is a rule of thumb that states no activity should be more than
N
          80 hours of effort.
N         d. Scope creep is another name for uncontrolled scope growth.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.2.2
Y         d. The WBS does not include dates. The schedule includes dates.
N         a. All the project management deliverables should be included in the WBS.
N         b. All the product deliverables should be included in the WBS.
          c. The WBS should include only the planned deliverables. Nothing else should be
N
          included in the WBS.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
Y         a. The work package level is the lowest level of the WBS.
          b. There is no activity level in the WBS. In the process define activities we take
N         the work packages of the WBS and turn them into small components called
          activities.
          c. The control account level is the level in the WBS above the work package
N
          level. It is sometimes called the cost account level.
          d. The control account level is the level in the WBS above the work package
N
          level. It is sometimes called the cost account level.


5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4 (implied though not explicitly stated)
Y         c. The WBS does not include dates. The schedule includes dates.
N         a. The WBS may help us communicate with many of the project stakeholders.
N         b. Building the WBS is a great team building activity.
          d. The WBS organizes the project deliverables. They may be organized by phase,
N
          etc.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
          c. The control account level is the level in the WBS above the work package
Y
          level. It is sometimes called the cost account level.
N         a. The work package level is the lowest level of the WBS.
          b. There is no activity level in the WBS. In the process define activities we take
N         the work packages of the WBS and turn them into small components called
          activities.
N         d. There is no such thing as the dictionary level of the WBS.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
Y         a. The WBS should be deliverable oriented.
N         b. and c. The activity list, not the WBS, should be activity oriented.
N         d. The WBS should be deliverable oriented.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
Y         b. The WBS dictionary describes in detail the work packages in the WBS.
N         a. The scope statement describes the project and the product scope.
          c. The control account level is the level in the WBS above the work package
N
          level. It is sometimes called the cost account level.
N         d. The requirement documents describe the requirements.


9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
          a. The scope baseline includes three documents: the scope statement, the WBS,
Y
          and the WBS dictionary.
          b. The project scope is not described in the scope management plan. The plan
N
          describes how to define and manage the scope.
          c. The requirements management plan describes how to collect and manage the
N
          requirements.
          d. The requirements traceability matrix ensures that all the requirements provide
N
          business value.
10. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
         c. The control account level integrates scope, time, and cost and is the level used
Y
         for earned value management.
         a. The work package level is too detailed to be the level for earned value
N
         management.
         b. There is no activity level in the WBS. In the process define activities we take
N        the work packages of the WBS and turn them into small components called
         activities.
         d. The planning package level is below the control account level and is a holding
N
         bucket for future work.


11. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
Y        d. The scope baseline includes the project deliverables.
N        a. The schedule baseline includes the planning dates.
N        b. The schedule baseline includes the sequencing of activities.
N        c. The cost estimates include the estimated costs for each work package.


12. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
         a. The code of accounts assigns a unique number to each and every component of
Y
         the WBS.
         b. This is the definition of the chart of accounts. It is another WBS idea that
N
         assigns categories to costs so as to keep track of them.
         c. The corporation, or the organization may have a chart of accounts. This is a
N
         numbering system that keeps track of costs by category, not by WBS component.
         d. The cost account level, sometimes called the control account level, is the level
N
         above the work package level.


13. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.2.2
Y        d. We should decompose to a level that adds value, and no further.
         a. We may be able to decompose to a high level of detail, but we only want to
N
         decompose to a level that adds value.
         b. We may have money available to allow us to decompose to a high level of
N
         detail, but we only want to decompose to a level that adds value.
         c. We may have time available to allow us to decompose to a high level of detail,
N
         but we only want to decompose to a level that adds value.
Plan Schedule Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-4 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process the schedule management plan is created.


INPUTs of plan schedule management

   Project management plan - the project plan most likely is not
   fully developed yet. Elements of the project plan though may help develop the
   schedule management plan.


   Project charter -               this document provides high level information
   including the summary milestone schedule to help start planning for the schedule.


   Enterprise environmental factors -                                ex. Organizational
   culture- the culture of our organization may affect the process we use to plan for the
   schedule. As an example, a culture that is very detail oriented may lead us to
   develop a schedule plan that is very detail oriented.


   Organizational process assets -                            ex. Templates- our
   organization may have templates for the schedule management plan, the activity list,
   etc. These templates may make developing the schedule a much quicker process.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of plan schedule
management

   Expert judgment, Analytical techniques                                            and
     Meetings-

OUTPUTs of plan schedule management
                           Selects a scheduling methodology, a scheduling tool, and sets formats
Schedule Management Plan   and criteria for the project schedule.
                           It does not describe or list the planned start and finish dates for project
                           activities. (The schedule does this).
                           It is not part of the schedule baseline.
                           It is contained in or a subsidiary plan of the project management plan.
PLAN SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT - Sample
Questions

1. An example of an enterprise environmental factor is:
a. historical information
b. templates
c. change control procedures
d. project management software

2. An example of an organizational process asset is:
a. change control procedures
b. project management software
c. organizational work authorization system
d. organizational culture

3. The schedule management plan establishes:
a. the planned start and finish dates for all activities
b. the dependencies for project activities
c. the units of measure (staff hours, staff days) for project activities
d. the leads and lags for project activities
PLAN SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.1.1.3
Y         d. Software in general is an enterprise environmental factor.
          a., b., and c. Templates, change control procedures, and historical information are
N
          organizational process assets, not enterprise environmental factors.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.1.1.4
Y         a. Change control procedures are organizational assets.
          b., c., and d. Software, organizational work authorization systems, and
N         organizational culture are all examples of enterprise environmental factors not
          organizational process assets.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.1.3.1
          c. The schedule management plan describes how we will create and manage the
Y
          schedule. This includes information about units of measure.
N         a. The schedule includes the planned start and finish dates for all activities.
          b. The network diagram and the schedule show the dependencies for project
N
          activities.
N         d. The network diagram and the schedule show the leads and lags for activities.
Define Activities

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-6 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       In this process we take the lowest level deliverables of the Work Breakdown
       Structure and break them down into even smaller components called activities.


   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between the WBS and the activity list.


WBS                                            ACTIVITY LIST
Made up of deliverables (nouns)                Made up of activities (verbs)
Output of Create WBS                           Output of define activities




INPUTs of define activities (not all listed)

       Schedule management plan - the schedule management plan
       may describe the process for developing the activity list.


       Scope baseline - the scope baseline contains the WBS (work breakdown
       structure). The lowest level of the WBS are the work packages. During define
       activities we take these work packages and break them down even further into
       activities.


   EXAM TIP: The scope baseline contains: Scope statement, WBS, and WBS
Dictionary.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of define activities (not
all listed)
   Decomposition -             we use this tool to break the work packages (in
   deliverable format) into smaller more manageable items (activities -in action
   format).


   Rolling wave planning - we plan the near term work in great detail
   and the far term work in much less detail. This is a type of progressive elaboration.


OUTPUTs of define activities

   Activity list - this is a list of all the activities we need for the project. Of
   course, if we are doing rolling wave planning, we will only have the activities for
   the near term work.


   Activity attributes -                this is a complete description of the activity
   including activity ID and WBS ID, etc. Also included is the type of activity.
   Examples of types of activities include:
                  *    Level of effort
                  *    Discrete effort
                  *    Apportioned effort


   Milestone list - this is a list of milestones for the project. Milestones may
   be:
                   *    Mandatory- required by physical nature of work or by a
                contract (hard logic)
                   *    Discretionary- based on best practices but not mandatory (soft
                logic)


 EXAM TIP: Milestones have zero cost and zero duration.
DEFINE ACTIVITIES - Sample Questions

1. In the process of define activities we:
a. decompose the work packages into a list of activities
b. decompose the activities into a list of work packages
c. decompose the work packages into a hierarchy of activities
d. decompose the activities into a hierarchy of work packages

2. Milestones:
a. have zero duration
b. are always mandatory
c. have a planned start and finish date
d. are an input to define activities

3. The scope baseline is made up of all the following documents except:
a. the WBS
b. the WBS dictionary
c. the schedule
d. the scope statement

4. Decomposition is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. define activities
b. define activities and create WBS
c. define activities and define scope
d. define activities and collect requirements

5. Based on your success on small projects you now have been made the project
manager of a large, complex, multi-year project. In the past, you have planned out
all the details of the activities early in the project. For your current project you are
more likely to do progressive elaboration through:
a. rolling wave planning
b. scope changes
c. WBS dictionary
d. templates

6. Your project team is new to project management. They are struggling with the
idea of a WBS versus an activity list. You explain that:
a. the activity list is really the lowest level of the WBS
b. the WBS shows the sequence of activities
c. the activity list drives the creation of the WBS
d. the WBS is deliverable oriented whereas the activity list is action oriented
DEFINE ACTIVITIES - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2
          a. Define activities is the process in which we take the work packages of the
Y
          WBS and break them down into smaller components called activities.
          b. The activities are smaller than the work packages. We decompose the work
N
          packages into activities, not the activities into work packages.
          c. We do decompose the work packages into activities but not a hierarchy of
N
          activities. The output is a list.
          d. The activities are smaller than the work packages. We decompose the work
N
          packages into activities, not the activities into work packages.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2.3.3
Y         a. Milestones have zero duration.
N         b. Milestones may be mandatory or discretionary.
          c. Since milestones have zero duration they have only one date, not a planned start
N
          and a planned finish date.
N         d. Milestones are an output of define activities, not an input.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
          c. The schedule, once approved, will become the schedule baseline, not the scope
Y
          baseline.
          a., b., and d. The scope baseline is made up of 3 documents: the scope statement,
N
          the WBS, and the WBS dictionary.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 5.4.2.1 and 6.2.2.1
          b. This is the best answer. Decomposition is a tool and technique of both of these
Y
          processes.
N         a. This is a true answer but look for a better one.
N         c. Decomposition is not a tool and technique of define scope.
N         d. Decomposition is not a tool and technique of collect requirements.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2.2.2
          a. Rolling wave planning means we plan the near term activities in detail and the
Y
          activates further out in much less detail.
N         b. Scope changes should be processed through the perform integrated change
          control process.
          c. The WBS dictionary is created before the activities. It is related to the work
N
          packages.
          d. Templates help us know what activities may be associated with what work
N
          packages. This activity does not fit in the context of the question.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2
          d. The WBS is deliverable oriented (the components of the WBS are
Y         deliverables), whereas the activity list is action oriented (the components of the
          activity list are activities- actions).
          a. The lowest level of the WBS is the work package level. The activities are not
N
          in the WBS.
          b. The network diagram, not the WBS, shows the sequence of activities. c. The
N
          WBS drives the creation of the activity list.

After we define activities we may begin sequencing activities and/or estimating activity
resources. These two processes may occur in parallel.
Sequence Activities

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-8 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   During sequence activities we want to create a network diagram that visualizes the
   logical relationships between all the activities. All activities should have a
   predecessor (only exception- the first activity has no predecessor) and a successor
   (only exception- the last activity has no successor.)
                   *     Predecessor- an activity that comes before (precedes) another
                activity
                   *     Successor- an activity that comes after (succeeds) another
                activity


INPUTs of sequence activities (not all listed)

   Schedule management plan - the schedule management plan
   describes the process for sequencing the activities found in the list. It may include
   the name of the scheduling tool (ex. Microsoft Project) and the scheduling method
   (ex. critical path method).


   Activity list - these are the activities we need to sequence. At this point we
   will be thinking about predecessors and successors.


   Activity attributes -                  details about mandatory or discretionary
   relationships may be included in the attributes.


   Milestone list -               these milestones may need to occur before or after
   specific activities or at certain dates (monthly status reviews).


   Project Scope Statement -                         includes the constraints and
   assumptions that we need to consider as we sequence the activities.
TOOLs AND TECHNIQUEs of sequence activities

   Precedence diagramming method (PDM) -                                                  most
   common method of sequencing activities
                *    Nodes (boxes)- represent activities
                *    Lines (arrows)- represent relationships

   There are four types of relationships represented in the precedence diagramming
   method. (see PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-9)


   Finish to start (FS) - this is the most common relationship. If a relationship is not
   specifically listed on a diagram assume it is finish to start.

   Finish to finish (FF) - the finish of one activity is driving the finish of another.

   Start to start (SS) - the start of one activity is driving the start of another.

   Start to Finish (SF) - this is the least common of all the relationships- the start of
   one activity is driving the finish of another.


   Other methods of depicting relationships
   include:
       Arrow Diagramming Method (ADM) - (not in the
         PMBOK(R) Guide)
                *    used less often than the PDM
                *    activities are placed on arrows (not in boxes)
                *    the arrows represent both the activities and the relationships
                *    diagram called "activity-on-arrow" or "activity-on-line"
             diagram
                *    only uses finish to start relationships
                *    uses dummy activities to show dummy relationships. There are
             no cost and no duration for dummy activities
           GERT- graphical evaluation and
           review technique - (not in the PMBOK(R)
           Guide)
                    *     Allows for probabilistic treatment of the network diagram
                    *     Very complex and thus not common
                    *     Allows loops between activities


     Dependency determination - the type of dependency has a huge
     impact on the amount of flexibility the project manager may use when managing the
     schedule.
                    *     Mandatory dependency- required by the physical nature of work
                 or by a contract (hard logic)
                    *     Discretionary- based on best practices but not mandatory (soft
                 logic)
                    *     External- something outside the project is driving something
                 inside the project
                    *     Internal- a dependency that is within the control of the project
                 team members


  EXAM TIP: Recognize the phrases: hard logic and soft logic.



     Leads and Lags -
                     *     Project Leads- leads allow a successor activity to advance as it
                  is related to a predecessor. Ex. When we are writing code we may be
                  able to start testing some code even before we finish writing all the
                  code.
                     *     Project Lags- lags forces a delay in a relationship. Ex. When
                  painting a room we often want a lag after painting the walls before we
                  will hang artwork on the walls.


   EXAM TIP: Be careful on the exam with these ideas. Leads only advance the project
when the lead falls on the critical path. Lags only delay a project schedule when the lag
is on the critical path.
OUTPUTs of sequence activities (not all listed)

   Project schedule network diagrams (see
   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-11) - this diagram is a physical
   representation of the logical relationships of the project activities. Notice at this
   point there are no dates, no durations, etc. on the diagram. This will come later when
   we get to develop schedule.
SEQUENCE ACTIVITIES - Sample Questions

1. In the precedence diagramming method which relationship is most common:
a. finish to start
b. finish to finish
c. start to start
d. start to finish

2. Another name for the precedence diagramming method is:
a. activity on arrow
b. arrow diagramming
c. activity on node
d. activity on line

3. The nodes (boxes) in a precedence diagram represent:
a. the activity
b. the relationship
c. the duration
d. the cost

4. Soft logic is another name for:
a. discretionary dependency
b. mandatory dependency
c. external dependency
d. internal dependency

5. We show the delay of a successor activity on a network diagram through:
a. leads
b. lags
c. milestones
d. arrows

6. The arrows in a precedence diagram represent:
a. the activity
b. the relationship
c. the duration
d. the cost
7. Hard logic is another name for:
a. discretionary dependency
b. mandatory dependency
c. external dependency
d. preferential dependency

8. We show the acceleration of a successor activity on a network diagram through:
a. leads
b. lags
c. milestones
d. arrows


9. In the Precedence Diagramming method which relationship is least common:
a. finish to start
b. finish to finish
c. start to start
d. start to finish

10. You are working with your core team developing the network diagram for your
map making project. Your team member tells you that they suggest you plan in your
schedule that you will do a fly over of the area before researching the geography.
You ask them why and they tell you it is a best practice. This is an example of a(n):
a. mandatory dependency
b. discretionary dependency
c. hard logic
d. external dependency

11. The schedule network diagrams are an output of sequence activities. This output
becomes an input to which process?
a. estimate activity resources
b. estimate activity durations
c. develop schedule
d. plan schedule management
SEQUENCE ACTIVITIES - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.1
          a. If you think about the schedules that you now use, most likely the most common
Y
          relationship is finish to start.
          b. Finish to finish means the finish of one activity drives the finish of another.
N
          This is not nearly as common as finish to start.
          c. Start to start means the start of one activity drives the start of another. This is
N
          not nearly as common as finish to start.
          d. Start to finish is the least common relationship. It means the start of one activity
N
          drives the finish of another.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.1
          c. Another name for the precedence diagramming method (PDM) is activity on
Y
          node.
          a., b., and d. Activity on arrow, arrow diagramming, and activity on line are all
          another way of representing logical relationships. These diagrams are limited to
N
          finish to start relationships and therefore are not as common as the precedence
          diagramming method.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.1
Y         a. The boxes represent the activity.
N         b. The lines (or the arrows) represent the relationship.
          c. The duration is not represented in the diagram. In this context the diagram is
N         only showing the activities and the relationships. All the boxes are the same size.
          (See PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-11.)
N         d. The cost is not represented in the diagram.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.2
Y         a. Another name for discretionary logic is soft logic. It is based on good practice.
N         b. Hard logic is another name for mandatory dependencies.
          c. External dependencies are normally outside the control of the project team.
N
          They may use hard or soft logic.
          d. Internal dependencies are normally inside the control of the project team. They
N
          may use hard or soft logic.
5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.3
Y         b. Lags show the delay of a successor activity.
          a. Leads show the advancement (acceleration) of a successor activity. The
N
          successor activity begins before the predecessor has completed.
N         c. Milestones are events with zero duration.
N         d. Arrows (or lines) represent relationships in precedence diagrams.


6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.1
Y         b. The arrows (or lines) represents the relationships.
N         a. The boxes represent the activity.
          c. The duration is not represented in the diagram. In this context the diagram is
N         only showing the activities and the relationships. All the boxes are the same size.
          (See PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-11.)
N         d. The project cost is not represented in the diagram.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.2
Y         b. Hard logic is another name for mandatory dependencies.
N         a. Another name for discretionary logic is soft logic. It is based on good practice.
          c. External dependencies are normally outside the control of the project team.
N
          They may use hard or soft logic.
          d. Internal dependencies are normally inside the control of the project team. They
N
          may use hard or soft logic.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.3
          a. Leads show the advancement (acceleration) of a successor activity. The
Y
          successor activity begins before the predecessor has completed.
N         b. Lags show the delay of a successor activity.
N         c. Milestones are events with zero duration.
N         d. Arrows (or lines) represent relationships in precedence diagrams.


9.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.1
          d. Start to finish is the least common relationship. It means the start of one activity
Y
          drives the finish of another.
          a. If you think about the schedules that you now use, most likely the most common
N
          relationship is finish to start.
N         b. Finish to finish means the finish of one activity drives the finish of another.
         This is not nearly as common as finish to start.
         c. Start to start means the start of one activity drives the start of another. This is
N
         not nearly as common as finish to start.


10. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.2
Y        b. Discretionary dependencies are based on best practices.
         a. This is not a mandatory dependency because we do not have to use this
N
         sequence.
         c. Hard logic is mandatory logic. This is not mandatory. We do not have to do it
N
         this way.
         d. Both of the activities are related to the project and therefore would not be
N
         considered external.


11. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-8
         c. This diagram shows the logical relationships between activities. This is
Y
         needed to develop a schedule.
N        a. We do not need the network diagram to estimate activity resources.
N        b. We do not need the network diagram to estimate activity durations.
         d. The schedule management plan is used to help sequence activities. Therefore,
N        the schedule management plan is an input to sequence the activities, not the other
         way around.
Estimate Activity Resources

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-13 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process we estimate the number of resources (material, people, equipment,
   and supplies) needed for each activity. With human resources we often estimate in
   terms of person hours or person days. Realize we are not determining the durations
   of the activities yet, just how many resources are needed for each activity.


INPUTs of estimate activity resources (not all listed)

   Schedule management plan - the schedule management plan
   may describe the process for estimating activity resources. As an example the plan
   should define what units of measure are acceptable. Maybe you want all labor hours
   estimated in work hours, or work days, or work weeks. The plan will specify this.


   Activity list -         we will estimate how many resources (material, people,
   equipment, and supplies) we need for each activity.


   Activity attributes -                details listed in the attributes may help with
   estimating resources.


   Resource calendars - you may be wondering about this input. It is
   actually an output of acquire project team and conduct procurements. Think of the
   current process as being iterative. We may not have resource calendars the first time
   we estimate our resources, but eventually we will need these calendars to do a good
   job of estimating.


   Risk register - again you may be wondering about this input. We may not
   have a risk register the first time we estimate resources but eventually we will want
   to include risk in all of our planning. Think of the risk register as a spreadsheet or a
   database that includes all of our current risk information.


   Activity cost estimates -                   one more time you may be wondering
   where this input came from. It is an output of estimate costs. The cost of resources
   may be something we want to think about as we consider different resource options.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of estimate activity
resources (not all listed)

   Alternative analysis -                  there may be different options as far as
   resources. Ex. - maybe you would prefer to have 100 hours of a senior engineer on a
   particular activity but you know you will not be able to acquire that many hours from
   a senior engineer. Another option would be 20 hours of a senior engineer and 150
   hours of a junior engineer.


   Published estimating data -                           in some industries there are
   published unit costs, etc. for labor, material, etc. In this technique, the activity is
   compared to the activities for which data exists and the actual cost or durations or
   resources of the closest comparable activity is selected from the data and used as the
   estimate. This only works if there is published estimated data available.
   Ex.- when you take your automobile in for service the service organization often
   obtains labor requirements for the required service from a book or database.


   Bottom-up estimating- -after the resources are estimated for all the
   activities these estimates are aggregated (added together) so as to develop an
   estimate for the entire project.


   Project management software - this software is often used to
   help improve resource utilization. Examples of items to help with this include:
   resource breakdown structures, etc.


OUTPUTs of estimate activity resources (not all
listed)

    Activity resource requirements - based on the information
    we have, this is what we require as far as type and quantity of resources for each
    activity. Documentation should include not just the requirements but how you came
    up with those requirements (basis of estimate and assumptions).


    Resource Breakdown Structure -                              this is one way to
    visualize resource requirements.
ESTIMATE ACTIVITY RESOURCES - Sample
Questions

1. During estimate activity resources we should estimate the type and quantities of
all of the following resources except:
a. material
b. money
c. people
d. equipment

2. Examples of alternative analysis include all of the following except:
a. using different levels of people (20 hours of a senior engineer may be equivalent in
output to 5 hours of a senior engineer and 40 hours of a junior engineer)
b. different machines or tools
c. in-house labor versus contractors
d. analogous versus parametric estimating

3. Which of the following is a tool and technique of estimate activity resources:
a. published estimating data
b. precedence diagramming method
c. critical path method
d. resource leveling

4. All of the following are outputs of estimate activity resources except:
a. activity resource requirements
b. activity duration estimates
c. resource breakdown structure
d. project documentation updates

5. Optimizing resource utilization often uses what tool and technique:
a. bottom-up estimating
b. project management software
c. precedence diagramming method
d. critical path method
ESTIMATE ACTIVITY RESOURCES - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.4
Y         b. We estimate money during the process estimate costs.
          a., c., and d. Estimating resources includes estimating equipment, materials, labor
N
          (people hours, not the actual people we will use - that comes later).


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.4.2.2
          d. Alternative analysis is a tool and technique we use to look at different
          alternatives from a resource standpoint to get us to the same output. Analogous
Y
          versus parametric estimating are two estimating techniques, not two alternative
          uses of resources.
          a., b., and c. These are examples of alternative resources that may be analyzed as
N
          we estimate our resources.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.4.2.3
          a. Published estimating data may be used to help speed up the process of
Y
          estimating resources.
          b. The precedence diagramming method is a tool and technique of sequence
N
          activities.
N         c. The critical path method is a tool and technique of develop schedule.
N         d. Resource leveling is a tool and technique of develop schedule.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.4.3
Y         b. The activity duration estimates are an output of estimate activity durations.
          a., c., and d. Estimate activity resources has several outputs including activity
N         resource requirements, resource breakdown structure, and project documentation
          updates.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.4.2.5
          b. Project management software, with the appropriate data entered may be used to
Y
          optimize resource allocation.
          a. Bottom-up estimating is used a tool and technique of both estimate activity
N
          resources and estimate costs.
          c. The precedence diagramming method is a tool and technique of sequence
N
    activities and is used to show logical relationships among the schedule activities.
    d. The critical path method is a tool and technique of develop schedule and is
N   used to calculate the early start and finish dates, the late start and finish dates, as
    well as the float of activities and project duration.
Estimate Activity Durations

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-15 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process we estimate the number of work periods (not the number of person
   hours) required to complete each activity. Example- Activity A will take 80 person
   hours to complete. We have one person available half time and therefore we will
   estimate four weeks to complete the activity.


INPUTs of estimate activity durations (not all listed)

   Schedule management plan - the schedule management plan
   describes the process for estimating activity resources. As an example the plan
   should define what units of measure are acceptable.


   Activity list - we will estimate the duration needed for each activity.

   Activity attributes -              details listed in the attributes may help with
   estimating durations.


   Activity resource requirements - if we believe an activity
   will take 80 hours of a standard senior engineer and an above average senior
   engineer becomes available we may not have to estimate 2 full weeks of duration but
   maybe something less.
   Efficiency and productivity must be taken into account when moving from resource
   requirements to duration estimates.


   Resource calendars -                     we review these calendars to check
   availability of desired resources. As an example, we require 40 hours of a junior
   engineer. The calendar shows us that the engineer will only be available half time.
   Therefore, we may estimate a duration of 2 weeks (the engineer can work 20 hours
       per week).


       Project scope statement -                        constraints and assumptions will be
       listed in the scope statement that may affect activity durations.
       Example related to assumptions- we may assume that the project team will be
       projectized and that all resources will be available full-time.
       Example related to constraints- we may have a constraint that all electrical work
       will be performed by union labor and that labor is allowed to work no more than 35
       hours/week.


       Risk register - this is the spreadsheet or database that contains our list of
       risks, etc. Based on the risks, we may add contingency to our duration estimates.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of estimate activity
durations (not all listed)

   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between analogous and parametric estimating.


ANALOGOUS ESTIMATING                 PARAMETRIC ESTIMATING
Based on one past project            Based on statistics
Limited amount of data available     Enough data to create statistics
Less costly                          More costly
Quicker                              Slower- because we need to develop the statistics
Less accurate                        More accurate




       Three-Point Estimating - to increase the accuracy of an estimate
       we may go from just asking for the most likely result to asking for 3
       estimates/activity. The three estimates are:
       P- pessimistic (worst case scenario)
       ML- most likely
       O- optimistic (best case scenario).
TRIANGULAR                             BETA DISTRIBUTION
DISTRIBUTION
Often called the simple average        Often called PERT
Estimate = (P + ML + O)/3              PERT Estimate = (P +4 ML + O)/6


STANDARD                DEVIATION
                                       VARIANCE
(SD)
 The standard deviation is a
                                 The variance of a number is the square of the
  measure of how spread out the
                                  standard deviation.
  numbers in a distribution are.
 SD is also represented by the
  Greek letter sigma .
  One Standard Deviation= |(P -O)/6|       Variance = (1SD)2



  EXAM TIP: PERT stands for: Program Evaluation and Review Technique.


      Group decision-making techniques -                                 more accurate
      estimates, and greater commitment to the project, may be obtained by working as a
      team on estimates. Examples of these techniques include:


              Delphi technique - a technique in which we only work with
              experts in an anonymous fashion to reach a consensus.


              Nominal group technique - a voting technique used after
              brainstorming to rank the most important ideas.
              Brainstorming - a technique in which many ideas are generated
              often from lots of people.


      Reserve analysis - there are two types of reserves: contingency and
      management.
CONTINGENCY RESERVE                                   MANAGEMENT RESERVE
                                                      For unknown unknowns - unforeseen work that is within the
For known unknowns
                                                      scope of the project
Part of the project baseline and therefore under the
                                                     Outside of the project baseline
control of the project manager.
The reserve may be:
     * a percentage of the estimated duration
     * a fixed time
                                                 Often developed based on historical information.
     * developed using other methods
As we move through the project, we should have a
better estimate of what contingency is required



   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between contingency and management reserves.



OUTPUTs of estimate activity durations (not all
listed)

       Activity duration estimates - these are the estimates for each
       project activity. The estimates may include reserve but do not include leads and lags.
       It is always good to include a range with each estimate.
ESTIMATE ACTIVITY DURATIONS - Sample
Questions

1. The purpose of estimating activity durations is to get an approximation on:
a. the amount of time it will take to complete the project
b. the number of work periods for each activity
c. the quantity of resources needed for the project
d. the amount of effort required for each activity

2. Your team is deciding between analogous estimating and parametric estimating to
assist with estimating the activity durations. Which of the following is true of
analogous estimating compared to parametric estimating:
a. analogous is a slower process
b. analogous is based on statistics
c. analogous is generally more costly to develop
d. analogous is based on one past project

3. The PERT (program evaluation and review technique) uses all of the following
estimates except:
a. most likely
b. optimistic (best-case)
c. pessimistic (worst-case)
d. mean (average)

4. All of the following are true about a time reserve except:
a. it may be a percentage of the estimated duration
b. it may be a fixed time
c. it may be developed using other methods
d. it should be the same amount for each activity

5. Management reserves are set-up for:
a. known-unknowns
b. accepted risks
c. extra work to make the customer happy
d. unforeseen work that is within the scope of the project
6. The traditional PERT technique uses:
a. a triangular distribution
b. a beta distribution
c. mean
d. average
ESTIMATE ACTIVITY DURATIONS - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.3.1
          b. Estimating activity durations is estimating the durations of the activities, not of
Y
          the project.
          a. The term in this answer that makes it incorrect is project. Estimating activity
N
          durations is estimating the durations of the activities, not of the project.
          c. Activity resource requirements is an estimate of the quantity of resources
N
          required for the project.
          d. Estimating activity resources is estimating effort (for people) for each activity.
          Estimating activity durations is about estimating the durations of each activity.
N         They are not the same thing. We may need 40 hours of effort on activity A. If we
          have 2 people available full-time the duration of the activity may be closer to 20
          hours, not 40 hours.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.2
          d. Analogous estimates are based on one past project. Parametric estimates are
Y
          based on the statistics developed from many past projects.
          a. Parametric estimating is a slower process. The assumption is that we need to
N
          develop the statistics used in the parametric estimates.
N         b. Parametric estimating is based on statistics, analogous is not.
          c. Parametric estimates are usually more costly to develop. The assumption is that
N
          we need to develop the statistics used in the parametric estimates.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.4
          d. The equation for PERT. PERT= PERT Estimate= (P +4ML +O)/6. P=
Y
          pessimistic, ML= most likely, O= optimistic


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.6
          d. The tricky part of this answer is the term "should". Be careful of terms like
Y
          should. The time reserve is what makes sense for the activity and the project.
          a. A time reserve may be a percentage. Let's take the example of 10% reserve
          added. If the duration for activity A is 10 days we may then add 10% of 10 days
N
          =1 day. The new estimated duration for activity A =10 days + 1 day reserve = 11
          days.
N         b. A time reserve may be a fixed amount of time.
N         c. A time reserve may be developed using risk management processes.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.6
          d. Management reserves may relate to cost or schedule. They are for unplanned
Y
          work within the project scope.
          a. Contingency reserves are for known-unknowns. An example would be rework.
N
          We know we are going to have rework though we don't know exactly how much.
          b. Contingency reserves are for risks that have been accepted actively. More on
N
          this when we get to plan risk responses.
          c. We do not do extra work to make the customer happy. We do the work to meet
N
          the project objectives, nothing more, nothing less.


6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.4
Y         b. PERT uses a beta distribution.
          a. If we are going to use a triangular distribution we would use the equation:
N         Duration estimate= (P +ML+O)/3. P= pessimistic. O= optimistic, ML= most
          likely.
          c. and d. Mean and average have the same definition. Therefore, neither may be
N         right. We use the most likely estimate not the mean (or average) in the PERT
          equation.
Develop Schedule

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-17 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       In this process we enter the schedule data into the scheduling tool so a schedule
       model may be created. Each activity in the schedule should have a planned start and
       planned finish date.


  EXAM TIP: Know the difference between the processes sequence activities and
develop schedule.


SEQUENCE ACTIVITIES                                      DEVELOP SCHEDULE
                                                         The process of analyzing activity sequencing, durations,
The process of identifying and documenting relationships resource requirements, and schedule constraints to create
among the project activities.                            the project schedule model with planned dates for
                                                         completing project activities.
                                                         Performed after the processes:
Performed in parallel to the processes:
                                                             * estimate activity resources
    * estimate activity resources
                                                             * estimate activity durations
    * estimate activity durations.
                                                             * sequence activities
                                                       The outputs include the schedule as well as eventually the
The output is the network diagram. This diagram is a schedule baseline. Both of these documents present linked
graphical representation of the logical relationships. activities with planned dates, durations, milestones, and
                                                       resources.




INPUTs of develop schedule (not all listed)

       Schedule management plan - the schedule management plan
       describes the process for developing the schedule. The plan will list the scheduling
       software to be used, as well as what methods (CPM, critical chain, etc.) will be
       used in what order. The plan may identify who owns the review for accuracy for
       each activity once the initial schedule is developed.


       Activity list - each of these activities will be included in the schedule.
   Activity attributes - the attributes provide finer detail of the activities
   on the list. This detail may help in developing the schedule.


   Project schedule network diagrams -                           these diagrams
   show the relationships (predecessors and successors) for the activities on the
   activity list.


   Activity resource requirements - provide information on the
   types and quantities of resources required. Tradeoffs may need to be made to
   optimize resource utilization.


   Resource calendars - provide information on when each resource is,
   and is not, available to work on the project. Tradeoffs may need to be made to
   optimize resource utilization.


   Activity duration estimates - these estimates of time periods
   required for each activity are a critical part to developing the schedule.


   Project staff assignments - these are an output of the process
   acquire project team. We will get there later in this book. In simplistic terms, the
   staff assignments name the person who will perform each activity.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of develop schedule (not
all listed)

   Schedule network analysis -                           a group of techniques used to
   develop the schedule. Important terms:
   path convergence- two or more paths becoming one
   path divergence- one path becoming two or more
   The critical path method (CPM) - this is the method used to
    calculate the theoretical early start, early finish, late start, and late finish for each
    activity on the project schedule. These theoretical numbers tell us how much
    flexibility we have on the schedule and also the minimum project duration.
    Several important definitions:
       The critical path:
                      *    the longest path through the network
                      *    the shortest amount of time to complete the project (the shortest
                   project duration)
                      *    with CPM (critical path method) the critical path normally has
                   zero total float
    Critical activity- any activity on the critical path.
    Total float = float = total slack = slack- the amount of time an activity may be
    delayed without delaying the project finish date. The equation: total float= late finish
    - early finish.
    Free float- the amount of time an activity may be delayed without delaying the
    earliest start of any successor.
    Project float- the amount of time the project may be delayed without impacting an
    imposed end date.
    Negative float- a project may have negative float. A negative float for the project
    means the amount of time required for the project is greater than the amount of time
    allocated.

    Early start- theoretically the earliest an activity may start
    Early finish- theoretically the earliest an activity may finish
    Late start- theoretically the latest an activity may start
    Late finish- theoretically the latest an activity may finish


  EXAM TIP: The critical path method assumes unlimited resources.


   FREE HELP: We suggest you go to YouTube and search for Aileen Ellis, PMP for
free videos on the critical path method.


    A few ideas to help us contrast some project management terminology.


    The critical chain method - in this method we place buffers
    along schedule paths. The buffers help us manage:
                      *     limited resources
                      *     project uncertainties
       There are two types of buffers (see PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-19):
                      *     feeding buffer-
                                   placed at the end of a path feeding into the critical chain
                                   these buffers help protect the critical path from any
                          slippages on the feeding path
                      *     project buffer-
                                   placed at the end of the critical chain
                                   these buffers help protect the end date from any slippages
                          on the critical chain
                      *     developed by Dr. Goldratt (know this name for exam). This
                   concept is based off of Theory of Constraints (ToC).
             Critical chain was developed to lower the probability of the following two
             ideas delaying the project.
                      *     Parkinson theory- expanding the work to fill the time
                      *     Student syndrome- procrastination. Example- If we know it will
                   take two weeks to complete an activity but we are given five
                   weeks.....many of us will not start the activity for three weeks.


   EXAM TIP: The critical chain is the resource -constrained critical path.




       Resource optimization techniques- two of several techniques are discussed.

RESOURCE LEVELING                                RESOURCE SMOOTHING
                                                 GOAL: Ensure demand for resources does not exceed
GOAL: Balance demand for resources with supply
                                                 certain limits
Critical path may change- usually get longer                 Critical path not allowed to change
All resource issues resolved                                 Not all resources may be optimized



Modeling techniques- two of several techniques are discussed.


WHAT-IF Scenario Analysis                                    Simulation
GOAL: assess feasibility of schedule, preparing contingency
                                                            GOAL: understand probability of hitting project objectives
plans
                                                          METHOD: using three-point estimates to simulate schedule
METHOD: evaluating scenarios to predict effect on project
                                                          (note: to simulate the schedule a network diagram is also
objectives
                                                          required). Ex. Monte Carlo



LEADS                                                        LAGS
Advance a successor activity in relationship to its
                                                    Delay an activity in relationship to its predecessor
predecessor
Only affects project end date if on the critical path.       Only affects project end date if on the critical path
                                                       Ex. Waiting a time period after painting a wall before
Ex.- allowing testing to begin even though we have not
                                                       hanging art work on the wall (the lag is required for the paint
completed coding
                                                       on the wall to dry)



Two types of schedule compression tools and techniques are listed

CRASHING                                                     FAST TRACKING
GOAL: shorten the project duration                           GOAL: shorten the project duration
                                                             METHOD: overlap activities or phases that we would
METHOD: add more resources to the critical path activities
                                                             prefer to complete in sequence
                                                        EFFECT: increased risk for the project. In simple terms, no
EFFECT: increased cost to the project. The risk is also
                                                        increased cost unless a negative risk event occurs because
increased but not nearly as much as in Fast Tracking.
                                                        of overlap.



    EXAM TIP: If the question states:
             *      You want to shorten the schedule but you have no money, what
           should you do? The answer is fast track. (We cannot crash since we have no
           money available).
                     *    You want to shorten the schedule and you have money available,
                  what should you do? The answer is Crash. Now of course you can also Fast
                  Track but do not Select the answer Fast Track. If we have money we should
                  crash since crashing raises our risk less than Fast Tracking.
       Schedule tool- this is usually a software based tool that allows for scheduling.


OUTPUTS of develop schedule (not all listed)

       Schedule baseline -                   this is the approved schedule. The schedule
       baseline is not normally created the first time through the process develop schedule.
       Only after several iterations do we normally have a schedule baseline. To change the
       schedule baseline, or any baseline, requested changes must be processed and
       approved through the integrated change control process.


       Project schedule - this is your working schedule. It is expected to
       change and to be updated with actual data. May be expressed in several forms:
       Bar chart- simple, easy to read, good to show progress
       Milestone chart- simple, easy to read, good for management presentations
       Project schedule network diagram- more complex, show logical relationships.
       Good for working with team.


Project Schedule                                    Schedule Baseline
Living document                                     Frozen document
Is a project document                               Is a part of the project plan
Can be changed by the project manager (without formal Can only be changed through a formal change control
change control)                                       process
                                                    Schedule performance is always measured against the
                                                    schedule baseline



For 50 more sample questions and solutions related to the critical path method
please see Aileen's book: How to get Every Network Diagram question right
on the PMP(R) Exam.
The book is available in both print and e-book format on Amazon. This book
is much better in the print format.
DEVELOP SCHEDULE - Sample Questions

Use the following table for questions 1-4.




1. The duration of the critical path in the above diagram is:
a. 20 days
b. 25 days
c. 35 days
d. 37 days

2. The total float of Activity C is:
a. 0 days
b. 9 days
c. 12 days
d. 24 days

3. The critical path activities are:
a. A, B, E, G
b. A, B, C, E, G
c. A, B, C, D, E, F, G
d. A, B, D, E, G

4. If management imposes an end time of 22 days the project float is:
a. 3 days
b. 4 days
c. -4 days
d. -3 days
5. In the critical chain method the project buffer:
a. protects the target finish date from slippage along the critical path
b. protects the critical chain from slippage along the feeding chains
c. is placed on the feeding chain
d. is placed at the beginning of the critical chain

6. In the critical chain method the feeding buffer:
a. protects the target finish date from slippage along the critical path
b. protects the critical chain from slippage along the feeding chains
c. is placed at the end of the critical chain
d. is placed at the beginning of the critical chain


7. Resource Leveling is used:
a. after the critical path method
b. before the critical path method
c. instead of the critical path method
d. instead of crashing

8. The most common type of simulation technique used to develop the schedule is:
a. earned value method
b. Monte Carlo Analysis
c. decision tree analysis
d. expected monetary value

9. The purpose of schedule compression is to:
a. shorten the project schedule
b. obtain a constant use of resources
c. overlap the project activities
d. add resources to the critical path

10. You are managing the development of a new medical device. Hitting the market
window is critical for project success. To analyze the amount of float each activity
has you will most likely use what method?
a. bottom-up estimating
b. expert judgment
c. critical path method
d. resource leveling
Develop Schedule - Solutions
1. The first thing we must do is draw out the diagram, showing the dependencies.




Now that we have the logic we will want to do a forward pass to identify the
early start and early finish numbers for each activity. Try it on your own and
then use the notes below to check your work.




Since A is the first activity it begins on day 1 (early start). A is 2 days long. A's early
finish= A's early start of 1 plus A's duration of 2 days minus 1= 1+2-1= 2.

B is the successor to A. The early start of B is the early finish of A (2 days) plus 1= 3.
B's early finish= B's early start of 3 plus B's duration of 5 minus 1= 3+5-1= 7.

C is the successor to B. The early start of C is the early finish of B (7 days) plus 1= 8.
C's early finish = C's early start of 8 plus C's duration of 6 minus 1= 8+6-1= 13.

D is also the successor of B. The early start of D is the early finish of B (7 days) plus 1= 8.
D's early finish = D's early start of 8 plus D's duration of 3 minus 1= 8+3-1= 10.

E is the successor to C. The early start of E is the early finish of C (13 days) plus 1= 14.
E's early finish = E's early start of 14 plus E's duration of 8 minus 1= 14+8-1= 21.

F is the successor to both C and D. We look at both of these predecessors to determine
which has the largest early finish value. The early finish of C is 13 and of D is 10.
Therefore, C has the largest early finish and that is the number we use. Therefore, the early
start of F will be the early finish of C (13 days) plus 1= 14 days.
F's early finish = F's early start of 14 plus F's duration of 7 minus 1= 14+7-1= 20.

G is the successor to both E and F. We look at both these predecessors to determine which
one has the largest early finish value. The early finish of E is 21 and of F is 20. Therefore,
E has the largest early finish value and that is the number we use. Therefore, the early start
of G will be the early finish of E (21 days) plus 1= 22 days.
G's early finish = G's early start of 22 plus G's duration of 4 minus 1= 22+4-1= 25.
The critical path duration is 25 days.

2.To calculate the float of activities we do a backward pass through the network.
To do a backward pass we begin at the last activity which is G. We take the early finish of
G (25 days) and bring that number down into the box for the late finish of G (now also 25
days).
Late start of G= late finish of G (25 days) - duration of G (4 days) plus 1= 25 - 4+1= 22
days.

Late finish of E= late start of G (22 days) minus 1= 22-1= 21 days.
Late start of E = late finish of E (21 days) - duration of E (8 days) plus 1= 21 - 8 + 1= 14
days.

Late finish of F = late start of G (22 days) minus 1= 22-1= 21 days.
Late start of F = late finish of F (21 days) - duration of F (7 days) plus 1= 21 - 7 + 1= 15
days.

Late finish of C is trickier. C is the predecessor for both E and F. We ask which successor
to C (E or F) has the lower late start date. E has a late start of 14 days. F has a late start of
15 days. Therefore, E has the lower late start date.
Late finish of C= late start of E (14 days) minus 1= 14-1=13.
Late start of C= late finish of C (13 days) - duration of C (6 days) plus 1= 13 - 6 + 1= 8
days.
Late finish of D= late start of F (15 days) minus 1= 15-1+14.
Late start of D= late finish of D (14 days) - duration of D (3 days) plus 1= 14 - 3 + 1= 12
days.

Late finish of B is trickier. B is the predecessor for both C and D. We ask which immediate
successor to B (C or D) has the lower late start date. C has a late start of 8 days. D has a
late start of 12 days. Therefore, C has the lower late start date.
Late finish of B= late start of C (8 days) minus 1= 8-1= 7.
Late start of B= late finish of B (7 days) - duration of B (5 days) plus 1= 7 - 5 + 1= 3
days.

The late finish of A now should be easier. Late finish of A = late start of B (3 days) -1 = 2
days.
The late start of A =late finish of A (2 days) - duration of A (2 days) +1= 2-2+1= 1.

The question is asking for the total float of C. Total Float of C= late finish of C (13 days)
minus early finish of C (13 days)= 13-13= 0. Since this answer is 0 this also tells us that C
is on the critical path.


3. b PMBOK(R) Guide Section 6.6.2.3
To determine which activities are critical we calculate the total float for each activity.
Float of Activity A = 2-2 = 0
Float of Activity B = 7-7 = 0
Floact of Activity C =13-13 = 0
Float of Activity D = 14-10 = 4
Float of Activity E = 21-21 = 0
Float of Activity F = 21-20 = 1
Float of Activity G = 25-25 = 0.
Notice that Activity A, B, C, E and G all have zero total float. These activities are critical.
Activity D has a total float of 4. Activity F has a total float of 1. These two activities are
not critical. We did a lot of math here. Hopefully it was easy to look at the diagram and
easily know that Activity A, B, and G are critical.


4. d PMBOK(R) Guide Section 6.6.2.3
If management imposes an end date of 22 days the project float = late finish of G (22 days)
minus early finish of G (25 days) = - 3 days.
5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.3
          a. The project buffer is placed at the end of the critical chain to protect the project
Y
          end date.
          b. and c. Feeding buffers are placed at the end of the feeding chain before it hits
N
          the critical chain to protect the critical chain.
          d. The project buffer is placed at the end of the critical chain to protect the
N
          project end date.


6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.3
          b. The feeding buffers are placed at the end of the feeding chain before it hits the
Y
          critical chain to protect the critical chain.
          a. and c. The project buffer is placed at the end of the critical chain to protect the
N
          project end date.
N         d. No buffers are placed at the beginning of chains.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.4
          a. There must be a schedule to resource level. Resource leveling occurs after the
Y
          critical path method.
          b. and c. There must be a schedule in place to resource level. Therefore, resource
N
          leveling occurs after the critical path method.
          d. Resource leveling is used to ensure no resources are overcommitted. Fast
N
          tracking is used to shorten the schedule.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.5
          b. Monte Carlo analysis is the most common simulation technique used to develop
Y         the schedule.

N         a. Earned value method is not a simulation technique.
N         c. Decision tree analysis is not a simulation technique.
N         d. Expected monetary value is not a simulation technique.


9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.7
Y         a. The goal of schedule compression is to shorten the schedule.
          b. The goal of resource leveling is to ensure we have no overcommitted
N
          resources.
          c. With fast tracking we overlap activities or phases. The goal of fast tracking is
N
          to shorten the schedule. The method is overlapping the activities.
          d. Crashing adds resources to the critical path. The goal of crashing is to shorten
N
          the schedule. The method is adding resources to the critical path.


10. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.3
Y         c. The critical path method determines the float of each activity.
N         a. Bottom-up estimating determines the activity requirements.
N         b. Expert judgment may help with many processes.
N         d. Resource leveling helps ensure we have no overcommitted resources.
Plan Cost Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 7-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process we create the cost management plan.


INPUTs of plan cost management

   Project management plan - the project plan most likely is not
   fully developed yet. Elements of the project plan though may help develop the cost
   management plan. Examples include:
   Scope baseline- scope statement (contains constraints and assumptions), the WBS,
   and the WBS dictionary.
   Schedule baseline- contains the approved start and finish dates for project activities.


   Project charter -               this document provides high level information
   including the summary budget to help start planning for costs.


   Enterprise environmental factors - ex. Currency exchange
   rates. When we plan for costs we need to decide if we will accept cost estimates in
   multiple currencies or only one currency. Also, when we pay our internal labor and
   our vendors, we need to decide how we will deal with different currencies.


   Organizational process assets - ex. Accounting codes most
   likely are standard for the organization. We need to ensure that we organize and
   collect cost information in a way that it is easy to move that data into the
   organization's accounting system.


TOOLs and                  TECHNIQUEs                       of       plan          cost
management
        Analytical techniques -                   these techniques may relate to project
        funding such as self-funding, etc. Other techniques may relate to how financial
        decisions are made such as: return on investment, cost-benefit analysis, net present
        value, opportunity cost, etc.
        Expert judgment and meetings

OUTPUTs of plan cost management
Cost management plan                           Defines- level of accuracy, units of measure, earned value rules, etc.
                                               It does not describe or list the planned costs for the project. (The cost
                                               estimate and cost baseline do this).
                                               It is not part of the cost baseline.
                                               It is contained in or a subsidiary plan of the project management plan.



A few other ideas:

DIRECT COST                                                 INDIRECT COST
Directly related to the project                             Not directly related to a project
Ex. Cost of full-time consultant on project                 Ex. Building security, electricity



VARIABLE COST - UNIT COSTS                                  FIXED COST
Varies with output                                          Independent of output
Ex. Wages- the more people the more we spend in total on Ex. Rent for building- the rent does not change based on the
wages                                                    number of people
PLAN COST MANAGEMENT - Sample Questions

1. The degree of rounding allowed is called:
a. level of precision
b. level of accuracy
c. control thresholds
d. rules of performance measurement

2. Weighted milestones, percent complete, etc., are techniques used in:
a. units of measure
b. levels of precision
c. levels of accuracy
d. earned value measurement

3. All estimates must be within +/- 20 % is an example of:
a. control thresholds
b. levels of precision
c. levels of accuracy
d. earned value measurement

4. The amount we are allowed to deviate from the baselines without escalating is
called:
a. control thresholds
b. levels of precision
c. levels of accuracy
d. earned value measurement

5. Currency exchange rates are an example of:
a. units of measure
b. enterprise environmental factors
c. levels of accuracy
d. organizational process assets
PLAN COST MANAGEMENT - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.3.1
          a. The amount of rounding allowed with numbers is called the level of precision.
Y
          This should be defined in the cost management plan.
          b. The level of accuracy defines the acceptable range on numbers. Maybe we will
N
          accept numbers that are +/- 50 % early in the project.
          c. Often we specify how much variance we will allow in actuals before
N         escalation needs to occur. As an example we may say that if the project's CPI gets
          below .90 or above 1.1 the sponsor needs to be notified.
          d. Performance measurement rules relate to earned value. As an example the
          0/100 rule states that an activity gets earned value credit only when the activity is
N
          100% complete. The 50/50 rule states that an activity gets 50% earned value
          credit when it begins and 50% earned value credit when it completes.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.3.1
          d. These are all examples of earned value measurement techniques which are a
Y
          subset of the rules of performance measurement.
N         a. Examples of units of measure include work hours, work days, work weeks, etc.
          b. The amount of rounding allowed with numbers is called the level of precision.
N
          As an example we want all costs rounded to US$1000.
N         c. The level of accuracy defines the acceptable range on numbers. Ex. +/-50 %.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.3.1
Y         c. The level of accuracy defines the acceptable range on numbers.
N         a. Examples of units of measure include work hours, work days, work weeks, etc.
          b. The amount of rounding allowed with numbers is called the level of precision.
N
          As an example we want all costs rounded to US$1000.
          d. Performance measurement rules relate to earned value. Weighted milestones
N
          and percent complete are examples.


          PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.3.1 a. Often we specify how much variance we
4. Ya.    will allow in actuals before escalation needs to occur. As an example we may say
          that if the project's CPI gets below .90 or above 1.1 the sponsor needs to be
          notified.
          b. The amount of rounding allowed with numbers is called the level of precision.
N         As an example we want all costs rounded to US$1000.

          c. The level of accuracy defines the acceptable range on numbers. Maybe we will
N
          accept numbers that are +/- 50 % early in the project.
          d. Performance measurement rules relate to earned value. Weighted milestones
N
          and percent complete are examples.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.1.3
          b. Currency rates relate to the project environment. Therefore, they are
Y
          considered enterprise environmental factors.
N         a. Examples of units of measure include work hours, work days, work weeks, etc.
N         c. The level of accuracy defines the acceptable range on numbers. Ex. +/-50 % .
          d. Cost estimating policies, procedures, etc. are examples of organizational
N
          process assets.
Estimate Costs

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 7-5 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process we determine what we think it will cost to complete the project.
   Usually, we estimate in some form of currency though terms like labor hours may be
   used. Cost estimates should improve over the life of the project.


   Cost estimating accuracy:
   During the initiation phase- Rough order of magnitude estimate of -25% -+75%
   Later in project- definitive estimates of -5% -+10%

   Cost estimates should include all costs billed to the project:
                   *   Labor, equipment, materials, facilities
                   *   Inflation allowance
                   *   Contingency costs- from risk management


INPUTs of estimate costs (not all listed)

   Cost management plan -                           this plan describes the process of
   estimating costs. It also may include guidelines for:
                   *      Units of measure- should costs be estimated in labor hours, etc.
                   *      Levels of accuracy- how much rounding will be allowed in the
                cost estimates (round to the $1, or $10,000?)


   Human resource plan - we may not have created this plan yet but
   once we do we will need to update our cost estimates. This plan will include
   information on costs related to training, rewards, etc.


   Scope baseline - is made up of three documents
                  *   Scope statement- contains project constraints and assumptions.
                The most likely constraint is a predefined budget. Assumptions may
                        relate to direct and indirect costs.
                                        Direct costs- costs billed directly to the project (the cost
                               of material)
                                            Indirect costs- costs that often hit a project through an
                                   allocation (the cost of water or electricity in the building when
                                   the building houses multiple project teams)
                            *   WBS and the WBS Dictionary- sometimes costs are estimated
                        at the work package


       Project schedule - tells us when we plan our activities and the type and
       amount of resources required for each activity. We may estimate costs at this level.


       Risk register - contains both threats and opportunities. The responses to
       these risks may have a cost to the project.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of estimate costs (not all
listed)

   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between analogous and parametric estimating.


ANALOGOUS ESTIMATING                                   PARAMETRIC ESTIMATING
Based on one past project                              Based on statistics
Limited amount of data available                       Enough data needed to create statistics
Less costly                                            More costly
Quicker                                                Slower
Less accurate                                          More accurate




       Bottom-up estimating - after the costs are estimated for all the
       activities these estimates are aggregated (added) so as to develop an estimate for the
       entire project.
       Three-Point Estimating - to increase the accuracy of an estimate
       we may go from just asking for the most likely result to asking for 3
       estimates/activity. The three estimates are:
       P- pessimistic (worst case scenario)
       ML- most likely
       O- optimistic (best case scenario).


TRIANGULAR DISTRIBUTION                                     BETA DISTRIBUTION
Often called the simple average                             Often called PERT
Estimate = (P + ML + O)/3                                   PERT Estimate = (P +4 ML + O)/6



STANDARD DEVIATION (SD)                                     VARIANCE
The standard deviation is a measure of how spread out the The variance of a number is the square of the standard
numbers in a distribution are.                            deviation.
SD is also represented by the Greek letter sigma .
One Standard Deviation= |(P -O)/6|                          Variance = (1SD)2



   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between contingency and management reserves.


CONTINGENCY RESERVE                                         MANAGEMENT RESERVE
                                                            For unknown unknowns - unforeseen work that is within
For known unknowns
                                                            the scope of the project
Part of the project baseline and therefore under the control Outside of the project baseline but included in the overall
of the project manager.                                      project budget.
The reserve may be:
     * a percentage of the estimated duration
     * a fixed time
                                                        Often developed based on historical information.
     * developed using other methods
As we move through the project, we should have a better
estimate of what contingency is required




       Cost of quality -               often an organization will estimate the cost of the
       project and then add on a factor to cover the cost of quality. Much more on this when
       we get to plan quality.


       Project Management software - may be used to simplify and
     speed up the estimate cost process.


     Vendor bid analysis - often we may ask our vendors to submit bids,
     etc. that we may use in our cost estimating process.


     Group decision-making techniques -                                 more accurate
     estimates, and greater commitment to the project, may be obtained by working as a
     team on estimates. Examples of these techniques include:
     Delphi technique- a technique in which we only work with experts in an anonymous
     fashion to reach a consensus
     Nominal group technique- a voting technique used after brainstorming to rank the
     most important ideas
     Brainstorming- a technique in which lots of ideas are generated often from lots of
     people


   EXAM TIP: Notice how many of the tools and techniques of estimate costs are also
tools and techniques of estimate activity durations. Build a list of the tools and techniques
that these two processes have in common.


OUTPUTs of estimate costs (not all listed)

     Activity cost estimates - these are the estimates of how much we
     believe the project will cost. It must be decided if these estimates include only
     direct costs or if indirect costs will also be estimated.


     Basis of Estimates (BOEs) -                          this is all of your backup
     information to support how you came to the cost estimate you did. It should include
     constraints and assumptions, etc.
         ESTIMATE COSTS - Sample Questions

1. All of the following are tools and techniques of estimate costs except:
a. cost of quality
b. project management software
c. vendor bid analysis
d. benefit cost analysis

2. Cost estimate tolerances should:
a. narrow over the life of the project
b. widen over the life of the project
c. stay approximately the same over the life of the project
d. increase over the life of the project

3. All of the following are true concerning the basis of estimate except:
a. supports the cost estimate backup information
b. should include ranges
c. describes how cost estimate was developed
d. is an input to estimate costs

4. As you are planning your project, your team members are asking about the
amount of variance that will be allowed. They are really asking you about:
a. precision level
b. control thresholds
c. earned value rules
d. report formats

5. One way to get people more committed to meeting a cost estimate is to:
a. involve people doing the technical work in the estimating process
b. ensure the cost of quality is used as a tool and technique
c. utilize reserve analysis on the project
d. use project management software for all estimating
ESTIMATE COSTS - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-4
          d. Benefit cost analysis may be used to create the business case before the project
Y
          begins and as a tool in the quality project management processes.
          a., b., and c. The cost of quality, project management software, and vendor bid
N
          analysis are all tools and techniques of estimate costs.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.2
          a. Cost estimate should be refined over the life of the project. This means that our
Y
          cost estimates should get better, get more accurate over the life of the project.
          b. Cost estimates should get better (narrower) over the life of the project not
N
          wider (worse).
          c. The further we are in a project the more we know and the better (more
N
          accurate) the cost estimates should be.
          d. Cost estimates should not increase (get higher) over the life of the project.
N
          They should get more accurate.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.2.3.2 (it is an output not an input)
Y         d. The basis of estimates is an output not an input to estimate costs.
N         a. The basis of estimate is the backup information to support the cost estimate.
          b. The basis of estimates should include ranges. As an example, instead of saying
N         we estimate the project will cost $100 we should say it will cost somewhere
          between $90-$125.
          c. The basis of estimate should describe what methods we used for each estimate.
N         As an example, we may state that our labor estimates were determined using
          bottom-up estimating.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.3.1
          b. Often we specify how much variance we allow in actuals before escalation
          needs to occur. As an example we may say that if the project's CPI gets below .90
Y
          or above 1.1 the sponsor needs to be notified. These levels are called our control
          thresholds.
          a. The amount of rounding allowed with numbers is called the level of precision.
N
          As an example, we want all costs rounded to US$1000.
          c. Performance measurement rules relate to earned value. As an example, the
N         0/100 rule states that an activity gets earned value credit only when the activity is
          100% complete. The 50/50 rule states that an activity gets 50% earned value
          credit when it begins and 50% earned value credit when it completes.
          d. We may specify the formats we want for all cost reports. By specifying the
N
          format it makes it easier to combine reports, etc.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.2.2.10
Y         a. Often the best way to get people committed is to get them involved.
N         b. Using the cost of quality it not likely to affect people's commitment.
          c. Reserve analysis is a tool and technique of estimate costs. Using it though it not
N
          likely to affect people's commitment to the project.
          d. Project management software is a tool and technique of estimate costs. Using it
N
          though it not likely to affect people's commitment to the project.
Determine Budget

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 7-7 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   The cost baseline is the primary output of this process.


INPUTs of determine budget (not all listed)

   Cost management plan -                          this plan describes the process of
   determine budget.


   Scope baseline - is made up of three documents
                      *   Scope statement- contains project constraints and assumptions.
                  Constraints most likely would be related to the spending of money over
                  time.
                      *   WBS and the WBS Dictionary- sometimes costs are estimated
                  at the work package level of the WBS.


   Activity cost estimates and basis of estimates -
   these estimates will be aggregated into the cost baseline.


   Project schedule - the cost baseline will show when we plan to spend
   money (over time). The schedule of activities is the driving force for this.


   Risk register - responses to opportunities and threats may have a cost to
   the project.


   Agreements - we may have agreements in place with our suppliers. The
   cost of these agreements should be in the cost baseline.
TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of determine budget
(not all listed)

   Cost aggregation-               the cost of the individual activities (or work
   packages) are aggregated (added up) to create the cost baseline.


   Reserve analysis- the contingency reserve needs to be part of the cost
   baseline. The management reserve needs to be part of the project budget.


   Funding limit reconciliation- when we plan to spend money
   (see the cost baseline) needs to be in line with when money will be available. If this
   does not reconcile, the timing of activities may need to be adjusted.


OUTPUTs of determine budget (not all listed)

   Cost baseline - this is the approved time phased budget for the project. It
   should include contingency reserve but not management reserve.


 EXAM TIP: Review PMBOK(R) Guide: Figures 7-8 and 7-9 for understanding.



   Project funding requirements -                         should match the cost
   baseline plus management reserve. Funding may occur all at once but more likely
   will occur incrementally over the life of the project.
DETERMINE BUDGET - Sample Questions

1. The total value of the control accounts is equal to:
a. value of work package cost estimates plus value of contingency reserve
b. value of the cost baseline plus the value of the management reserve
c. value of the activity cost estimates plus the value of the activity contingency reserve
d. value of the work package cost estimates plus value of the activity contingency reserve

2. Cost aggregation results in:
a. cost estimates allocated to each activity
b. cost estimates allocated to each work package
c. cost estimates added together to create an estimate for the entire project
d. cost estimates added together to create an estimate for the product life cycle

3. The project budget is equal to:
a. value of work package cost estimates plus value of contingency reserve
b. value of the cost baseline plus the value of the management reserve
c. value of the activity cost estimates plus the value of the activity contingency reserve
d. value of the work package cost estimates plus value of the activity contingency reserve

4. The project funding requirements should equal:
a. the cost baseline
b. value of work package cost estimates plus value of contingency reserve
c. the cost baseline plus the management reserve
d. the cost baseline plus the contingency reserve

5. Management is concerned about the practice of cost estimators and project
managers inflating cost estimates. To deal with this practice in a positive way,
management has told you that you will be allowed a contingency reserve on your
project if you can support the reserve with real data. From your project
management training, you realize that all the following are true about a contingency
reserves except:
a. they are set-up for expected but not certain events
b. they are part of your project schedule and cost baselines
c. they are for unknown unknowns
d. they are under the control of the project manager
6. Your management has approved a contingency reserve for the project. There
seems to be some confusion between contingency reserve and management reserve.
You explain that management reserve is:
a. the difference between the maximum funding and the top end of the cost baseline
b. the same as contingency reserve
c. part of the cost baseline
d. under the discretion of the project manager

7. The output of determine budget is the:
a. cost estimate
b. basis of estimate
c. cost baseline
d. cost-benefit analysis
Determine Budget - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-8
          a. The value of the control accounts = work package cost estimates + contingency
Y
          reserve.
N         b. The project budget= cost baseline + management reserve.
          c. Work package cost estimates= activity cost estimates + activity contingency
N
          reserve.
N         d. This definition has no real meaning.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.3
          c. Aggregation is adding together. Cost aggregation is adding the individual cost
Y
          estimates together to get an estimate for the whole project.
          a. and b. Aggregation is the opposite of allocation. Allocation is to distribute.
N
          Aggregate is to bring together.
N         d. The phrase "product life cycle" makes this answer wrong.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-8
Y         b. The total project budget= cost baseline + management reserve.
          a. The value of the control accounts= work package cost estimates + contingency
N
          resource.
          c. Work package cost estimates= activity cost estimates + activity contingency
N
          reserve.
N         d. This definition has no real meaning.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-9 (look at the top right of diagram)
          c. The project funding should equal the project budget = cost baseline +
Y
          management reserve.
N         a. This answer is not complete. Need to add the management reserve.
          b. The value of the control accounts = work package cost estimates + contingency
N
          reserve.
N         d. The term "contingency" makes this answer wrong. It should say "management."


5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.2.2.6
Y         c. Management reserve, not contingency reserve is for unknown unknowns.
N         a. Contingency reserve may be used for expected but not certain events.
N         b. Contingency reserve is part of the baselines, both cost and schedule.
          d. Contingency reserve spending should be under the control of the project
N
          manager.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-9
Y         a. Management reserve= project budget - cost baseline.
          b. Management reserve is for unknown unknowns. Contingency reserve is for
N
          known unknowns.
N         c. Management reserve is not part of the cost baseline. Contingency reserve is.
          d. Management reserve is not under the control of the project manager.
N
          Contingency reserve is under the control of the project manager.


7.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.3.3.1
Y         c. The cost baseline is the output of determine budget.
N         a. The cost estimate is the output of estimate costs.
N         b. The basis of estimate is an output of estimate costs.
          d. The cost-benefit analysis may be part of the business case (an input to develop
N
          project charter) and it is a tool and technique in quality management.
Plan Quality Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 8-4 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   The outputs include the quality management plan and the process improvement plan.


INPUTs of plan quality management (not all listed)

   Project management plan - the project plan most likely is not
   fully developed yet. Elements of the project plan though may help develop the
   quality management plan. Examples include:
          Scope baseline - scope statement (contains information on acceptance criteria
          that may affect how we plan for quality), the WBS, and the WBS dictionary.
          Schedule baseline - contains the approved start and finish dates for project
          activities. Schedule performance will be measured against this baseline.
          Cost baseline - contains the approved cost information. Cost performance
          will be measured against this baseline.


   Stakeholder register -                         may contain information on which
   stakeholders are most interested in quality.


   Risk register - may contain information on what threats or opportunities
   may have the biggest impact on quality.


   Requirements documentation - used to plan how to perform
   control quality.


TOOLs and                TECHNIQUEs                     of     plan        quality
management
  EXAM TIP: The first two tools and techniques have the word cost in their name.
Remember they belong in Quality. There is a strong link between cost and quality



        Cost-benefit analysis - some people will say that all money spent on
        quality is money well spent. That is not the view we want to take. We should only
        spend money on quality initiatives if the benefit is greater than the cost.


        Cost of Quality - includes all money spent to ensure quality. The costs
        are often broken down into two categories (cost of conformance and the cost of non-
        conformance) and then sometimes even into two more subcategories under each
        category (see PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-5). In theory we want to invest more in the
        cost of conformance (spend money proactively) and invest less in the cost of non-
        conformance (spend less money reactively).


           COST of CONFORMANCE                                    COST of NON-CONFORMANCE
Proactive costs to ensure quality.                         Reactive costs because of poor quality
                                                         Internal failure costs -incurred to remedy defects
Prevention costs - incurred to prevent quality problems.
                                                         discovered before the deliverable is shipped to the customer.
Example: training
                                                         Examples: waste, scrap, reword
                                                          External failure costs -incurred to remedy defects
Appraisal costs- associated with measuring and monitoring
                                                          discovered by customers. Examples: repairs, warranty
activities related to quality. Example: quality audit.
                                                          claims, returns



  EXAM TIP: Make sure you recognize what costs fall into each of the categories of the
cost of quality.


Seven basic quality tools (study PMBOK(R) Guide:
Figure 8-7)

        1. Cause and Effect diagrams - sometimes called fishbone
        diagrams or Ishikawa diagrams
        These diagrams show the causes of a specific result. Causes are usually grouped in a
        specific category to help identify sources of variation. Sometimes the 5 whys
        technique is used to trace the cause all the way back to the root cause. We don't just
want to solve problems, we want to find their root cause so they do not occur again.
In quality- cause and effect diagrams are often used in association with control
charts. The control charts show if we have variation. The cause and effect diagram,
along with the 5 whys, may lead us to the assignable cause for the variation.


2. Flowcharts - sometimes called process maps
These diagrams show the steps in a process. Flowcharts are used to analyze, design,
or document a process.
Boxes are often used to show the activities. Arrows are used to show the direction
of flow.
In quality- flowcharts are often used to estimate the cost of quality in a process.


3. Check sheets - Sometimes called Tally sheets
These sheets allow us to collect data in an organized way. Data is often recorded by
making checks on it. The sheet may be divided into different areas where a check in
one area has a different meaning than a check in another area.
Ex. Let's assume you are having someone transport your car across the country.
Sometimes you are asked to fill out a check sheet (the diagram on the check sheet
looks like a car) and you check every place where there is a mark on your real car.
You fill out the sheet before they move your car and then again afterwards, to note if
any damage was done while the car was being moved.
In Quality- check sheets are often used to collect data while performing inspections
on deliverables or products.


4. Pareto diagrams -
These are vertical bar charts that also show a line. The bars often are listed in
descending order (the highest at the left) and the line (curve) shows the cumulative
total.
Pareto diagrams show what is most important (the highest bar) from multiple factors.
In control quality, the bars often represent:
                *      the most common sources of defects
                *      the highest occurring type of defect
                *      the most frequent reasons for customer complaints


5. Histogram - is a vertical bar chart. It shows a visual impression of
the distribution of data. Time is not an input to the histogram.
       6. Control charts - show if a process is running in control and has
       stable performance. If the process is under control, there is variation but the
       variation is coming from sources common to the process. Often, control charts will
       have two sets of lines above and below the mean.
       Control limits- these are the voice of the process. These limits are based on history.
       How well you control your process. Control limits are often set at +/- 3 Standard
       Deviations (SD). SD is often referred to as sigma. Therefore, we often set our
       control limits at +/- 3 sigma. These limits inform us of when to take corrective
       action. Out of control process-
                        *     a data point is outside of a control limit (regardless of whether
                    it is outside of the specification limit)
                        *     the rule of seven- seven consecutive points are above or below
                    the mean
       Specification limits- sometimes called tolerance limits - These limits come from
       the customer and define the acceptable limits from the customer.
       In operations environment- control charts are often used to track behavior on
       repetitive processes
       In project management environment- control charts are often used to track items that
       let us know if our project management processes are running in control. Examples
       include:
                        *     Schedule variance (SV)
                        *     Cost variance (CV)




       In general we set the control limits at +/- 3 SD.
+/- 3 SD                                        represents 99.7 % of the data
+/- 2 SD                                        represents 95.5 % of the data
+/- 1 SD                                      represents 68.3 % of the data




       7. Scatter diagrams - Sometimes called correlation charts
       X-Y chart that may suggest correlations between two variables.


       Benchmarking - comparing your organization's practices to practices of
       other organizations.
       The goals of benchmarking are to:
                       *    generate quality standards for measurement
                       *    identify best practices
                       *    develop ideas for improvement
              The biggest learning from benchmarking often comes when we benchmark
       outside of our industry.


       Design of experiments -                     a statistical idea where we set-up an
       experiment to determine what factors have the most influence on a specific variable.


       Statistical sampling - planning to test only part of a population. We
       often only test a sample of the population because it is:
                        *   less expensive
                        *   less time consuming
                        *   and must be done if the testing is destructive (crash testing a
                     car)


OUTPUTs of plan quality management (not all
listed)
Quality management plan                       Describes how the quality requirements will be met.
                                              Does not contain the quality standards.
                                              It is a subset of the project management plan.



                                              Describes how project management and
                                              product development processes will be
Process Improvement plan                                analyzed and enhanced.

                                                        It is a subset of the project management plan.


        Quality metrics -             a project or product attribute and how it will be
        measured. Examples- on time performance, etc.


Other Ideas:
QUALITY                                                 GRADE
                                                        Category for products having the same use but different
Degree to which a product meets requirements
                                                        characteristics



PRECISION                                               ACCURACY
Value of results forms a cluster - little scatter       Value of results is close to true value
Not all precise measurements are accurate.              Not all accurate measurements are precise.



        To achieve customer satisfaction we need both:


Conformance to requirements                             Fitness for use
Ensure project produces what it said it would produce   The product satisfies a real need
Crosby's definition of quality                          Juran's definition of quality




        Continuous improvement- based off of the work of Shewhart and
        Deming


5 Process Groups                                        Shewhart and Deming
INITIATING
PLANNING                                                PLAN
EXECUTING                                               DO
MONITORING AND CONTROLLING                              CHECK-ACT
CLOSING
Responsibility for quality:
                       *    At the task level- the person performing the task (not the
                    inspector).
                      *    At the project level- the project manager (not the quality
                    manager) owns quality.
                      *    At the organizational level- senior management (not the quality
                    department) owns quality.

Kaizen - the ideas that focus on continuous process improvement.

Just-in-time - the goal is higher return on investment by reducing inventory and
costs to carry that inventory.


Marginal analysis - optimal quality is reached when incremental revenue
from improvements = incremental costs to secure it. (Stop spending more money).


Total Quality Management (TQM) - know the name Deming for
TQM. Everyone inside and outside the organization has responsibility to continuously
improve the quality of products and processes.


QFD- quality function deployment -                                 takes customer needs
(VOC- voice of the customer) and transforms into product/service characteristics.
PLAN QUALITY - Sample Questions

1. Rework is an example of a(n):
a. prevention cost
b. appraisal cost
c. internal failure cost
d. external failure cost

2. Control limits are usually set at:
a. +/- 3 sigma
b. +/- 6 sigma
c. +/- 1 sigma
d. +/- 4 sigma

3. Comparing project practices to those of other organizations to identify best
practices is known as:
a. the cost of quality
b. cost-benefit analysis
c. benchmarking
d. design of experiments

4. A statistical method used to determine optimal conditions for producing the
product is called:
a. the cost of quality
b. cost-benefit analysis
c. benchmarking
d. design of experiments

5. Ensuring that each quality activity is worth the cost is confirmed through:
a. the cost of quality
b. cost-benefit analysis
c. benchmarking
d. design of experiments

6. Testing only part of a population that is representative of the whole is known as:
a. statistical sampling
b. benchmarking
c. design of experiments
d. the cost of quality

7. Training is an example of a(n):
a. prevention cost
b. appraisal cost
c. internal failure cost
d. external failure cost

8. You own an outdoor food stand where your main product is hamburgers. You want
to collect data so you can understand the inherent limits of your process. To do this,
you are most likely to use a:
a. Pareto chart
b. control chart
c. cause and effect diagram
d. trend analysis

9. A SIPOC (supplier, inputs, process, outputs, customers) model is an example of:
a. cause-and-effect diagram
b. check sheets
c. Pareto diagram
d. flowchart

10. A cause-and-effect diagram is also known as:
a. Ishikawa diagram
b. scatter diagram
c. Pareto diagram
d. flowchart

11. You are the project manager for a logging company. This month you are charted
to deliver 10,000 units that are 60 centimeters each. Your upper control limit on your
process is 63 centimeters. Your lower control limit on your process is 57 centimeters.
Approximately what percentage of your units will be above 61 centimeters?
a. 68.3%
b. 31.7%
c. 95.5%
d. 15.9%
Plan Quality - Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-5
Y         c. Rework is an example of an internal failure cost.
N         a. Training is an example of a prevention cost.
N         b. Testing is an example of an appraisal cost.
N         d. Customer returns is an example of an external failure cost.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y         a. Control limits are usually set at +/- 3 sigma.
          b., c., and d. Control limits are usually set at +/- 3 sigma. Realize your
N
          organization may use a different number.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.4
          c. We may benchmark with another organization for several reasons.
                 *    To develop quality standards
Y
                 *    To gain ideas on how to achieve those quality standards
                 *    To learn best practices
N         a. The cost of quality is the total cost spent to achieve quality.
          b. Cost-benefit analysis is used in quality planning to ensure that money is only
N
          spent on quality where the benefit from the expenditure is greater than the cost.
          d. Design of experiments is a statistical idea that helps us understand how varying
N
          certain factors leads to optimal results.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.5
Y         d. This is a definition of design of experiments.
N         a. The cost of quality is the total cost spent to achieve quality.
          b. Cost-benefit analysis is used in quality planning to ensure that money is only
N
          spent on quality where the benefit from the expenditure is greater than the cost.
N         c. Benchmarking with another organization may be used to identify best practices.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.1
          b. Cost-benefit analysis is used in quality planning to ensure that money is only
Y
          spent on quality where the benefit from the expenditure is greater than the cost.
N         a. The cost of quality is the total cost spent to achieve quality.
N         c. Benchmarking with another organization may be used to identify best practices.
          d. Design of experiments is a statistical idea that helps us understand how varying
N
          certain factors leads to optimal results.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.6
          a. Statistical sampling is used to save both money and time. With this method we
Y
          test only a representative sample of an entire population.
N         b. Benchmarking with another organization may be used to identify best practices.
          c. Design of experiments is a statistical idea that helps us understand how varying
N
          certain factors leads to optimal results.
N         d. The cost of quality is the total cost spent to achieve quality.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-5
Y         a. Training is an example of a prevention cost.
N         b. Testing is an example of an appraisal cost.
N         c. Rework is an example of an internal failure cost.
N         d. Customer returns is an example of an external failure cost.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y         b. Control charts help us understand the inherent limits of our process.
N         a. Pareto charts help us prioritize.
N         c. Cause and effect diagrams help us see what inputs lead to what effects.
N         d. Trend analysis uses history to predict the future.


9.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y         d. A SIPOC is an example of a flowchart.
N         a. A fishbone diagram is another name for a cause and effect diagram.
          b. Check sheets are used to collect data, often by the collector making a check or
N
          a tally mark in a certain region of the sheet.
N         c. Pareto diagrams are used to help us prioritize.


10. a.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
          a. An Isikawa diagram and a fishbone diagram are the other names for a cause
Y
          and effect diagram.
N         b. A scatter diagram shows data for two variables using an X and Y plot.
N        c. A Pareto chart helps us prioritize.
N        d. A flowchart shows how elements in a system relate to each other.


11. d.   Statistical Process Control textbook or Web Search
         d. 15.9 % of the data will be above 61 centimeters. One standard deviation is
         equal to the absolute value of ((Upper control limit-Lower control limit)/6).
         Therefore, one standard deviation = (63-57)/6= 6/6= 1 centimeter. The mean is
         60 centimeters. 61 centimeters is +1 standard deviation from the mean. and 59
         centimeters is -1 standard deviation from the mean. Therefore, 68.3 % of the data
         will be between 59 and 61 centimeters. 100-68.3= 31.7 will be outside of 59 and
         61. 31.7/2= 15.9 will be above 61 centimeters.
         a. 68.3 % of the data will be between 59 and 61 centimeters because this range
         represents +/- 1 standard deviations.
         b. 31.7% of the data will be outside the range of 59 and 61 centimeters because
         100%-68.3% =31.7%.
         c. 95.5 % of the data will be between 58 and 62 centimeters because this range
         represents +/- 2 standard deviations.
Plan Human Resource Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 9-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process we are planning for the team. This includes deciding what positions
   we need, what tasks people will perform in each position, how positions will report
   to each other, and when each position will join and leave the team.
   Reality- we may not get the people we want in the positions we want. We need to
   plan for this reality and also think about using resources outside of the organization
   if skill sets cannot be found or are not available inside.


INPUTs of Plan Human Resource Management (not
all listed)

   Project management plan - the project plan is not complete yet.
   Still there are elements in the plan that may help us plan for human resources.


   Activity resource requirements -                                     most likely these
   requirements have been developed, at least a first draft, by the time we begin
   planning for human resources. These requirements are an output of the estimate
   activity resource process. These requirements tell us what type and quantity (by hour
   or day) of the different skill sets will be required on the project.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of Plan Human
Resource Management

   Org charts and positional descriptions - the primary
   purpose of this tool and technique is to ensure that every team member understands
   explicitly their roles and responsibilities and that all project work is clearly owned
   by someone.
    Hierarchical-type charts - there are several of these type charts that
    may be used to help plan for human resources.


    Organizational chart - Shows reporting relationships on the team.




   EXAM TIP: Make sure you are very clear on the difference between the
organizational chart (Org chart) and the organizational breakdown structure.


    Organizational breakdown structure - shows what work
    packages (or activities) each existing department is responsible for.




    The resource breakdown structure (RBS) -groups
    resources by category for the project. The one below is very high level. In general
    you want the RBS to be detailed enough to be used with the WBS.
Matrix based charts - the most likely example of this will be a RAM
(responsibility assignment matrix). This matrix shows who (by person, position, or
group) is responsible for what activity (or work package). Only one person is
allowed to be accountable for each activity.




Text-oriented formats -                     here we are talking about a positional
description. This is a document (may be electronic) that describes details of a
particular position. These descriptions help the project manager when he goes out to
recruit people to fill specific positions.


Networking - we want to network inside and outside of our organization.
Networking helps us understand office politics but more importantly helps us
understand how to best set-up our project organization to be successful. Networking
may help us better understand where the skill sets exist that we need for the project,
both internally and externally. Networking such as attending conferences, can help us
grow professionally.
    Organizational theory - is the study of organizations. We want to
    study how organizations work so as to have a positive effect on our project. As an
    example, by studying organizational theory we may learn the best organizational
    structure to set-up for the type of work and the individuals of our project. Also, this
    theory may help us with other elements of planning such as identifying resource
    requirements, etc.


    Expert judgment - there are many details related to planning for human
    resources. If we utilize experts, both on and off the team, then most likely it will lead
    to a better human resource plan.


OUTPUTs of Plan human resources
  Human Resource plan - this plan is a subset of the project plan
    and deals just with items affecting the project team (and not stakeholders as a
    whole). Most likely the plan will include:
                   *     Roles and responsibilities by position- what position owns
                each work package
                   *     Project organization chart- visual display of reporting
                relationships of the positions on the team
                   *     Staffing management plan- the primary purpose of this plan,
                which is a subset of the human resource plan, is to define how and when
                people will be acquired and how long they will be needed, by position.
                Other elements relate to training, rewards and recognition, compliance,
                and safety.


  EXAM TIP: Know the difference between the human resource plan and the staffing
management plan. Know the org chart is part of the human resource plan.


    Other ideas:
    The halo effect -
                           *   applied to project management: assuming that if someone
                        is good at something.. they are good at everything.
                           *   Ex. Assuming that because someone is a great engineer
                        they will make a great project manager.
Sample Question
From the information below, which activity is likely to cause the project manager the
most frustration?




a. Write requirements documentation
b. Develop traceability matrix
c. Develop requirements management plan
d. Develop scope statement exclusions

The correct answer is answer (a). When using a RACI chart no individual activity should
have more than one person accountable.
PLAN HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT -
Sample Questions

1. The project organizational chart shows:
a. reporting relationships
b. the project deliverables
c. the communication protocols
d. the existing organizational departments with the project work packages listed under
each department

2. The organizational breakdown structure shows:
a. reporting relationships
b. the project deliverables
c. the resources required for the project
d. the existing organizational departments with the project work packages listed under
each department

3. The responsibility assignment matrix shows:
a. how many hours are required by resource category
b. who is responsible for what activities
c. the reporting relationships
d. the positional descriptions for team members

4. Information on how people, teams, and organizations behave is called:
a. roles and responsibilities
b. networking
c. organizational theory
d. human resource plan

5. All of the following are elements of the human resource management plan except:
a. project staff assignments
b. roles and responsibilities
c. project organization charts
d. staffing management plan

6. All of the following are reasons to document team member roles and
responsibilities except:
a. ensure each work package has an owner
b. ensure each team member understands their role
c. ensure each team member understands the reporting relationships
d. ensure each team member understands the communication plan

7. The resource breakdown structure:
a. may contain multiple categories including human resources
b. shows the reporting relationships
c. shows the project deliverables
d. defines the communication protocols


8. When utilizing a RAM (responsibility assignment matrix) it is important to:
a. show reporting relationships
b. describe the way people and teams behave
c. ensure that only one person is accountable for each task
d. identify risks associated with staff acquisition

9. Exercising a flexible management style as the team matures is an example of:
a. networking
b. an organizational theory
c. enterprise environmental factors
d. organizational process assets

10. Geographical dispersion of team members is an example of:
a. networking
b. an organizational theory
c. enterprise environmental factors
d. organizational process assets
PLAN HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT -
Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.3.1
Y         a. The project organizational chart shows reporting relationships.
N         b. The WBS shows the project deliverables.
N         c. The communication plan would describe communication protocols.
          d. The organizational breakdown structure (OBS) shows which work packages
N
          fall under which departments.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.1
          d. The organizational breakdown structure (OBS) shows which work packages
Y
          fall under which departments.
N         a. The project organizational chart shows reporting relationships.
N         b. The WBS shows the project deliverables.
          c. The resources required for the project are listed and organized in the resource
N
          breakdown structure.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.1
          b. The responsibility assignment matrix shows who is responsible for what
Y
          activities (or work packages).
          a. The resource histogram shows how many hours are required by resource
N
          category.
N         c. The project organizational chart shows reporting relationships.
          d. The positional description forms, sometimes called the role-responsibility-
N
          authority forms, show the descriptions for each position.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.3
          c. Information on how people, teams, and organizations behave is called
Y
          organizational theory.
N         a. The human resource plan describes roles and responsibilities.
          b. Networking should be used inside and outside the organization for many
N         reasons including understanding the politics. We need this knowledge to set-up a
          strong project organization.
          d. The human resource plan includes the project organizational chart, roles, and
N         responsibilities and the staffing management plan.



5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.3.1
          a. When we create the human resource plan we do not know the project staff
Y         assignments. The staff assignments are an output of acquire project team. These
          assignments tell us what person has what position on the project.
          b., c., and d. The human resource plan includes the project organizational chart,
N
          roles and responsibilities, and the staffing management plan.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.1 (focus is not on communications)
          d. Communication protocols are described in the communications management
Y
          plan.
          a., b., and c. We document roles and responsibilities for many reasons including:
          to ensure each work package has an owner, to ensure each team member
N
          understands their roles, and to ensure each team member understands the
          reporting relationships.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.1
          a. The resources required for the project are listed and organized in the resource
Y         breakdown structure. Examples of resources include human resources, equipment,
          material, etc.
N         b. The project organizational chart shows reporting relationships.
N         c. The WBS shows the project deliverables.
N         d. The communications plan defines the communication protocols.


8.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.1
          c. A RAM will allow only one person to be accountable for each task (or
Y
          activity).
N         a. The project organizational chart shows reporting relationships.
          b. Information on how people, teams, and organizations behave is called
N
          organizational theory.
N         d. RAMs are not used to identify risks associated with staff acquisition.


9.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.3
          b. Organizational theory may tell us to be less flexible with a junior team and to
Y        be more flexible with a more mature team.

         a. Networking may help us understand the project and organizational environment.
N
         It may also be a way to develop ourselves as a professional project manager.
         c. Organizational culture is an example of an enterprise environmental factor that
N
         may be useful as we plan for human resource management.
         d. Templates for positional descriptions are an example of an organizational
N
         process asset that may be useful as we plan for human resource management.


10. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.1.3
         c. Geographical dispersion is an example of an enterprise environmental factor
Y
         that may be useful as we plan for human resource management.
         a. Networking may help us understand the project and organizational environment.
N
         It may also be a way to develop ourselves as a professional project manager.
N        b. Organizational theory provides information on how people behave.
         d. Templates for organizational charts are an example of an organizational
N
         process asset that may be useful as we plan for human resource management.
Plan Communications Management

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 10-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


    In this process we develop our plan for ensuring stakeholders have the information
    they need, when they need it, using a method that works for them, in a format that
    works for them, based on what assets we have available. The project manager
    should spend 90% of his time communicating. Communicating involves more than
    talking, it also involves listening.


   EXAM TIP: This process and in fact this whole knowledge area is focused on the
stakeholders, not just the team.


INPUTs of plan communications management (not
all listed)

    Project management plan - this plan most likely is not complete
    when we enter plan communications. If fact, plan communications should occur very
    early in planning. At this point though, there may be elements of the project plan,
    such as the change control plan, etc. that may help with this process.


    Stakeholder register -                       this register is an output of identify
    stakeholders. It lists the project stakeholders and what we know about them. This list
    as well as other data in the register can help us understand what stakeholders will
    require what information at what time, etc.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of plan communications
management

    Communications requirements analysis - we want to
     analyze what the stakeholders truly need as far as communication. It is important to
     understand what value different types of information, in different formats provide to
     the stakeholders.
     One specific question that may come up in this area relates to communication
     channels.




     Let's assume there are three (3) stakeholders total on your project, including you.
     You could get a question asking how many communication channels you have. To
     solve:


  EXAM TIP: # of communication channels = n(n-1)/2 where n is the number of people.


     For this problem we have 3 people therefore:
     # of channels= 3(3-1)/2= 3 channels.


   EXAM TIP: Be careful if the exam question states that you are interacting with 9 other
stakeholders. This means there are 10 people and you need to solve the problem for n=
10 people.


Sample Question: There are only two stakeholders on the project. Five more
stakeholders are added. How many new channels have been added?
a. 28 channels
b. 10 channels
c. 20 channels
d. 21 channels

d. is the correct answer. You need to solve the problem for n=2 people and again for n=7
people. We got 7 from 2+5. Then take the difference between the two answers to get the
number of new channels added. When n= 2 people there is 1 channel. When n= 7 people
there are 21 channels. The correct answer is 20 new channels. See if you can get to that
answer.


     Communication technology-                             many factors affect the type of
     technology used for project communication. The project manager should select the
     technology that best fits the needs of the stakeholders based on certain factors:
                     *     What technology is available to different stakeholders
                     *     What level of knowledge, experience, and comfort do the
                  stakeholders possess on the different technologies
                     *     How quickly do stakeholders require information
                     *     What is the project environment- do people meet face-to-face,
                  is the team virtual, are people working on different shifts in different
                  time zones, etc.


     Communication Models - several different models exist related
     to communications.




     Sender - encodes the message based on who they are, their experiences, etc.
     Receiver - decodes the message based on who they are, their experiences,
     etc. The tricky part is the receiver may not decode the same way the sender encodes.
     Acknowledgement -                     the receiver should acknowledge that he
     received the message.
     The tricky part- acknowledgement does not mean understanding or agreement.
Medium - the message is sent through some medium (e-mail, face-to-face,
etc.)
Noise - the message may experience noise (distance, etc.)
There should be a feedback loop. Remember in the feedback loop the original
receiver will encode the message and the original sender will decode the message.
Again, this provides a chance for miscommunication.


Communication Methods -                          Make sure you understand the
difference between these three types of communication methods.




Meetings - this is a tool and technique of many processes
              *     there are three types of meetings.
                      *   Information exchange- to give updates to other parties
                      *   Brainstorming, etc.- to generate ideas
                      *   Decision-making- to come to a decision
              *     Some general guidelines for meetings
                      *   Be clear on the type of meeting
                      *   Only call a meeting when a meeting is required
                      *   Have an agenda, follow an agenda
                      *   Make sure people know the items to be discussed before
                  the meeting occurs
                      *   Collect action items- distribute action items in a timely
                  manner
                      *   Have meeting rules (one person speaks at a time, etc.)
              *     Face-to-face vs. Virtual
                          *    Face-to-face- most effective - may not be practical
                          *    Virtual meetings- take more effort to achieve same result
                       as face-to-face


OUTPUTs of Plan Communications Management
(not all listed)

    Communications management plan - this plan may be a
    simple spreadsheet for a small project to a very complex plan for bigger projects.
    The plan is a subset of the project management plan. Please see a high level example
    below.




    Other Ideas - Understand the following table.




  EXAM TIP: On the exam you may be given an example such as reports. You will then
be asked if reports are formal or informal, written or oral.
     When we communicate face-to-face with each other, much (more than 50%) of the
     meaning is communicated through our non-verbals. In simple terms, we trust what
     we see (non-verbals) and hear (para linguals such as pitch and tone), more than the
     actual words spoken.


           Face to Face Communications




                                     non-verbals

                                     paralinguals

                                     words


  EXAM TIP: It is important to know that much of the meaning of what is communicated
comes from the person's body language (such as gestures, is the person leaning forward
or backward, etc.)
PLAN COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT -
Sample Questions

1. Which of the following is an input to plan communications?
a. stakeholder register
b. team directory
c. human resource plan
d. communications plan

2. In the communications model, translating the message back into meaningful
thoughts is:
a. encoding
b. medium
c. noise
d. decoding

3. When sharing large amounts of information or information to a large group, we
are most likely to use:
a. push communication
b. interactive communication
c. pull communication
d. communication model

4. You realize that as you increase the number of stakeholders, you increase the
number of communication channels. Your current project has 10 stakeholders total.
How many communications channels are there on this project?
a. 10
b. 45
c. 50
d. 100

5. In the communications model, distance is an example of:
a. encoding
b. the message
c. the medium
d. noise
6. Which plan is an input to plan communications management?
a. communications management plan
b. human resource plan
c. procurement management plan
d. project management plan

7. Video conferencing is an example of what communication method?
a. interactive communication
b. push communication
c. pull communication
d. silent communication


8. The most efficient way to ensure a common understanding is:
a. interactive communication
b. push communication
c. pull communication
d. silent communication

9. When the receiver acknowledges the message, he is really saying that he:
a. agrees with the message
b. understands the message
c. has received the message
d. comprehends the message

10. The communications plan is an output of plan communications management. This
plan then becomes an input to:
a. manage communications and identify stakeholders
b. manage communications and manage stakeholder engagement
c. manage communications and plan stakeholder management
d. manage communications and control stakeholder engagement

11. The most efficient means for communicating and ensuring a common
understanding with stakeholders is:
a. electronic mail
b. a face-to-face meeting
c. a report
d. a voice mail
PLAN COMMUNICATIONS MANAGEMENT -
Solutions
1.    a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.1.2
           a. The stakeholder register is an input to plan communication. It lists the
Y          stakeholders. It gives us details to help us begin to plan communication with these
           stakeholders.
           b. The team directory would be associated with processes in the human resource
N
           area, not the communication area.
           c. The human resource plan would be associated with processes in the human
N
           resource area, not the communication area.
N          d. The communications plan is an output, not an input to plan communications.


     EXAM TIP: The human resource plan is associated with the team.


   EXAM TIP: The communication plan is associated with the stakeholders. The team is
a subset of the project stakeholders.


2.    d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.3
Y          d. Decoding is translating the message back into meaningful thoughts.
N          a. Encoding is translating ideas into language.
           b. The medium is the transmission channel selected. Examples include e-mail,
N
           face-to-face, etc.
           c. Noise is anything that gets in the way of the transmission. Examples include:
N
           distance, etc.


3.    c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.4
           c. The larger the audience or the bigger the volume of the information, the more
Y
           likely we are to use pull communications. An example would be an intranet site.
           a. The amount of information may be too large to push. Examples of push include
N
           e-mails, voice mails, etc.
           b. Interactive communication is often used for smaller groups or smaller amounts
N
           of information.
N          d. The communication model does not make sense in the context of this question.
4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.1
          b. The number (#) of communication channels = n(n-1)/2 where n is the number of
Y         people. For this problem we have 10 people therefore: # of channels=
          10(101)/2= 45 channels.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.3
Y         d. Distance is an example of noise.
N         a. Encoding is translating thoughts into language.
N         b. The message is the information being sent.
          c. The medium is the transmission channel selected. Examples include e-mail,
N
          face-to-face, etc.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.1.1
Y         d. The project management plan is an input to plan communications.
          a. The communications management plan would be an output of, not an input of
N
          plan communications management.
          b. The human resource plan would be associated with processes in the human
N
          resource area, not the communication area.
          c. The procurement plan would be associated with processes in the procurement
N
          area, not the communications area.


   EXAM TIP: The project management plan is an input of all processes that begin with
the term "plan". Examples include but are not limited to: plan scope management, plan
schedule management, etc.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.4
Y         a. Video conferences are an example of interactive communication.
N         b. E-mails are examples of push communications.
N         c. Lessons learned databases are examples of pull communications.
N         d. The PMBOK(R) Guide does not, in general, use the term silent communication.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.4
          a. Interactive communication is often the most efficient way to ensure that all
Y
          parties have the same understanding on a particular idea.
N         b. Push communication is used when we want to ensure the message was sent.
          c. Pull communication is used when we are providing a large amount of
N
          information or information to a large audience.
N         d. The PMBOK(R) Guide does not, in general, use the term silent communication.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.3
Y         c. Acknowledgement of the message from the receiver means he has received it.
          a. Acknowledgement of the message from the receiver means he has received it. It
N
          does not mean he agrees, or disagrees, with it.
          b. and d. Since answer b. and answer d. mean the same thing as each other they
N         must both be wrong, since they cannot both be right. Regardless,
          acknowledgement does not mean understanding.


10. b.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 10-3
          b. The communications plan is an input to both manage communication and
Y
          manage stakeholder engagement.
          a. The communications plan would not be an input to identify stakeholders. The
N         output of identify stakeholders, the stakeholder register helps us develop the
          communications plan.
          c. The communications plan is not an input to plan stakeholder management. Since
N         this process begins with the term "plan" we know the project management plan,
          not any other plan will be an input.
          d. The project management plan, not the communications plan, is used to control
N
          stakeholder engagement.


11. b.    PMBOK(R) Guide: 10.1.2.4
          b. Face-to-face meetings are the most effective means for communicating and
          gaining a common understanding. During a face-to-face meeting, verbals, non-
          verbals, and para linguals can all be transmitted.
          a., c., and d. Notice the question uses the word effective, not the word practical.
          If a face-to-face meeting is not warranted or practical, telephone calls, electronic
N
          mail, and other electronic tools are useful for exchanging information and
          dialoguing.
Plan Risk Management

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 11-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       In this process we determine our strategy for the other risk management processes.
       This may include our risk methodology, roles and responsibilities, etc.

       A project risk is an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or a
       negative effect on a project's objectives.


OPPORTUNITY                                   THREAT
Risk event that would lead to a positive Risk event that would lead to a negative
outcome                                       outcome
Opportunities that occur are called benefits. Threats that occur are called issues.


KNOWN RISKS                                              UNKNOWN RISKS
Risks that have been identified and analyzed, making it
                                                        Risks that cannot be managed proactively.
possible to plan responses.
Contingency reserves may be set up for known risks that
                                                        Management reserves may be set up for unknown risks.
cannot (or we chose not to) be managed proactively.



  EXAM TIP: We want to spend time managing risks before they occur instead of
dealing with issues after the fact.


PURE RISKS (INSURABLE RISKS)                             BUSINES RISKS
The effect may only be negative.                         The effect may be positive or negative
Often we purchase insurance for pure risks.              Threats that occur are called issues.




INPUTs of plan risk management (not all listed)

       Project management plan -                     many areas of this plan may be
       reviewed to help plan for risk management. Most importantly we will review the
   information on the triple constraint of scope, time, and cost.


   Project charter -                the charter includes much information about the
   project. We will review the project objectives to think about how certain risks will
   effect these objectives. Also, we will look at the high level risks defined in the
   objectives as a starting point when we begin to identify risks.


   Stakeholder register - as we think about risks we need to understand
   the risk attitudes of key stakeholders. Also the roles of the stakeholders are defined
   in the register. We need to consider who will own risk management for the project.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs                                         of      plan         risk
management (not all listed)

   Analytical techniques -                        these are various techniques used to
   evaluate, analyze, or forecast potential outcomes based on possible variations and
   combinations of variations. These techniques may be used to help us understand the
   risk attitudes of key stakeholders or the total risk exposure.


OUTPUTs of plan risk management
   Risk management plan -                         this is our strategy for all the risk
   management activities on the project. It may include:
                 *     Risk management methodology - the principles and rules we
              will use to drive action in the area of risk.
                 *     Roles and responsibilities - we want to answer the question:
              who owns risk on this project? Will we have a risk manager? Will we
              have a risk management team? Will risk management ownership be
              spread across all the team members?
                 *     Risk categories - many organizations visualize their risk
              categories using a risk breakdown structure (see Figure in the PMBOK(R)
              Guide).
                 *     Definitions - it is important to define our terms we will use
                 inisk management analysis. See PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 11-1.
PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT - Sample Questions

1. What plan is an input to the plan risk management process?
a. risk management plan
b. stakeholder management plan
c. communications management plan
d. project management plan

2. The risk breakdown structure (RBS) is a hierarchical breakdown of risk by:
a. impact
b. probability
c. timing
d. category

3. Which of the following is developed as part of plan risk management:
a. a risk register
b. a list of risks
c. a risk methodology
d. a risk response plan

4. The tool and technique of plan risk management that is used to define the overall
risk management context of the project is:
a. meetings
b. analytical techniques
c. stakeholder register
d. project charter

5. Which of the following is not developed as part of plan risk management:
a. a risk methodology
b. roles and responsibilities for risk management
c. risk register
d. risk definitions
PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.1.1.1
Y         d. The project management plan is an input to plan risk management.
N         a. The risk management plan is an output of plan risk management.
          b. The stakeholder management plan is associated with stakeholder processes, not
N
          risk processes.
          c. The communications management plan is associated with communication
N
          processes not risk processes.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.1.3.1
Y         d. The risk breakdown structure (RBS) is set-up by risk category.
          a., b., and c. The risk breakdown structure (RBS) is set-up by risk category not by
N
          impact, probability, or timing.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.1.3.1
Y         c. A risk methodology is developed as part of the risk management plan.
          a. The risk register is an output of identify risks etc. It is not part of the risk
N
          management plan.
          b. A list of risks is the early basis for the risk register. This list is not part of the
N
          risk management plan. The plan describes how to develop the risk register.
          d. The risk responses are developed and become part of the risk register. They
N
          are not in the risk management plan.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.1.2.1
          b. These analytical techniques help define the risk context for the project. Ideas
Y         considered may include the risk attitudes of stakeholders as well as the overall
          risk exposure.
N         a. Meetings are used to develop the risk management plan.
          c. The stakeholder register is an input not a tool and technique for plan risk
N         management. It helps us understand the various roles the stakeholders will have in
          regards to risk management.
          d. The project charter is an input not a tool and technique for plan risk
N
          management. It includes information on risk from a high level standpoint.
5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.1.3.1
          c. The risk register is an output of identify risks. The register gets updated in
Y
          subsequent processes. It is not developed as part of plan risk management.
          a., b., and d. The risk management plan includes the risk methodology, roles and
N
          responsibilities related to risk, as well as risk definitions.


   EXAM TIP: The project management plan is an input of all processes that begin with
the term "plan". Examples include but are not limited to: plan scope management, plan
schedule management, etc.


   EXAM TIP: Remember there are no risks listed in the risk management plan. The risk
register is not an element of the risk management plan. The plan describes how to create
the risk register, etc.
Identify Risks

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 11-6 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


    In the process identify risk we identify potential opportunities or threats that may
    affect the project objectives. Often, a large group of people may be involved in this
    process. Risk identification is so important that we may even include risk experts
    from outside of the team or even the project stakeholders.


INPUTs of identify risks (not all listed)

    Risk management plan - this was the output of the last process. It
    includes our risk methodology, etc. It should include how we plan to conduct the
    identify risks process.


    Scope baseline -
                   *   Scope statement - includes the list of project constraints and
                assumptions. We need to ask what risks are present in the project
                assumptions.


                   *    WBS and WBS dictionary - these are key inputs. We may look
                at each component of the WBS (at the control account level or the work
                package level) and ask: What risks might there be associated with this
                component?


    Activity cost and activity duration estimates - each
    of these many contain ranges around the estimates. We may ask what risks are
    associated with these estimates and the ranges.


    Stakeholder register - as we think about risks we need to understand
    the risk attitudes of key stakeholders. We may want to include key stakeholders in
    identify risks.
TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of identify risks

         Documentation review - we want to review the documents that
         already exist on the project to check for risks.
                          *    Example - if you already have a contract in place with an
                      external customer. First review the contract for threats (risks that if they
                      occurred would have a negative outcome) and opportunities (risks that
                      if they occurred would have a positive outcome).
                          *    It is important to check documents for potential conflicts (one
                      document conflicts another) or gaps (there is information required for
                      the project that is not documented any place).


         Information gathering techniques - Know the difference
between brainstorming and Delphi.

Brainstorming                                            Delphi technique
                                                         Goal- reach a consensus
Goal- list of risks (no priority)
                                                         Includes reducing bias
                                                         Only experts involved
May be free form or Nominal Group Technique, etc.
                                                         Anonymous
RBS (risk breakdown structure) may be used Be careful of
                                                         Questionnaire
Group think
                                                         Multiple rounds



         Checklist analysis - we may have or may develop a checklist to help
         us identify risks. Sometimes we use the lowest level of the risk breakdown structure
         as our checklist. Be careful to not overly rely on the checklist.


         Assumption analysis - assumptions are found in the scope statement.
         We need to evaluate these assumptions and ask how much risk is there associated
         with these assumptions.
         Example- we assume that the human resources we need for the project will be
         available. We may need to ask, based on past experience and the current project
         context, what is the likelihood that assumption is true?


         Diagramming techniques -                                      we discussed several of these
   techniques in the quality chapter of this study guide. Think about how each one could
   be used to help us identify risk.


         Cause and effect diagram -                         what causes lead to what
         effects. What causes would lead certain risks to occur.


         System or process flow charts -these diagrams show
         how elements in a system relate to each other.


         Influence diagrams -               see PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 11-7.
         These diagrams show influences. How one event or activity may influence
         another.


SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats) analysis




   Expert judgment -                  in all areas, but especially in risk we want to
   ensure our risk experts have current experience and that the experience is related to
   the risks we may experience on the project.
   Ex. If we are managing a software project, bringing in a risk expert with experience
   in the construction industry may not be the best idea. While this person may help us
   think outside the box with risk, they may miss some common risks associated with
   software.
OUTPUTs of identify risks
   The output is the risk register. At this point the register includes no priority, no
   probability, and no impact information for the risks.
IDENTIFY RISKS - Sample Questions

1. Diagramming techniques to identify risks include the following except:
a. Delphi
b. cause and effect
c. system or process
d. influence

2. Who should be involved to help identify risks?
a. the project manager
b. the project management team
c. all project personnel
d. the risk management team

3. The goal of Delphi is:
a. a long list of risks
b. a consensus
c. strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
d. group think

4. All of the following are tools and techniques of identify risks except:
a. brainstorming
b. the Delphi method
c. risk probability and impact
d. assumption analysis

5. At the end of identify risks the risk register should include:
a. a list of risks with relative ranking
b. a list of risks with probabilistic analysis
c. a list of risks
d. a list of risks and a watch list
IDENTIFY RISKS - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.2.2.5
Y         a. Delphi is not a diagramming technique.
          b., c., and d. Cause and effect, system or process, and influence are all examples
N
          of diagramming techniques that may be used to identify risks.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.2
Y         c. Good ideas related to risks may come from any and all project personnel.
          a. The project manager alone would not be the best option as far as identifying
N
          risk.
          b. The project management team alone would not be the best option as far as
N
          identifying risk.
          d. The risk management team alone would not be the best option as far as
N
          identifying risk.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.2.2.2
Y         b. The goal of Delphi is for a limited group of experts to reach a consensus.
N         a. From brainstorming we often have a long list of risks.
N         c. SWOT looks at: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
          d. Group think is a negative outcome that occurs from brainstorming at times. It is
N         often caused by a group's desire to get along with each other. They put this desire
          ahead of critical evaluation of different ideas.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.2.2
          c. Risk probability and impact is a tool and technique of qualitative risk analysis.
Y         You need a list of risks to use this tool. We would not have this list while
          identifying risks.
          a. Brainstorming is used during identify risk as a way to come up with lots of
N
          ideas.
          b. The Delphi method is used during identify risks so that a limited group of
N
          experts may reach a consensus.
          d. During the process of identify risks we want to analyze our assumptions and
N
          ask: what risks do we see in our assumptions?
5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.2.3.1
Y         c. The output of identify risks is a risk register that includes a list of risks.
          a. The risks of the risk register are not ranked until after qualitative risk analysis.
N
          This ranking may change after quantitative risk analysis.
          b. The risks of the risk register do not include probabilistic analysis until
N
          quantitative risk analysis has been performed.
          d. As part of qualitative risk analysis it is determined which risks are low
N
          priority and should be placed on a watch list.
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 11-9 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


        In the process perform qualitative risk analysis we analyze the risks from a
        qualitative (not quantitative) standpoint so as to prioritize them for quantitative
        analysis and planning responses.

        Know tje difference between Qualitative risk and Quantitative risk analysis.


Qualitative Risk Analysis                                      Quantitative Risk Analysis
Goal- prioritize risks for quantitative analysis or developing
                                                               Goal- understand overall risk for project
responses
Quick                                                          Slower
Cost effective                                                 More expensive
Uses terms like- low, moderate, high                           Based on statistics
Can use numbers relative to each other                         Uses numbers




INPUTs of perform qualitative risk analysis

        Risk management plan - This plan includes a description of how
        to perform qualitative risk analysis.


        Scope baseline-
                            *   Scope statement - includes the list of project constraints and
                         assumptions.

                            *    WBS and WBS dictionary - .We may look at each component
                         of the WBS (at the control account level or the work package level) and
                         ask about probability and impact of risks associated with this
                         component.
  Risk register - all the information we have so far on the project risks are
  in the risk register.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of perform qualitative
risk analysis

  Risk probability and impact assessment -                                helps up
  prioritize our risks from a relative standpoint. We may use numbers like 1-10 or
  terms like low, moderate, or high.




  Probability and impact matrix - see PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure
  11-10. This matrix again helps us prioritize our risks:
  Threats (negative risks) in the high risk zone:
                  *    Have a higher probability of occurring and will have a higher
              impact
                  *    Require more active management
  Opportunities (positive risks) in the high risk zone:
                  *    Have a higher probability of occurring and will have a higher
              impact (this is a good thing)
                  *    We may want to put more focus on these opportunities because
              this is where we will get the biggest payback


  Risk data quality assessment - we need to ask how good is the
  data we are using to perform risk analysis. What is the accuracy, quality, reliability,
  and integrity of the data.
   Risk categorization -there are several ways to group our risks. It is a
   best practice to group them by root cause (not by their effects).


   Risk urgency assessment - we often prioritize risks by impact
   and probability. In some cases there is another dimension to think about: urgency.
   Urgency is how quickly the risk requires a response. A risk that requires an
   immediate response may take a higher priority than one that does not.


OUTPUTs of perform qualitative risk analysis

   Risk register updates - now we should have analyzed probability
   and impact qualitatively.
PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS -
Sample Questions

1. A risk watch list is for:
a. all risks
b. low priority risks
c. high priority risks
d. all threats

2. At the end of perform qualitative risk analysis the risk register should include:
a. a list of risks with relative ranking
b. a list of risks with probabilistic analysis of the project
c. a list of risks with no ranking
d. a list of risks and fully developed risk responses

3. To develop a risk rating which of the following tools and techniques is used:
a. risk categorization
b. probability and impact matrix
c. risk data quality assessment
d. risk urgency assessment

4. Examining the level of our understanding of a risk is called:
a. risk probability and impact assessment
b. probability and impact matrix
c. risk data quality assessment
d. risk urgency assessment

5. If we hope to develop effective risk responses we may want to group our risks by:
a. the deliverable affected
b. the objective affected
c. the project phase
d. the root cause
PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS -
Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3.3.1
Y         b. A risk watch list is for low priority risks.
N         a. Be careful of the term all.
N         c. High priority risks do not go on the watch list.
          d. The watch list is for low priority risks, regardless if they are threats or
N
          opportunities.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3.3.1
          a. As an output of qualitative analysis the risks should be ranked from a relative
Y
          standpoint.
          b. As an output of quantitative analysis the risks should include probabilistic
N
          analysis of the project.
N         c. As an output of identify risks, there should be a list of risks with no ranking.
          d. As an output of plan risk responses the list of risks should include fully
N
          developed risk responses for the higher priority risks.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3.3.2
          b. The risk rating may be developed by using the probability and impact matrix.
Y         This matrix develops the rating based on a risk's estimated impact and
          probability.
N         a. We use the tool risk categorization to group our risks by category.
          c. We use the tool risk data quality assessment to ask: How useful is the data we
N         have on risk? We may ask where did we get the data from? Is there bias in the
          data? Etc.
          d. Many organizations look at estimated probability and impact to determine a
          risk score. At times though, risk urgency is evaluated to determine a risk severity
N         rating. This rating takes into account impact, probability, and urgency. One aspect
          of urgency: How quickly must we respond if the risk occurs? Will there be any
          warning signs that the risk is about to occur?


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3.2.3
          c. Risk data quality assessment looks at how useful is the risk data to us. We may
Y
          ask: How well do we understand this risk?
          a. A risk probability and impact assessment looks at what is the probability the
N
          risk will occur and if it does, what effect is it likely to have on project objectives.
          b. A risk probability and impact matrix helps us determine the risk rating based
N
          on estimated probability and impact.
          d. Many organizations look at estimated probability and impact to determine a
          risk score. At times though, risk urgency is evaluated to determine a risk severity
N         rating. This rating takes into account impact, probability, and urgency. One aspect
          of urgency: How quickly must we respond if the risk occurs? Will there be any
          warning signs that the risk is about to occur?


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3.2.4
          d. In general, to develop effective risk responses we may want to group our risks
Y
          by root cause.
          a. It is fine to group our risks by the deliverable affected. In general though, to
N
          develop effective risk responses we may want to group our risks by root cause.
          b. It is fine to group our risks by the objective affected. To develop effective risk
N
          responses we may want to group our risks by root cause.
          c. If it fine to group our risks by the project phase. To develop effective risk
N
          responses we may want to group our risks by root cause.
Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 11-12 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


        At this point we want to take the higher priority risks and put them through
        quantitative analysis.

        Be sure to know difference between Qualitative risk analysis and Quantitative risk
        analysis.


Qualitative Risk Analysis                                      Quantitative Risk Analysis
Goal- prioritize risks for Quantitative analysis or developing
                                                               Goal- understand overall risk for project
responses
Quick                                                          Slower
Cost effective                                                 More expensive
Uses terms like: low, moderate, high                           Based on statistics
Can use numbers relative to each other                         Uses numbers




INPUTs of perform quantitative risk analysis

        Risk management plan -                                           this plan includes a description to
        perform quantitative risk analysis


        Cost and schedule management plan -                                   both of these
        plans describe how risk reserves (cost and schedule) are set-up and managed


        Risk register- all the information we have so far on the project risks are in
        the risk register.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of perform quantitative
risk analysis
     Data gathering and representation techniques -
     Interviews and probability distributions- statisticians
     will develop interviews where the results may be plotted on probability
     distributions. Being based on statistics... not your normal interviews.


     Quantitative risk analysis and modeling
     techniques:
     Sensitivity analysis- - a technique used to determine how different
     values for risks may effect project objectives. The results are plotted on a tornado
     diagram. See PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 11-15.


  EXAM TIP: The term sensitivity makes us think of people. Be careful, make sure you
associate sensitivity analysis with quantitative risk, not with the team or the stakeholders.


     Expected monetary value - this is a complicated idea, easier to
     understand through an example:


Your project has 30% probability of having to pay $20,000 in damages and a 40%
probability of receiving $30,000 in damages. What is the expected monetary value of this
situation?
a. - $ 6,000
b. + $ 6,000
c. -$ 12,000
d. + $ 12,000


b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2 (theory)




Think of expected monetary value as a statistical representation of a situation.
   Modeling and simulation - often will use a model to simulate a
   particular risk and its effect on project objectives.


 EXAM TIP:
          *        When using a model to simulate a cost risk we need cost estimates.
            *     When using a model to simulate schedule risk we need activity
          durations as well as an activity network diagram.
             *     Most often we simulate using Monte Carlo.



OUTPUTs of perform quantitative risk analysis
   Risk register with quantitative risk information:
PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS -
Sample Questions

1. The tornado diagram is associated with:
a. sensitivity analysis
b. expected monetary value
c. decision tree analysis
d. simulations

2. The triangular distribution gathers information from all of the following scenarios
except:
a. most likely
b. mean
c. optimistic
d. pessimistic

3. At the end of perform quantitative risk analysis the risk register should include:
a. a list of risks with relative ranking
b. a list of risks with probabilistic information
c. a list of risks
d. a list of risks and a watch list

4. Which of the following statements is true about quantitative risk analysis?
a. all risks should go through quantitative analysis
b. only the risks on the watch list should go through quantitative analysis
c. quantitative risk analysis is a quick low cost process
d. the effect of identified risks on project objectives can be quantified

5. To simulate the project schedule what information is required:
a. cost estimates
b. the schedule network diagram and the duration estimates
c. the schedule management plan
d. the cost management plan

6. To perform a cost risk analysis what information is required:
a. cost estimates
b. the schedule network diagram and the duration estimates
c. the schedule management plan
d. the cost management plan
PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS -
Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
          a. The tornado diagram is often associated with sensitivity analysis. See
Y
          PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 11-15.
          b. and c. Sometimes expected monetary value is applied to decision tree analysis.
N
          See PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 11-16.
          d. Simulations are often performed using the Monte Carlo technique. See
N
          PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 11-17.


2.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.1
          b. The triangular distribution uses the low (pessimistic), most likely, and high
Y
          (optimistic ) values for the calculation. The mean is not used.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.3.1
          b. As an output of quantitative analysis the risks should include probabilistic
Y
          analysis of the project.
          a. and d. As an output of qualitative analysis the risks should be ranked from a
N
          relative standpoint and include a watch list.
N         c. As an output of identify risks, there should be a list of risks with no ranking.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4
          d. Perform quantitative risk analysis should be used to understand the potential
Y
          effect of identified risks on project objectives.
          a. Not all risks should go through quantitative risk analysis. It is not worth the
N
          time and money for low priority risks.
          b. In general, the risks on the watch list are the lower priority risks and therefore
N
          they are the least likely to go through quantitative analysis.
          c. Qualitative risk analysis, not quantitative risk analysis, is a quicker low cost
N
          process.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
          b. We need a schedule network diagram to show path conformance and path
Y
          divergence as well as the activity duration estimates to simulate the schedule.
N         a. The cost estimates are needed to simulate the project budget.
          c. The schedule management plan does not contain the network diagram or
N
          duration estimates and therefore would not be used to simulate the schedule.
          d. The cost management plan does not contain the network diagram or duration
N
          estimates and therefore would not be used to simulate the schedule.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
Y         a. The cost estimates are needed to perform a cost risk analysis.
          b. We need a schedule network diagram to show path conformance and path
N
          divergence as well as the activity duration estimates to simulate the schedule.
          c. The schedule management plan does not contain the cost estimates and
N
          therefore would not be used to perform a cost risk analysis.
          d. The cost management plan does not contain the cost estimates and therefore
N
          would not be used to perform a cost risk analysis.
Plan Risk Responses

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 11-19 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       In this process we develop our responses to particular risks, both threats and
       opportunities.


INPUTs of plan risk responses

       Risk management plan                - This plan includes a description of how to plan risk
       responses.


       Risk register        - All the information we have so far on the project risks are in the
       risk register.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of plan risk responses
       Understand the strategies for threats and how they are different from the strategies
       for opportunities.


Strategies for threats                                       Strategies for opportunities
Avoid- changing plan so that either the risk will not occur or Exploit- changing the plan to ensure the risk will occur and
the risk will not affect the project.                          affect the project.
Ex. Changing schedule, reducing scope, cancelling project Ex. Assigning the most talented resources to the project
Transfer- changing plan by moving ownership (partially or Share- changing plan by sharing ownership with an outside
fully) to another party.                                  party
Ex. Insurance, subcontractor                              Ex. Partnerships, teams, joint ventures
Mitigate- changing plan to reduce probability or impact or Enhance- change plan to increase probability or impact or
both                                                       both
Ex. Designing redundancy                                   Ex. Adding more resources
Accept- don't change plan.                                   Accept- don't change plan.
Passive acceptance- do nothing.                              Passive acceptance- do nothing.
Active acceptance- set-up a contingency reserve.             Active acceptance- set-up contingency reserve.
     Contingent responses strategies - these are risk responses
     we use only if a particular trigger occurs.


  EXAM TIP: Contingency plans are associated with active acceptance, and only active
acceptance.


OUTPUTs of plan risk responses
     Risk register that includes planned responses




     Project document updates - multiple documents may be updated
     based on this process.


     Some key terms in risk:

     Trigger - event that may trigger a response

     Contingency plan -plan in place in case an accepted risk occurs
Back-up plan - sometimes called a fallback plan. Plan in place in case
your first contingency plan does not work


Residual risk - accepted risks and risks that are expected to still remain
after plans have been activated


Secondary risk - sometimes called an emerging risk. Risk that arises
out of implementing a response.
PLAN RISK RESPONSES - Sample Questions

1. A contingency reserve is set-up for what types of risks?
a. risks that have been passively accepted
b. risks that have been actively accepted
c. as part of a mitigation strategy
d. as part of an avoidance strategy

2. The use of insurance is what type of strategy:
a. avoid
b. transfer
c. mitigate
d. accept

3. When we transfer a risk:
a. the risk is eliminated
b. the risk liability moves to another party
c. the risk is actively accepted
d. the risk is passively accepted

4. Passive acceptance requires:
a. transferring risk to another party
b. setting up a contingency reserve
c. documenting the decision
d. putting redundancy in place to deal with the risk

5. All of the following are strategies for opportunities except:
a. transfer
b. accept
c. exploit
d. enhance

6. A risk that develops because we implemented a risk response is called:
a. a secondary risk
b. a residual risk
c. a fallback
d. a risk trigger
PLAN RISK RESPONSES - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
Y         b. A contingency reserve is set-up for risks that have been actively accepted.
          a. If a risk is passively accepted, it means we do nothing, including not setting up
N
          a reserve.
          c. Mitigation means we change our plan to either lower the probability of the risk
N         or lower the impact of the risk or both. With mitigation we do not set-up
          contingency reserves.
          d. Avoidance means we do something so either the risk does not occur or if it
N         does occur it does not affect the project. With avoidance we do not set-up
          contingency reserves.


2.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
Y         b. Insurance is an example of a transfer technique.
N         a. Cancelling the project is an extreme avoidance technique.
          c. Designing redundancy into our system is an example of a mitigation technique.
N
          The redundancy may reduce the impact if the risk does occur.
          d. Doing nothing but documenting the risk, without changing the project plan is an
N
          example of passive acceptance.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
          b. When we transfer the risk the risk liability, or at least part of the liability
Y
          moves to the other party. Buying insurance is a good example of this.
          a. When we transfer a risk, the risk still exists, but the liability for the risk is now
N
          owned, or partially owned by the other party.
          c. Active acceptance means we do not change our plan because of the risk, but we
N
          put a contingency in place. With transfer, we are changing the plan.
          d. Passive acceptance means we do not change our plan because of the risk and
N
          we put no contingency in place. With transfer, we are changing the plan.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
          c. Doing nothing but documenting the risk, without changing the project plan is an
Y
          example of passive acceptance.
          a. Transfer means we move the liability for the risk, or at least part of the liability
N
          to another party.
N         b. Active acceptance means we do not change our plan because of the risk, but we
          put a contingency in place.
          d. Designing redundancy into our system is an example of a mitigation technique.
N
          The redundancy may reduce the impact if the risk does occur.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.2
Y         a. Transfer is a technique for threats.
          b., c., and d. Accept, exploit, and enhance are all examples of techniques for
N
          opportunities.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.3.2
          a. A secondary risk is a risk that develops because of a risk response that was
          implemented. Example: Because of the snow storm there is a risk that my car may
Y         slide off of the road. I decided to walk to work instead of driving so as to avoid
          the risk of my car sliding off the road. A new risk, called a secondary risk, of me
          falling on the ice, has now emerged.
          b. A residual risk is a risk that remains even after we execute planned responses.
N         Also, risks that have been accepted are called residual risks because they remain
          risks because of our acceptance.
          c. A fallback plan is the plan you have in place in case your first response does
N
          not fully work.
          d. A risk trigger condition is a situation that leads us to utilize a risk response
N
          strategy.
Plan Procurement Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 12-3 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In plan procurements we think about what we need on our project and does it make
   sense to have the work performed inside of the project team or outside. If we feel it
   makes sense to have an outside organization perform the work we start to think about
   what contract type we should use, writing a procurement statement of work for the
   potential supplier, developing a request for proposal, invitation for bid, etc., and
   also coming up with criteria to help us decide from whom to buy.


INPUTs of plan procurement management

   Project management plan - there are many things to review
   inside the project management plan. The three that are most important at this time are
   the project scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. We review these
   documents to really understand the project work and to help us make good decisions
   on what work can best be performed by the team and what work can best be
   performed by an outside organization.


   Requirement documentation - this documentation is really the
   basis for developing the project scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary.
   As we decide what work can best be performed by the team and what work can best
   be performed by an outside organization we need to think if there are any legal
   implications in the requirements. As an example: intellectual property rights. If we
   have a seller perform some of the technical work on the project, we need to think
   about and plan for ownership of intellectual property rights.


   Risk register - based on the work of plan risk responses, we may have
   already decided to utilize contracts. As an example, we may have decided to
   purchase insurance as a risk transfer technique.
     Activity resource requirements - these requirements tell us
     what type and how much we have estimated for resources (people, equipment,
     materials, supplies). These estimates need to be considered as we consider using an
     outside party to perform some of the work of the project.


     Project schedule - we need to consider when we planned to have work
     complete versus when a supplier could have work complete. Also, we may need to
     consider lead time on equipment orders.


     Activity cost estimates - if we request bids, quotes, or proposals
     from potential suppliers, we may compare their pricing to any estimates we have
     already developed.


     Stakeholder register - we may use this register to understand the
     impact and interests on the project and how utilizing suppliers may affect other
     stakeholders.


     Enterprise environmental factors- -again,                              there may be
     several factors to consider. The most important at this point is really understanding
     our marketplace. Are the products or services we need available on the market at an
     acceptable price and in an acceptable time frame? How does marketplace pricing
     compare to our internal pricing?


     Organizational assets - there may be several factors to consider.
     Contract types are of great importance.

                        Seller obligated to deliver
                        Statement of Work (SOW)- very clear
Fixed Price Contracts   Buyer risk lower
                        Seller risk higher
                        Firm Fixed Price- most common and most simple.
                        Fixed Price Incentive Fee Contract- more flexible.
                        Final price paid based on seller's performance in specific areas such as cost, schedule, or
                        technical.
                        Price ceiling is set to protect buyer.
                     PTA-Point of total assumption- this is the point when the seller assumes all financial risk.


                     Know this equation for the exam.
                     PTA= target cost + ((ceiling price-target price)/buyer share ratio)




                     Fixed Price with Economic Price Adjustment- usually used on contracts that span multiple
                     years. The final price of the contract is adjusted based on changing conditions such as
                     inflation, cost increases, cost decreases, etc. Designed to protect both buyer and seller.



                           Seller obligated to put forth their best effort.
                           Statement of work (SOW)- flexible in case it needs to change or cannot be clearly
Cost        Reimbursable   defined upfront.
Contracts                  Seller reimbursed for legitimate actual costs plus a fee (profit).
                           Buyer risk higher.
                           Seller risk lower.
                           Cost Plus Fixed Fee- seller reimbursed for all legitimate costs plus paid a fee (profit)
                           that is a percentage of the estimated costs. The fee is not a percentage of the actual
                           costs.
                           Cost Plus Incentive Fee Contract- more flexible.
                           Final price paid based on seller's performance.
                           No price ceiling is set.
                           Cost Plus Award Fee Contract- seller reimbursed for all legitimate actual costs.
                           Fee (profit) based on subjective criteria and awarded at buyer's discretion.
                           Used to help align the seller's objectives to the buyer's objectives.



                     Seller paid a fixed price by the hour or day and reimbursed at cost (or cost plus a handling
                     fee) for material.
Time and Materials   Buyer has more risk since they are paying by the hour or day ( and not for finished
Contract             deliverables).
                     Seller has lower risk since they are being paid for time... not deliverables.
                     Considered hybrid type.
                     Fixed price is on labor (fixed price per hour or day).
                     Cost reimbursable since the total contract price is unknown at the beginning.
                     Key terms to look for:
                     services, emergency, short term, staff augmentation
                     Statement of work (SOW)- often a clear, well defined SOW cannot be created. These
                     contracts can be set-up (and cancelled) very quickly.
 EXAM TIP: On Contract types- for the exam make sure you know for each category:
          *    Is seller paid based on delivery, effort, or time?
            *     Who has more risk on the contract?
            *     Details on type of statement of work.



TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of plan procurement
management

   Make-or-buy analysis -
                   *    general management technique
                   *    deciding if we should perform the work internally or externally
                   *    if we decide to go external may need to further decide to buy or
                lease
                   *    while comparing internal and external costs must look at all
                costs


   Market research - important at this point is to really understand our
   marketplace. Are the products or services we need available on the market at an
   acceptable price and in an acceptable time frame? How does marketplace pricing
   compare to our internal pricing? Is there new technology in development that we
   may want to leverage, and accept the risk associated with it?


   Meetings - at this point we may hold meetings with potential bidders. At
   times, our potential bidders may hold more of an expertise in a certain area than we
    possess. Working with these bidders early may have very positive long term results
    on the project.


OUTPUTs of plan procurement management

    Procurement Management Plan -                                    This plan is very
    specific to one procurement and will describe the decisions we have made so far
    related to the procurement plus outline the other procurement processes.


    Procurement statement of work -                                 this is the narrative
    description of the item (product, service, result) we want to purchase. The statement
    of work needs to be clear enough and complete enough that the potential bidder can
    fully understand our needs and summit a reasonable pricing offer.


   EXAM TIP: Do not confuse the procurement statement of work with the project
statement of work.
               *     Project statement of work- comes from our customer or sponsor
             describing the item they want to purchase (obtain) from us.
               *     Procurement statement of work- from us to our potential bidder
             describing the item we want to purchase (obtain) from them.



    Procurement documents - these are the documents we use when
    we are ready to ask the seller to submit an offer to sell.


   Request                for Used when we want information from our potential bidder but do not want them to
                              make an offer to sell at this time.
   Information                Often used before the other two below.
   Invitation for bid,
                       Used when the decision is likely to be made to the low price technically acceptable
   Request for quote, offer (LPTA).
   tender notice
                              Used when the decision will be based on more than just low price. Other items that
                              may influence the decision are:
   Request for proposal             *    Technical approach
                                    *    Reputation and past performance
     Source selection criteria - even before we see any bids, quotes,
     or proposals we should be clear on the criteria we are going to use to select the
     winning bidder. This criteria will vary greatly from industry to industry and even
     inside of an industry from product to product.
     If we are purchasing an item that is easily available on the market, then price may be
     the primary criteria. For other items the list of criteria may be objective or
     subjective.
            Examples include:
                     *     Technical approach
                     *     Quality of materials
                     *     Reputation
                     *     Past performance
                     *     Many others


     Make or buy decisions - if we decide to make the item in house
     (and not use an outside source) we will continue with the other project management
     processes. If we decide to purchase the item, we then continue with the three other
     processes from the procurement management knowledge area.


     Change requests - we have stated that change requests are an output of
     many executing processes and all monitoring and controlling processes. This is the
     only planning process with change requests as an output. The decision to purchase
     may affect many aspects of the project plan as well as other project documents.


  EXAM TIP: Remember that this is the only planning process with change requests as
an output. No initiating processes have change requests as an output. No closing
processes have change requests as an output.


  EXAM TIP:
              *     A contract is a legal document.
              *     A project plan is not a legal document.


     A few other ideas -
             *    Competitive and non-competitive contracting      -   in general
          we want to use competitive contracting methods in order to find the
          supplier who can provide the best product and relationship to match our
          needs.


            *     Non-competitive forms of contracting
                   *    Sole source- we (the buying organization) believe there
                is only one qualified source and therefore if we want to buy we
                will need to buy from that one source.
                   *    Single source- we (the buyer) believe there are multiple
                qualified sources but we have some compelling reasons to only
                work with one of them. Example- we have other products from
                this same supplier and want to continue with them because our
                maintenance people are used to working on their equipment.


For 50 more sample questions and solutions
related to contract math please see Aileen's book:
How to get Every Contract Math Question
right on the PMP(R) Exam. The book is available
in both print and e-book format on Amazon.
PLAN PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT-
Sample Questions

1. The customer is reviewing the deliverables to determine how the seller has
satisfied certain broad subjective performance criteria that was incorporated into
the contract. The seller is most likely working under what contract type:
a. firm fixed price
b. fixed price with economic price adjustment
c. cost plus award fee
d. time and materials

2. The general management technique we use in plan procurements to determine
what work should be performed by the project team and what work should be
performed externally is:
a. make-or-buy analysis
b. contract types
c. proposal evaluation techniques
d. procurement negotiations

3. You are experiencing an emergency on your project and need to bring on a
consultant with technical expertise very quickly though it is unclear the exact work
he will perform. Most likely you will use what contract type?
a. firm fixed price
b. cost plus fixed fee
c. cost plus award fee
d. time and materials

4. Under this contract type, the seller is required to complete the work. Financial
incentives are included that are related to cost, schedule, or technical performance.
All costs above the price ceiling are the responsibility of the seller. This contract
type is called:
a. firm fixed price
b. fixed price incentive fee
c. fixed price with economic price adjustment
d. cost plus incentive fee
5. We want to ensure that our seller is legally obligated to deliver under a new
contract. We most likely will set-up what contract type:
a. firm fixed price
b. time and materials
c. cost plus fixed fee
d. cost plus incentive fee

6. The contract type with the least financial risk for the buyer is:
a. firm fixed price
b. cost plus fixed fee
c. cost plus incentive fee
d. time and materials


7. The contract type with the most financial risk for the seller is:
a. firm fixed price
b. time and materials
c. cost plus fixed fee
d. cost plus incentive fee

8. Acquisition of experts is often handled under what contract type?
a. fixed price with economic price adjustments
b. time and materials
c. cost plus fixed fee
d. cost plus incentive fee

9. The contract type that often spans multiple years and allows for final adjustments
to the total price due to changed conditions is:
a. fixed price with economic price adjustments
b. time and materials
c. cost plus fixed fee
d. cost plus incentive fee

10. If the buyer is likely to make their final selection on a vendor based on technical
capability and not just low price they are most likely to send out a(n):
a. request for quote
b. invitation for bid
c. tender notice
d. request for proposal
11. You are working under a Fixed Price Incentive Contract. The pricing is:
target cost:            $100,000
target profit:          $ 10,000
target price:           $110,000
share ratio:            70/30
Price ceiling:          $125,000.
You complete the work for a cost of $120,000. The final contract price is?
a. $ 120,000
b. $ 124,000
c. $ 125,000
d. $ 126,000

12. You are managing the design/build of a small office building. With your customer,
you have signed a Cost Plus Incentive Contract. The negotiated pricing for the
contract is:
target cost: $100,000 and the target fee: $ 8,000
max fee $ 12,000 and the min fee is $ 4,000
share ratio 60/40
You complete the work for $105,000. What is the total price the buyer will pay?
a. $105,000
b. $109,000
c. $111,000
d. $113, 000

13. You are working under a Fixed Price Incentive Contract. The pricing is:
target cost:         $100,000
target profit:       $ 10,000
target price:        $110,000
share ratio:         70/30 and a Price ceiling:               $125, 000.
If you complete the job for a cost of $131,429 what is the PTA (point of total
assumption) ?
a. $ 120,000
b. $ 121,429
c. $ 125,000
d. $ 131,429

14. All the following statements about time and materials contracts are true except:
a. they are a hybrid type of arrangement that contain aspects of both cost-reimbursable
and fixed-price arrangements
b. the seller receives a profit in addition to being reimbursed for allowable costs
c. the full value of the agreement is not defined at contract award
d. the exact quantity of items to be delivered is not defined at contract award
PLAN PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT-
Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          c. The key term in the question is "subjective". The award criteria in a cost plus
Y
          award fee contract is subjective.
          a. and b. With these contracts the criteria for acceptance should be extremely
N
          clear.
          d. In time and materials, the supplier is paid based on time worked. Therefore,
N
          we do not see broad subjective performance criteria.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.2.1
          a. Make or buy analysis is a general management technique used in plan
Y         procurements to determine what work should be performed internally and what
          work should be performed externally.
N         b. Contract types is an input under the category of organizational process assets.
          c. Proposal evaluation techniques are used in conduct procurements, not plan
          procurements. To use these techniques we need to already have the proposals. In
N
          general we would not have proposals when we are deciding what work to
          perform internally and what work to perform externally.
          d. Procurement negotiations are used in conduct procurements, not plan
N         procurements. If we are using this technique we have already decided the work
          will be performed externally.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          d. The key term in the question is "emergency". If we need to bring in a consultant
Y         quickly and cannot clearly define the work, we most likely will use a time and
          materials contract.
          a. If we cannot clearly define the work we will not be able to set-up a firm fixed
N
          price contract.
          b. and c. In general, cost contracts are not used for this type of situation. They
N
          often take time to set-up, too much time if you are in an emergency situation.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          b. There are several key terms and phrases in the question. The phrase "required
Y         to complete the work" tells you that we are in the fixed price category. The term
          "incentives" brings us to the incentive fee contract.
          a. This cannot be the correct answer because the question references financial
N
          incentives.
N         c. There is no mention in the question of economic price adjustment.
          d. No cost contract can be the correct answer because of the phrase "required to
N         complete the work." In a cost contract, the supplier has to make their best effort,
          regardless of if they are able to complete the work.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
Y         a. With a firm fixed price contract the seller is legally obligated to deliver.
          b. With a time and materials contract, the seller is paid by the hour or day. They
N
          are obligated to make their best effort to deliver.
          c. and d. With cost contracts, sellers are obligated to make their best effort to
N
          deliver.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          a. The firm fixed price contract has the least financial risk for the buyer and the
Y         most financial risk for the seller. The buyer only pays if the seller is able to
          deliver.
          b. and c. Cost contracts carry more financial risk for the buyer and less for the
N
          seller.
          d. Time and materials contracts carry more financial risk for the buyer than fixed
N         price contracts. In a time and materials contract the seller is paid by the hour or
          day, not the deliverable.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          a. The firm fixed price contract has the least financial risk for the buyer and the
Y         most financial risk for the seller. The buyer only pays if the seller is able to
          deliver.
          b. and c. Cost contracts carry more financial risk for the buyer and less for the
N
          seller.
          d. Time and materials contracts carry less financial risk for the seller than fixed
N         price contracts. In a time and materials contract the seller is paid by the hour or
          day, not the deliverable.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
Y
          b. We often use time and materials contracts for the acquisition of experts.
          a. The fixed price with economic price adjustment contract is often used on
N         contracts that span many years and there is a strong potential for changing
          conditions. Examples include the price of commodities.
          c. and d. Cost contracts are usually not used for the acquisition of experts since
N
          these contracts can be very complex to set-up and monitor.


9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          a. The fixed price with economic price adjustment contract is often used on
Y         contracts that span many years and there is a strong potential for changing
          conditions. Examples include the price of commodities.
          b. Time and materials contracts are usually set-up for much shorter time periods
N
          than fixed price with economic price adjustment contracts.
          c. and d. The final price of a cost contract is tied very much to the legitimate
N
          actual costs of the seller, not to changing conditions.


10. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.3.3
          d. A request for proposal is often used when the buyer hopes to make the final
Y
          decision based on criteria other than or in addition to low price.
          a., b., and c. The terms request for quote, invitation for bid, and tender notice are
N         often used when the buyer plans to make the final decision based on a low price
          acceptable offer.


11. b. Garrett World Class Contracting


Contract type                             Fixed Price Incentive
Do we have an overrun or under run? How
                                          Overrun of $20,000
much?
Will the seller's profit be increased or Decreased by the seller's % of the overrun.
decreased for an overrun?                 (go to share ratio, take 2nd %)
Decreased by how much?
                                          30% of $20,000= $6,000
(Seller's % *overrun)
                                          Seller profit= $10,000-$6,000
Seller profit=target profit-adjustment
                                          Seller profit= $4,000
                                          Price= $120,000 + $4, 000
Actual price= actual cost + actual profit
                                          Price= $124,000
Is actual price less than the ceiling price?   Yes, Therefore, the actual price is $124,000
                                               and profit is $4,000.


12. c. Garrett World Class Contracting


Contract type                          Cost Plus Incentive
Overrun or under run? How much?        Overrun of $5,000
Will the seller's fee be increased or Decreased by the seller's % of the overrun.
decreased for an overrun?              (go to share ratio-take 2nd %)
Decreased by how much?                 40% of $5,000= $2,000
                                       Seller fee= $8,000-$2,000
Seller fee=target fee-adjustment
                                       Seller fee= $6,000
Is fee between max and min fee?        Yes, so Seller fee=$6,000
Actual price= actual cost + actual fee Actual price= $105,000+6,000= $111,000


13. b. Garrett World Class Contracting
PTA= target cost+ (ceiling price-target price)/buyer share ratio
PTA= 100,000 + (125,000-110,000)/.7
PTA= 100,000 + (15,00)/.7
PTA= 100,000 + 21,429
PTA= 121,429


14. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
         b. This question has the term except in it; therefore, we are looking for the answer
Y        that does not belong or is not true. This statement is the definition of a cost-
         reimbursable contract, not a time and materials contract.
         a., c., and d. These are all true statements and thus not the correct answer. T&M
         contracts resemble cost reimbursable type arrangements in that they are open-
N        ended. They resemble fixed price from the standpoint that the price per hour or
         per day is fixed. Neither the full value of the agreement nor the exact quantity of
         items to be delivered are defined.
Plan Stakeholder Management

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 13-6 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   Once we have identified our stakeholders we now need to plan how to engage them.
   The stakeholder management plan should be very specific on how we are going to
   engage different stakeholders in the best interest of the project.


INPUTs of plan stakeholder management (not all
listed)

   Project management plan - there are elements of the project
   plan that may help define the stakeholder management plan. Examples include the
   project life cycle, the change management plan, etc.


   Stakeholder register - the register lists and organizes everything we
   know so far about the stakeholders. The register also lets us know which
   stakeholders require the most engagement. This is critical as we plan stakeholder
   management.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of plan stakeholder
management

   Analytical techniques -                  with our most critical stakeholders we
   want to assess the current engagement compared to the desired engagement for a
   successful project. See PMBOK(R) Guide for definitions.


   The table below is a stakeholder engagement
   assessment matrix.
     Stakeholder 1- we need to engage more to move them from neutral to leading
     Stakeholder 2- we need to engage enough so they do not slip from supportive to
     neutral or worse
     Stakeholder 3- we need to engage more (or differently) to move them from resistant
     to supportive




C- current engagement D- desired engagement


OUTPUTs of plan stakeholder management

     Stakeholder management plan -                                        the stakeholder
     management plan may take on many forms. At a minimum it should be specific in our
     strategy to engage our key stakeholders. The stakeholder engagement assessment
     matrix may be part of the plan as well as a table like the one below that lists the
     stakeholder, and the strategy to engage the stakeholder as well as the owner.
  EXAM TIP: Not engaging the stakeholders, or the right stakeholders, early and often
on a project may lead to more change requests than usual and more expensive change
requests. Ignoring negative stakeholders is often found after the fact as a key reason of
project failure.
PLAN STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT -
Sample Questions

1. The stakeholder management plan is used to:
a. increase stakeholder support and decrease their negative impact
b. identify all project stakeholders
c. prioritize project stakeholders
d. assess how stakeholders will react to various scenarios

2. Which of the following represents how the project manager should share the
stakeholder management strategies:
a. shared openly
b. use his best judgment when sharing
c. share openly inside the organization but not outside
d. share openly with the project team but not the rest of the organization

3. Your biggest frustration managing your current project is interacting with one of
your key stakeholders Mr. Grant. It seems no matter how much planning is
conducted, Mr. Grant is always requesting more changes. To help alleviate this
situation you should:
a. Interact with Mr. Thompson, who is Mr. Grant's immediate supervisor
b. Get Mr. Grant more involved with your planning activities
c. Ensure that Mr. Grant is not invited to key meetings so that he will not have the
opportunity to request changes
d. Move to a different project with less frustrating stakeholders

4. You are only 30 percent through your current project and you have experienced
more change requests than any project in your 20 year career. You are using a
project management methodology that has been tested out across many groups in
your organization. The current project has 200 stakeholders from 20 different
countries. The most likely reason for the problems on this project is:
a. technology has progressed
b. communication is more complex
c. a key stakeholder may have been overlooked
d. this project was not planned as well as previous projects
PLAN STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT -
Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.2.3.1
          a. The stakeholder plan is used to increase stakeholder support and decrease their
Y
          negative impact.
          b., c., and d. The stakeholder register is used to identify, analyze, prioritize, and
N
          assess our stakeholders and their potential reactions to various scenarios.


2.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.2.3.1
          b. The project manager should realize there may be sensitive information in the
Y
          stakeholder management plan and use his best judgment when sharing.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.2 (Implied in materials though not explicit)
          b. The more we can get Mr. Grant involved in planning, the more he will become
Y
          part of the solution, not part of the problem.
          a. and c. Going around Mr. Grant or leaving him out of meetings will likely only
N         cause more frustration on the part of Mr. Grant and will not help solve the
          problem.
          d. Moving to a different project will not solve the problem described in the
N
          question.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.2 (Implied in materials though not explicit)
          c. If we find that we are experiencing many more change requests than expected
          we should ask if we have identified and are actively working with our key
Y
          stakeholders. Often overlooking a key stakeholder will lead to many requested
          changes that could have been avoided.
          a. and b. There is no reason to assume that advancing technology or complex
N
          communication will be the driver of more change requests than expected.
          d. The question states that you are using a tested project management
N         methodology. There is nothing in the question to tell us that this project is not as
          well planned as others.
PLANNING - Knowledge and Skills
These ideas discussed below are based on information provided by the PMP(R) Exam
Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) and may or may not be directly referenced in the
PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Change management planning -                                 During the process
     develop project management plan the project team develops both a change
     management plan and a configuration management plan. Both of these plans are
     subsets of the project management plan. Change management is a normal part of
     running a project and we should plan proactively for change. When change requests
     occur, mostly as outputs from the executing and the monitoring and controlling
     processes, a change management system should already be in place to handle them.


     Efficiency principles -                  Efficiency is creating output while
     employing the minimum amount of input (resources and time). Efficiency is being
     able to produce an output with in the minimum amount of time and utilizing the
     minimum amount of resources.

     Efficiency is often confused with effectiveness. Effectiveness is doing the right
     things. Efficiency is doing things in the right manor. In project management we think
     about efficiency in many areas. For instance, in earned value management, we often
     use two measures of efficiency: the schedule performance index (SPI) and cost
     performance index (CPI).


     Lean principles -                In Lean production, we focus on the pursuit of
     perfection by systematically and continuously identifying and eliminating waste.

     Five principles of lean thinking:
                     1. Identify customers and specify value - Define value from the
                  point-of-view of your end customers and then target removal of all non-
                  value activities
                     2. Identify and map the value stream, the entire process that
                  delivers value to the customer
                     3. Create flow by eliminating waste - Eliminate elements of the
            value stream that do not add value to the customer's product(s)
               4. Respond to customer pull - Understand customer demand and
            create a process that meets this demand
               5. Pursue perfection - Work toward making every asset and every
            action add value to the end-customer's product




Lean project management principles -                                   Lean project
management is the creation of customer value with the least waste of resources in the
shortest amount of time.
Seven principles of lean project management:
               1. Eliminate waste - Among the many types of waste are wasted
            time and effort at handoffs between team members.
               2. Empowerment, respect and integrity - For example, functional
            managers can empower team members to represent their function on the
            project team
               3. Decide later - Make decisions as late as possible. For example,
            groom the backlog as late as possible.
               4. Deliver fast - Break a project into a series of smaller, more
            easily achievable interconnected projects so as to deliver value earlier
            in the project. Perform active pipeline management.
               5. Amplify learning - Plan for training. Communicate often, get
            feedback and learn from it.
               6. Optimize the whole - View the whole project as more than the
            sum of its parts. Determine how the project aligns with the whole
            organization.
               7. Build quality in - Ensure quality throughout the life of the
            project and not just at the end. For example, through refactoring, -
            restructure existing code to improve readability and reduce complexity.


Regulatory impacts assessment planning -
Regulatory actions may affect project objectives and deliverables. The PMBOK(R)
Guide includes regulations from government regulatory agencies and classifies them
as "government standards" among enterprise environmental factors. These items
should be planned for over the life of the project. Regulatory compliance can often
necessitate a tremendous amount of documentation which can take time, money and
resources to produce. Therefore, the project plan should include a regulatory
impacts assessment.
Environmental impacts assessment planning -
The project team should assess the impacts the environment may have on the project
and the impacts the project may have on the environment. Projects impacts can be
social, economic, or environmental and cant long outlive the life of the project.
Again the project team should assess these impacts as part of project planning.


Scope backlog - In the agile SCRUM model there are two types of
backlogs.
               1. The product backlog - This is a prioritized list of all the work
            that needs to happen to deliver the product. The list is a living document
            and may be continuously updated. Some important terms in backlog
            management are the following:
                      a. Backlog refinement (sometimes called "grooming" the
                   backlog)
                              i.Deleting non-relevant user stories
                             ii.Adding or splitting user stories
                           iii.Refining estimates
                            iv.Etc.
                      b. The product owner usually has authority to update the
                   product backlog
               2. The sprint backlog, which is a subset of the product backlog,
            that includes all the work expected to be completed in the current sprint.
                      a. The sprint backlog should be very visible
                      b. The team has authority to update the sprint backlog
MINI-TEST after PLANNING: Questions

It is strongly recommended that you: Do not circle the answers below so that you may
attempt these questions again later. These questions are drawn from all areas of the
PMP(R) Exam and many are not included in the PMBOK(R) Guide. After completing each of
the other process groups, come back and try to answer these questions again.
        1. Decomposition is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
        a. create WBS
        b. create WBS and define activities
        c. define activities and develop schedule
        d. develop schedule

      2. Product analysis is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
      a. collect requirements
      b. define scope
      c. collect requirements and define scope
      d. define activities

      3. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
      a. develop project charter
      b. identify stakeholders
      c. develop schedule
      d. collect requirements

      4. The critical path method is a tool and technique of what process?
      a. define activities
      b. sequence activities
      c. develop schedule
      d. estimate activity durations

      5. Another name for hard logic is:
      a. mandatory dependency
      b. discretionary dependency
      c. external dependency
      d. soft logic

      6. Resource leveling is a tool and technique of what process?
a. define activities
b. sequence activities
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity durations

7. Affinity diagrams are a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. collect requirements and define scope
d. define activities


8. Facilitated workshops are a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. collect requirements and define scope
d. define activities

9. Leads and lags are a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. estimate activity durations and sequence activities
b. sequence activities and develop schedule
c. develop schedule and estimate activity resources
d. estimate activity resources and estimate activity durations

10. Prototypes are a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. collect requirements and define scope
d. define activities

11. Rolling wave planning is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. collect requirements and define scope
d. define activities

12. Alternatives generation is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. collect requirements and define scope
d. define activities

13. Alternative analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
a. define activities
b. sequence activities
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity resources

14. Resource optimization is a tool and technique of what process?
a. define activities
b. sequence activities
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity resources

15. Reserve analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
a. define activities
b. sequence activities
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity durations

16. Crashing and fast-tracking are examples of what tool and technique?
a. critical path method
b. resource optimization
c. schedule compression
d. modeling techniques

17. The critical path method assumes:
a. no resource limitations
b. that resource optimization has already occurred
c. resource limitations
d. all start and finish dates are fixed

18. When using rolling wave planning:
a. all work is planning in detail
b. near term work is planning in detail and future work is planned at a higher level
c. near term work is planning at a higher level and long term work is planning in
detail
d. all work is planned at a high level

19. Another name for soft logic is:
a. mandatory dependency
b. discretionary dependency
c. external dependency
d. hard logic

20. Affinity diagrams:
a. sort ideas into logical groups
b. vote on ideas so as to make a decision
c. generate ideas
d. prioritize ideas for action

21. Your project team has a very consistent number of resources. Moving
around activities to fully utilize these resources is called:
a. critical path method
b. critical chain method
c. resource leveling
d. crashing

22. Based on changing market demands you have been notified to pull in your
project schedule by several weeks. Tentatively, you and your team discuss fast
tracking the schedule. To fast track, you hope which of the following
statements is true:
a. you have extra money in your budget
b. the project is considered high risk
c. the activities have preferential dependencies
d. you have resources available to add to the critical path

23. You need to present to your management on the status of project. Most
likely you will use:
a. a milestone chart
b. a network diagram
c. a project schedule with logical relationships
d. a schedule management plan

24. At this point in our planning, we have defined the logical relationships
between activities and estimated project resources and durations. Now we
need to determine early and late start and finish dates for project activities.
This information tells us:
a. the exact project end date
b. the amount of schedule flexibility we have
c. the dates the project activities will start and finish
d. the critical chain for the project

25. As we control our progress with respect to our schedule, we like to
illustrate project progress. This is best visualized through:
a. a milestone chart
b. a bar chart
c. a project schedule with logical relationships
d. a schedule management plan

26. We are trying to determine where to add feeding buffers and project
buffers. The most likely tool and technique we will use is:
a. critical path method
b. what-if analysis
c. resource leveling
d. critical chain method

27. A young and inexperienced project manager, you are struggling. Your
mentor suggests that you place less emphasis on organizational policy and
procedures and more emphasis on understanding organizational culture.
Which of the following is not usually considered one of the common
experiences that shape organizational culture?
a. operating environments
b. motivation and reward systems
c. shared vision, mission, values and beliefs
d. multiple geographic locations

28. A bridge design and construction project is being initiated. The core team
disagrees on what should and should not be included in the project charter.
Which of the following should be part of the project charter:
a. the key deliverables
b. the project schedule
c. the project requirements
d. the change management plan

29. Deliverables are an important output of projects. While initiating the
project we should identify:
a. all the project deliverables
b. the project deliverables that will be outputs of the initiating and planning
processes
c. only those deliverables going to the project customer
d. the key deliverables

30. A benefit provides no value until the benefit is:
a. received
b. approved
c. utilized
d. accepted

31. Project estimating is usually applied to:
a. costs
b. communications
c. organizational budgeting
d. vendor bid and analysis

32. Based on history the project manager knows that a major challenge on
projects is having the right resources available. The human resource plan, if
well-developed should help us acquire and manage project resources. Another
plan that may also help us do this is the:
a. stakeholder management plan
b. schedule management plan
c. procurement management plan
d. communications management plan

33. A project to improve water delivery in your community has been
progressing on schedule. However, a critical task, performed by Gamze, is not
progressing well. You have approached Gamze first and now her manager to
try to understand the delay and to offer help. Based on comments from both
Gamze and her manager, Gamze seems capable of performing the task on
time but refuses to do so. At this point, you may need to recommend:
a. training
b. mentoring
c. coaching
d. counseling

34. A typical knowledge transfer life cycle has five steps. Of the five steps,
which step is often the one least likely to be in place in an organization:
a. identifying the knowledge that is relevant and valuable
b. capturing and retaining that knowledge
c. sharing that knowledge with others
d. assessing the benefits of the transferred knowledge


35. You have been named the project manager of a project whose purpose is
to design, build, and set up a customer call center. This call center has been
determined to be was vital in driving the organization's strategy forward.
Setting up the call center may be viewed as a(n):
a. key performance indicator (KPI)
b. key success factor (KSF)
c. cost performance index (CPI)
d. organizational process asset (OPA)

36. Your project is to implement a standard customer management system
throughout your organization. The sales team manager is your primary
customer. You and the sales manager are often in conflict. It was suggested
that you try active listening the next time this manager complains to you about
the progress of the project. From what you have learned, active listening
includes all of the following except:
a. providing feed back to the speaker on your ideas on the topic
b. making eye contact with the speaker
c. watching the body language of the speaker
d. asking questions of the speaker to further your understanding

37. You began your career fifteen years ago as a project engineer. After
several successful years as an engineer, you moved first into a junior and now
into a senior project manager role. Your mentor suggests that you read your
company literature, including its annual report and strategic plan. After this,
he suggests you begin to study your company's competitors to understand
where your company fits in the overall marketplace. He also says that
learning when to speak in technical terms and when to eliminate technical
words in your conversation is critical. Your mentor is really recommending that
you develop skills in:
a. project management
b. strategic planning
c. program management
d. business acumen

38. You have just been assigned as the project manager of a very large project
that involves people from many cultures. Although your projects have been
cross-cultural in nature before, this project includes the opportunity to work
with people from many cultures new to you. While cultures awareness on
projects is important in general, one of the most important times for cultural
consideration is when:
a. determining rewards and recognition
b. assigning reporting relationships
c. deciding on promotions
d. tasking team members to complete work packages

39. An important aspect of configuration management is configuration
identification. Which item(s) below are often kept under configuration
control?
a. stakeholder analysis
b. bottom-up estimating
c. parametric estimating
d. quality plan

40. As a project manager you face many decisions on a daily basis. Some of
these decisions are small and others have many long-term implications. At this
point you are trying to decide between using in-house labor or an outside
consultant for a critical design aspect of your product. You are currently rating
the pros and cons of the two alternatives. What phase of your decision making
model are you in:
a. solution action planning
b. problem definition
c. ideas to action
d. problem solution generation
MINI TEST after PLANNING - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.2.1 and 6.2.2.1
          b. Decomposition is a tool and technique of both the create WBS and define
Y
          activities processes.
N         a. This answer is good but look for a better one.
          c. and d. Decomposition is not a tool and technique of the develop schedule
N
          process.


2.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.2.2
Y         b. Product analysis is a tool and technique of the define scope process.
          a. and c. Product analysis is not a tool and technique of the collect requirements
N         process. We need to have the requirements before we can analyze what the
          product should be.
          d. By the time we perform the define activities process we should already have a
N
          good understanding of the product.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.2.1
          b. We need to analyze the stakeholders as we identify them so we may classify
Y
          them.
N         a. The develop project charter process is too early to analyze stakeholders.
          c. The develop schedule process is all about the schedule. We should have
N
          already analyzed the stakeholders.
          d. As we perform the collect requirements process we use the output of the
N         identify stakeholders process to help us. The stakeholders were analyzed as part
          of the identify stakeholders process.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.2
          c. The critical path method is used when we perform the develop schedule
Y
          process.
          a. To use the critical path method we need to have a network diagram, activity
N         resource requirements, activity duration estimates, etc. We would not have these
          items as we perform the define activities process.
          b. To use the critical path method we need to have a network diagram, activity
          resource requirements, activity duration estimates, etc. We would not have these
N         items as we perform the sequence activities process. It is during that process
          sequence activities that we produce the network diagram that would need to be an
          input to performing the critical path method.
          d. To use the critical path method we need to have a network diagram, activity
          resource requirements, activity duration estimates, etc. We would not have some
N         of these items as we perform the estimate activity durations process. It is during
          the estimate activity durations process that we produce the activity durations that
          are needed as an input to performing the critical path method.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.2
Y         a. Hard logic is another name for mandatory logic.
          b. and d. Discretionary dependency and soft logic mean the same thing and
N         therefore neither can be a correct answer. Both of these answers are for
          dependencies based on good practices, not mandatory dependencies.
          c. External dependencies could be hard or soft logic. An external dependency is a
N
          link between a project and a non-project activity.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.4
          c. To resource level we need to have already performed the critical path method.
Y
          Therefore, we are in the develop schedule process.
          a., b., and d. Define activities, sequence activities, and estimate activity durations
N
          are all too early to have resource leveling as a tool and technique.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.4
          a. Affinity diagrams group like ideas. They are a tool and technique of the collect
Y
          requirements process.
          b., c. and d. Affinity diagrams group like ideas. They are not a tool and technique
N         of the define scope process, the define activities process or the define activities
          process.


8.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.3 and 5.3.2.4
          c. Facilitated workshops are used in both the collect requirements and the define
Y
          scope processes.
          a. and b. These are true answers but look for a better answer. d. Facilitated
N
          workshops are not a tool and technique of the define activities process.


9.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.3 and 6.6.2.6
Y        b. Leads and lags are a tool and technique of both the sequence activities and the
         develop schedule processes.
         a., c. and d. Leads and lags would not be a useful tool and technique of estimate
N
         activity durations process or the estimate activity resources process.


10. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.8
         a. Prototypes are a tool of the collect requirements process. A prototype is a
Y        mock-up of a product that lets the customer see something tangible to help define
         or clarify requirements.
N        b. and c. Prototypes are not a tool and technique of the define scope process.
         d. Prototypes are not a tool and technique of the define activities process.
N
         Prototypes are related to requirements, not activities.


11. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2.2.2
         d. Rolling wave planning is planning near term activities in detail and work that
Y        is further out in less or no detail. It is a tool and technique of the define activities
         process.
         a., b, and c. Rolling wave planning is not a tool and technique of the collect
N
         requirements process or the define scope process.


12. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.2.3
         b. We use alternative generation to determine different alternatives to meet the
Y
         requirements. It is a tool and technique of the define scope process.
         a. and c. We use alternative generation to determine different alternatives to meet
N        the requirements. We must already have the requirements and therefore it is not a
         tool and technique of the collect requirements process.
         d. We use alternative generation to determine different alternatives to meet the
N        requirements. It helps us define the product and the project scope. It is not about
         the activities.


13. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.4.2.2
         d. We use alternative analysis to analyze how different combinations or types of
Y        resources may accomplish the same activity. It is a tool and technique of the
         estimate activity resources process.
         a. We use alternative analysis to analyze how different combinations or types of
N
         resources may accomplish the same activity, not to define the activities.
         b. We use alternative analysis to analyze how different combinations or types of
N        resources may accomplish the same activity, not to sequence the activities.

         c. We use alternative analysis to analyze how different combinations or types of
N
         resources may accomplish the same activity, not to develop the schedule.


14. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.4
         c. Resource optimization is used to match the available resources with the need
Y
         for resources. It is a tool and technique of the develop schedule process.
         a. Define activities is too early for resource optimization. At this point, we would
N        not have even defined required resources. To optimize resources we need to have
         already used the critical path method to build an initial schedule.
         b. Sequence activities is too early for resource optimization. To optimize
N        resources, we need to have already used the critical path method to build an
         initial schedule.
         d. Estimate activities resources is too early for resource optimization. To
N        optimize resources, we need to have already used the critical path method to
         build an initial schedule.


15. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.6
Y        d. As we estimate activity durations we may include schedule reserves.
         a. Define activities is too early for reserve analysis. Reserve analysis is used to
N
         estimate durations, estimate costs, and determine budgets.
         b. Sequence activities is too early for reserve analysis. Reserve analysis is used
N
         to estimate durations, estimate costs, and determine budgets.
         c. The PMBOK(R) Guide does not list reserve analysis as a tool and technique of
N        the develop schedule process. It is listed as part of the estimate durations process
         in the time knowledge area.


16. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.7
         c. Crashing and fast tracking are examples of schedule compression. They are
Y
         both used with the goal of shortening the schedule.
         a. The goal of the critical path method is to estimate the project duration,
N        determine float, etc. This is different from the goal of crashing and fast tracking
         which is to compress the schedule.
         b. The goal of resource optimization is to match the available number of
N        resources with the required number. This differs from the goal of crashing and
         fast tracking which is to compress the schedule.
N        d. Crashing and fast tracking are not modeling techniques. What-if scenario
         analysis and simulations are modeling techniques.


17. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.2
Y        a. The critical path method assumes unlimited resources.
N        b. Resource optimization occurs after the critical path method.
         c. The critical chain method, not the critical path method, assumes resource
N
         constraints.
         d. The critical path method assumes theoretical start and finish dates for each
N
         activity. These ranges are what we call the early and late start and finishes.


18. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2.2.2
         b. When using rolling wave planning, near term work is planning in detail and
Y
         future work is planned at a higher level.
         a. Be careful of answers with the word "all" in them. Only near term work is
N
         planned in detail with rolling wave planning.
N        c. This answer is reversed.
         d. Be careful of answers with the word "all" in them. Only work in the long term
N
         is planned at a high level with rolling wave planning.


19. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.2
Y        b. Another name for soft logic is discretionary logic.
         a. and d. The term "hard" and "mandatory" logic mean the same thing. Therefore,
N
         neither can be the right answer.
         c. External dependencies could be hard or soft logic. An external dependency is a
N
         link between a project and a non-project activity.


20. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.4
Y        a. Affinity diagrams group like ideas.
N        b. Nominal group technique votes on ideas.
N        c. Brainstorming generates ideas.
N        d. Nominal group technique may be used to prioritize ideas.


21. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.4
Y        c. Resource leveling is used to ensure we have a flat use of resources.
22. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.7
         c. In fast tracking we take activities that we would prefer to be completed in
Y        series and force them to overlap or to be completed in parallel. If our activities
         have preferential (and not mandatory) relationships, it is easier to fast track.


23. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.3.2
         a. A milestone chart is often used for management presentations. It provides
Y        enough information without immersing too deeply in the details provided in other
         schedule types.


24. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.2
         b. The critical path method helps determine early start, early finish, late start, and
         late finish dates for each project activity. These dates represent the range of dates
Y
         when activities may occur. The larger the range, the more flexibility we have on
         the project.


25. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.3.2
         b. A bar chart can best enable us to visualize the project schedule and the actual
Y
         dates when activities occur.


26. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.3
Y        d. Feeding buffers and project buffers are used in the critical chain method.


27. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 2.1.1
         d. Organizational culture is shaped by common experiences. From this list, I
         would select multiple geographic locations as the exception. If we have people
Y
         working in multiple geographic locations, it is less likely they will be shaped by
         common experiences.
         a., b. and c. All of these may lead to shared experiences and thus shape
N
         organizational culture.


28. a.   PMP(R) Examination Content Outline Initiating - Task 2 - June 2015
Y        a. The key deliverables should be included in the project charter.
N        b., c. and d. These items are all too detailed to be included in the project charter.
29. d.   PMP(R) Examination Content Outline Initiating - Task 2 - June 2015
Y        d. Key deliverables should be identified as part of initiating.


30. c.
Y        c. Benefits provide value when they are utilized.


31. a.   PMI(R) Practice Standard for Project Estimating 2011
Y        a. Project estimating is usually applied to cost, resources, effort and durations.


32. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 12.1.3.1
         c. Resources are acquired in the Human Resource knowledge area and
         Procurement knowledge area. Therefore the procurement management plan the
Y
         may used to help us acquire and manage resources acquired through be
         procurement.
         a. The stakeholder management plan describes our strategy for engaging
N                                                                                     our
         stakeholders. It does not describe how we will acquire and manage resources.


33.      d.
         d. Counseling may be required when a team member is able to complete a task on
Y
         time but refuses to do so.


34.      d.
         d. Based on PMI(R) research, less than one third of organizations have processes in
Y
         place to assess the benefits of transferred knowledge.


35.      b.
Y        b. Satisfying a key success factor is necessary the organization to be successful.
N        a. KPIs measure the success of an organization or project.


36. a.
         a. Active listening does not involve sharing our ideas on the topic being
Y        discussed. While sharing our ideas may be a good practice, it is not part of active
         listening.
37. d.
         d. Learning about your organization, learning about the competition, and learning
Y
         about the marketplace are all examples of business acumen.


38.      a. PMBOK(R) Guide 9.3.2.6
         a. Different cultures will have different views of rewards and recognition.
Y        Therefore, we should consider culture when determining rewards and
         recognition.


39.      d. PMI(R) Practice Standard for Project Configuration Management
         d. Often we keep physical items, documents, forms, and records under
Y        configuration control. The quality plan is an example of a document that most
         likely would be under configuration control.
         a., b. and c. These answers are not documents but instead are tools and
N
         techniques. Therefore they are not under configuration control.


40.      c. PMBOK(R) Guide X3.6
         c. During the ideas to action phase we define the evaluation criteria, rate pros and
Y
         cons of alternatives, and select the best solution.
              EXECUTING PROCESSES
Executing Process Group Based on the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are eight
(8) Executing process of project management. These processes are performed to complete
the work defined in the project management plan. A large majority of the project budget is
spent during the executing processes. Along with completing the work defined in the
project management plan there also is a strong emphasis on acquiring, developing and
managing the team. Stakeholder engagement is a large part of executing and often a key
factor in determining the success or failure of the project.


Based on the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015), there are seven (7)
tasks of Executing. These tasks represent 31% of your exam content. Key phrases
associated with each task are:


Task                       Key Phrases
Task 1                                          Acquire and manage project resources
Task 2                               Manage task execution based on the project management plan
Task 3                                          Implement the quality management plan
Task 4                                    Implement approved changes and corrective action
Task 5                             Implement approved actions by following the risk management plan
Task 6                      Manage the flow of information by following the communication management plan
Task 7                      Maintain stakeholder relationships by following the stakeholder management plan



The PMBOK(R) Guide, the most often selected reference in studying for the PMP(R) exam,
does not list the tasks comprising the executing process group but emphasizes processes
instead. Although not as robust as the PMBOK(R) Guide for in-depth study, the PMP(R)
Examination Content Outline presents the tasks shown in the table above. Although
memorizing these tasks for the exam is not necessary, reviewing them from time to time is
recommended because they form the basis of the PMP(R) exam's questions on project
executing. As we cover the eight processes in the executing process group in the upcoming
pages, you can see how these t
asks relate to the processes. Assume all seven of these tasks occur concurrently.
Direct and Manage Project Work

  Exam Tip: Review Figure4-7 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     In this process, we complete the activities described in the project management plan.
     The project manager with help from the project management team ensures that all the
     work, and only the work that is defined in the project management plan, is
     performed.


  EXAM TIP: Much of the project budget is spent during the process direct and manage
project work.


INPUTs of direct and manage project work

     Project management plan -                          when you, the project manager,
     direct and manage the project work, it is important to ensure that the project team
     only does the work described in the project plan. If work was left out of the project
     management plan, then the plan needs to be updated.


     Approved change requests -                         when we first enter direct and
     manage project work there are no approved changes. As the project progresses,
     change requests are fed into perform integrated change control and if approved
     become an input to direct and management project work for implementation. The
     changes may take the form of:
                    *    Corrective action- changes to get your project back on plan
                    *    Preventative action- changes to make sure your project does not
                get off plan
                    *    Defect repair- rework of a product or part of a product


     Enterprise environmental factors -                                   ex. Personnel
     administration-think how guidelines for hiring and firing may affect how you direct
     and manage project work.
     Organizational process assets - ex. Think how documentation
     from previous projects including lessons learned may help you as you implement
     your current project.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of direct and manage
project work

     Expert judgment - go out and seek expertise to help you with your
     work on projects. Experts can be anyone and everyone who has knowledge that may
     help you.


     Project management information system (PMIS)
     - this system provides access to other systems that you will use to implement the
     project management plan. Also, you may want to use this system to collect data on
     our KPIs (key performance indicators).


  EXAM TIP: The PMIS is a tool and technique of some processes and an input (as a
subset of environmental factors) for other processes.


   EXAM TIP: Work authorization system- this system is a subset of the PMIS. The
work authorization system ensures that work is performed at the appropriate time, in the
appropriate sequence, and by the appropriate organization. Do you have a system that
helps you do this?


     Meetings - this is a tool and technique of many processes
                    *    there are three types of meetings
                           *   Information exchange- to give updates to other parties
                           *   Brainstorming, etc.- to generate ideas
                           *   Decision-making- to come to a decision.
                    *    Some general guidelines for meetings
                           *   Be clear on the type of meeting
                           *   Only call a meeting when a meeting is required
                             *    Have an agenda, follow an agenda
                             *    Make sure people know the items to be discussed before
                          the meeting occurs
                             *    Collect action items- distribute action items in a timely
                          manner
                             *    Have meeting rules (one person speaks at a time, etc.)
                      *     Face-to-face versus Virtual
                             *    Face-to-face is most effective - may not be practical
                             *    Virtual meetings- take more effort to achieve, same result
                          as face-to-face


OUTPUTs of direct and manage project work

   Deliverables - this is the most important output of all the processes. Some
   people will call project management: deliverable management. These deliverables
   will become inputs to the control quality process where they are measured for
   correctness and then inputs of the validate scope process where the customer will
   inspect them for acceptance. During the close project or phase process, the
   ownership of the deliverables will transfer to the customer or the operations group.


   Work performance data - we discussed this in chapter 3. This is
   the raw data collected as you implement your project. This data will become an
   input to several controlling processes for analysis. KPIs (key performance
   indicators) are an example of this data.


   Change requests - as you direct and manage the work of your project
   you may find a need for changes. Change requests address many aspects of the
   project. All change requests become inputs to perform integrated change control.


   Project plan updates and project documents
   updates - elements of the plan or other documents may need updating as part
   of this process.
DIRECT AND MANAGE PROJECT WORK -
Sample Questions

1. As the project manager, you are experienced in managing a small team of people.
Now your team includes over 500 members located in 4 different countries. It looks
like communication is a problem. As an example, Hiram was running late finishing
the development of the product. Ravi did not know this and started testing before
the product was ready. What may have helped prevent this situation:
a. a change control system
b. a work authorization system
c. a more detailed communication plan
d. a more defined human resource plan

2. The primary output of direct and manage project work is:
a. deliverables
b. work performance reports
c. approved change requests
d. denied change requests

3. Which of the following is a tool and technique of direct and manage project work?
a. change control plan
b. configuration management plan
c. project management information system
d. organizational process assets

4. The project management information system (PMIS) is:
a. part of the organizational process assets
b. part of the enterprise environmental factors
c. a subset of the configuration management system
d. a subset of the change management system

5. Which of the following is an output of direct and manage project work?
a. work performance reports
b. work performance data
c. organizational process assets
d. enterprise environmental factors
6. It seems like we have been planning the project forever. The baselines are now
approved and the team is excited to begin the real work. Frustration has set in
already related to not only the number of meetings but the way the meetings are
being handled. It seems some people come to the meeting expecting to share all
their accomplishments. Others are hoping for a lively exchange of ideas with their
new teammates. A few just want to come in, make the needed decisions, and get
back to the real work. At most meetings, we address all three of these needs. What
meeting guideline needs to be reinforced:
a. have an agenda and follow the agenda
b. publish meeting minutes based on the guidelines in the project plan
c. have meetings face-to-face to be most effective
d. do not mix meeting types
DIRECT AND MANAGE PROJECT WORK -
Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.3.2.2
          b. A work authorization system is a tool that ensures the work is done by the right
Y
          team member, at the right time, and in the proper sequence.
          a. There is nothing in the question to tell us that there is an issue with change
N
          control.
          c. and d. The question uses the term communication and the term team. Be careful
N         not to get distracted by these terms. The real issue in the example is that Ravi
          started work without authorization. We need a work authorization system.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-6
          a. Project management is really about deliverable management. Deliverables are
Y
          the primary output of direct and manage project work.
N         b. Work performance reports are an output of monitor and control project work.
N         c. Approved change requests are an output of perform integrated change control.
          d. Denied change requests are not noted as an output of any process. In theory,
N
          they would be an output of perform integrated change control.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-6
          c. The PMIS is a tool and technique of both direct and manage project work and
Y
          monitor and control project work.
          a., b., and d. Plans and organizational process assets are always inputs or outputs
N
          and never tools and techniques.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.3.2.2
Y         b. Since this is a system it is likely an enterprise environmental factor.
N         a. Since this is a system it is likely not an organizational process asset.
N         c. The configuration management system is a subset of the PMIS.
          d. The change management system is a subset of the configuration management
N
          system.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-6
          b. As we perform the work of the project (direct and manage project work) data
Y         is collected.
N         a. Work performance reports are an output of monitor and control project work.
N         c. and d. OPA and EEF are both inputs to direct and manage project work.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.3.2.3
          d. There are basically three meeting types: information exchange, brainstorming
Y         and decision-making. The question states that most meetings are a combination of
          all three. This is the problem that should be addressed.
          a., b., and c. All three of these ideas are good but none of them address the real
N         issue. The real issue is that we are mixing meeting types and this is causing
          frustration.
Perform Quality Assurance

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 8-9 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       Understand the difference between perform quality assurance and control quality.


Perform Quality Assurance                                 Control Quality
Improving our processes                                   Measuring our products
More managerial                                           More technical
More big picture                                          More detailed
Input-control quality measurements (provide input on what
                                                          Output-control quality measurements
processes need improvement)




INPUTS of Perform quality assurance

       Quality management plan -                                           describes how the process of
       quality assurance will be performed.


       Process improvement plan -                                                  describes    how   process
       improvements will occur on the project.


       Quality metrics - lists and details the attributes that will be measured
       and how they will be measured.


       Quality control measurements -                                               these measures help us
       understand what processes need improving.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of perform quality
assurance (see PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-10)
All tools from Plan Quality and from Control Quality may have a place in quality
assurance. The next seven tools listed are often known as the seven management and
planning tools.


Affinity diagrams - used to visually group similar ideas together.
Sometimes, we organize our WBSs based on the affinity diagram idea. We may want
to group similar ideas together in the WBS.


Process decision program charts (PDPC) -                                      is a
technique designed to help prepare contingency plans. The emphasis of the PDPC is
to identify the consequential impact of failure on activity plans, and create
appropriate contingency plans to limit risks. Process diagrams and planning tree
diagrams are extended by a couple of levels when the PDPC is applied to the bottom
level tasks on those diagrams


Interrelationship digraphs -                         This tool displays all the
interrelated cause-and-effect relationships and factors involved in a complex
problem and describes desired outcomes. The process of creating an
interrelationship digraph helps a group analyze the natural links between different
aspects of a complex situation.


Tree Diagram - this tool is used to breakdown broad categories into
finer and finer levels of detail. It can map levels of details of tasks that are required
to accomplish a goal or task. Developing the tree diagram helps one move their
thinking from generalities to specifics. Examples of its use in project management
include: WBS (work breakdown structure), OBS (organizational breakdown
structure), RBS (risk breakdown structure), RBS (resource breakdown structure),
etc. In this figure we have a horizontal view but we may also use a vertical view.


Matrix Diagram - This tool shows the relationship between items. At
each intersection a relationship is either absent or present. It then gives information
about the relationship, such as its strength, and the roles played by various
individuals or measurements.
     Activity Network Diagrams - we have already discussed these
     to some extent in the sequence activities process. Different examples include:
     activity on node diagrams (this is the precedence diagram we already discussed),
     and activity on arrow diagrams (similar to an activity on node, except the activities
     sit on the arrows and not on the boxes). In the time knowledge area these diagrams
     are used with PERT (program evaluation review technique), critical path method
     (CPM), and precedence diagramming methods (PDM). We have already discussed
     all three of these ideas.


     Prioritization matrix - this is often a combination of a tree diagram
     feeding into a matrix diagram. Often a pair-wise comparison is used to prioritize
     items and describe them in terms of weighted criteria. Pairwise comparison
     generally refers to any process of comparing entities in pairs to judge which of each
     entity is preferred.


     Quality audits - this is a review by someone outside the team to see how
     we are doing from a quality standpoint and to correct any negatives.


  EXAM TIP: Audits in general refer to processes while inspections in general refer to
deliverables or products. Therefore, we are more likely to:
               *    Audit a process (and not a deliverable).
              *       Inspect a deliverable (and not a process).



     Process analysis - we use the process improvement plan to analyze our
     processes and discover the root cause of issues.


OUTPUTs of Perform Quality assurance (not all
listed)

                  -
Change requests most monitoring and controlling processes have change requests as an
output. All change requests go to perform integrated change control for approval or
rejection.
PERFORM QUALITY ASSURANCE - Sample
Questions

1. Perform quality assurance includes:
a. the improvement of quality processes
b. identifying which quality standards are relevant and determining how to satisfy them
c. monitoring specific project results to determine if they comply with relevant quality
standards and identifying ways to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory performance
d. all the activities of the performing organization that determine quality policies,
objectives, and responsibilities so that the project will satisfy the needs for which it was
undertaken

2. Which of the following is an input into perform quality assurance:
a. deliverables
b. quality audits
c. quality control measurements
d. change requests

3. Which of the following is a tool and technique of plan quality management:
a. benchmarking
b. project management information system
c. sensitivity analysis
d. organizational theory

4. Which of the following is a tool and technique of perform quality assurance:
a. process analysis
b. product analysis
c. variance analysis
d. reserve analysis

5. A structured, independent review to determine if activities comply with policies,
processes, and procedures is known as:
a. quality audit
b. process analysis
c. affinity diagrams
d. product analysis
6. A diagram used to generate ideas that can be grouped to form patterns is:
a. affinity diagram
b. activity network diagram
c. matrix diagram
d. interrelationship diagram

7. What diagram is used to visualize the parent-to-child relationship in a
decomposition hierarchy?
a. tree diagram
b. activity network diagram
c. matrix diagram
d. affinity diagram


8. What diagrams are also known as activity on node and activity on arrow
diagrams?
a. tree diagram
b. activity network diagram
c. process decision program charts
d. affinity diagram

9. The tool used to understand a goal in relation to the steps for getting to the goal
is:
a. tree diagram
b. activity network diagram
c. process decision program charts
d. affinity diagram

10. Perform Quality Assurance is a(n):
a. planning process
b. executing process
c. monitoring and controlling process
d. closing process
PERFORM QUALITY ASSURANCE - Solutions
1.    a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2
Y          a. One of the aspects of quality assurance is process improvement.
N          b. This is a definition of plan quality.
N          c. This is a definition of control quality.
N          d. This is a definition of quality management (the entire knowledge area).


2.    c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.1.3
           c. During quality assurance we may use the quality control measurements to give
Y
           us insight into which processes need improving and which do not.
N          a. Deliverables are an input to control quality.
N          b. Quality audits are a tool and technique of perform quality assurance.
N          d. Change requests are an output of perform quality assurance.


     EXAM TIP: Audits are always tools and techniques and never inputs or outputs.


3.    a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.4
Y          a. Benchmarking is a tool and technique of plan quality management.
           b. The PMIS is a tool and technique of direct and manage project work and of
N
           monitor and control project work and of no other process.
           c. Sensitivity analysis is a tool and technique of perform quantitative risk
N
           analysis.
N          d. Organizational theory is a tool and technique of plan HR management.


4.    a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.3
           a. Quality assurance is the process in which we analyze our processes so as to
Y          improve them. Therefore, it makes sense that process analysis is a tool and
           technique.
           b. Product analysis is a tool and technique of define scope. We have no product
N          yet in define scope, we are analyzing what the product should be to meet the
           requirements.
N          c. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of control scope and control cost.
N          d. Reserve analysis is a tool and technique of five processes but not perform
           quality assurance.
5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.2
Y         a. This is the definition of a quality audit.
N         b. With this tool and technique we look at our processes so as to improve them.
          c. With this tool and technique we look at how the actual work and results are
N
          varying from the project plan.
          d. Product analysis is a tool and technique of define scope. We have no product
N         yet in define scope, we are analyzing what the product should be to meet the
          requirements.


  EXAM TIP: Audits are related to processes. Inspections are related to deliverables
and products.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.1
Y         a. An affinity diagram is used to group like ideas together.
          b. An activity network diagram is used to show the logical (predecessor and
N
          successor) relationships between project activities.
          c. A matrix diagram looks like a table with items listed across the top and down
N         the side. It provides information about the relationship (or lack of relationship)
          between the different items.
          d. An interrelationship diagram visually shows the relationship between various
N
          items. It is often used in problem solving.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.1
          a. A tree diagram shows the parent-child relationship. A WBS is a great example.
Y
          Tree diagram may be vertical or horizontal.
          b. An activity network diagram is used to show the logical (predecessor and
N
          successor) relationships between project activities.
          c. A matrix diagram looks like a table with items listed across the top and down
N         the side. It provides information about the relationship (or lack of relationship)
          between the different items.
N         d. An affinity diagram is used to group like ideas together.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.1
          b. An activity network diagram is used to show the logical (predecessor and
          successor) relationships between project activities. It may be set-up as activity on
Y         node (AON) diagram or an activity on arrow (AOA) diagram. Go to sequence
          activities for more information.
          a. A tree diagram shows the parent-child relationship. A WBS is a great example.
N
          A Tree diagram may be vertical or horizontal.
          c. These charts are used to help us breakdown the steps to achieve a goal. They
N         often include information on risks that may get in the way of goal achievement and
          ways to deal with these risks.
N         d. An affinity diagram is used to group like ideas together.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.1
          c. These charts are used to help us breakdown the steps to achieve a goal. They
Y         often include information on risks that may get in the way of goal achievement and
          ways to deal with these risks.
          a. A tree diagram shows the parent -child relationship. A WBS is a great
N
          example. Tree diagram may be vertical or horizontal.
          b. An activity network diagram is used to show the logical (predecessor and
N
          successor) relationships between project activities.
N         d. An affinity diagram is used to group like ideas together.


10. b.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2
          b. Perform quality assurance is an executing process. The executing processes are
Y
          more pro-active.
N         a. Plan quality management is a planning process.
          c. Control quality is a monitoring and controlling process. The monitoring and
N
          controlling processes are more reactive.
N         d. There are no quality processes in closing.
Acquire Project Team

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 9-8 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In this process we work to acquire the people we need to make the project
   successful. At times the project manager and the project management team have
   some control over who gets selected (or assigned) to the project team and at other
   times they do not. Sometimes the skill sets required are not available, or even if they
   are available are not assigned to the project team. Project managers need to ensure
   that the project plan is updated based on the actual people assigned to the project
   team.


INPUTs of Acquire Project Team (not all listed)

   Human resource plan - this document, as a subset of the project
   management plan, describes how we will acquire the team including information on
   roles and responsibilities, reporting relationships (org chart), and timing for
   acquiring and releasing project team members (staffing management plan).


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of Acquire project team

   Pre-assignment - at times we do not get to select some of our team
   members. Ex. The most likely example of this- sometimes our organization will
   submit a proposal to a potential customer. The proposal may include resumes of the
   people who will hold key positions on our team if we were to win the work. If we
   do win, these people are pre-assigned.


   Negotiation - the project management team will need to negotiate with
   other teams, functional managers, and external organizations to obtain the skill sets
   required to make the project successful. The ability to negotiate and influence will
   affect the success of the project.
     Acquisition - this sounds like a procurement term and it is. The project
     management team may need to go outside of the organization if the skill sets are not
     available internally. This could mean hiring a consultant or using a vendor to do
     some of the project work.


  EXAM TIP: Be careful on the exam with the tool and technique called acquisition.
Remember it is part of human resources and not procurement.


     Virtual teams - a virtual team is a team that is made up of individuals
     who do not normally meet face-to-face. Some of the negatives that may need to be
     overcome when using a virtual team include:
                    *    Issues with communications
                    *    Members feeling alone or isolated
                    *    More money needed to be spent on technology related to
                 communications
                    *    Etc.
     Some of the positives virtual teams many bring include:
                    *    Considering projects that may be would not have been
                 considered because of geography, etc.
                    *    Ability to obtain very skilled resources that would not have
                 been available locally
                    *    Lower costs associated with office space, relocation of
                 individuals
                    *    Etc.


     Multi-criteria decision analysis - often when selecting team
     members multiple factors may be considered (ex. availability, experience, desire to
     be on the team, cost, etc.). A decision-making tool may be used that will weigh the
     different criteria based on the needs of the team and the position. This can make the
     decision process clearer and less time consuming.


OUTPUTs of acquire project team

     Project staff assignments - at this point we should know who
will hold what positions on the team. Remember this does not happen all at once.
People will join the team as others leave the team based on the current skill sets
required.


Resource calendars - for the people assigned to the team a reliable
calendar should be created to show when they are available to work on the project
and when they are not available. They may not be available 100% of the time due to
other commitments such as supporting other projects, vacation time, etc.


Project management plan updates - many sections of the
project plan may be updated as human resources are acquired. Example- the project
schedule may need to be updated if we were unable to secure the experience we
expected and will be using less experienced resources. This may lead to the planned
schedule becoming longer.
ACQUIRE PROJECT TEAM - Sample Questions

1. Which plan is an input to acquire project team?
a. communications management plan
b. human resource plan
c. procurement management plan
d. stakeholder management plan

2. One of the positives of utilizing virtual teams is:
a. feelings of isolation
b. difficulty in communicating
c. expense of technology
d. new possibilities when acquiring team members

3. Having to use the resources promised as part of a proposal is an example of:
a. negotiation
b. acquisition
c. pre-assignment
d. virtual teams

4. If the project manager is unable to acquire the required resources to complete
the project he should:
a. try to move to a better project
b. be clear that management is responsible for project failure
c. cut corners on the work and hope no one notices
d. request management support to get the required resources

5. Organizational structure is an example of:
a. organizational process asset
b. enterprise environmental factor
c. negotiation
d. acquisition

6. Hiring consultants or subcontracting work to an outside organization is an
example of?
a. organizational process asset
b. enterprise environmental factor
c. negotiation
d. acquisition

7. Multi-Criteria decision analysis involves:
a. hiring individual consultants
b. negotiating with functional managers
c. forming teams whose members live in widespread geographic areas
d. using criteria to rate potential team members

8. Resource calendars document:
a. who is responsible for what deliverables
b. the time periods that each team member can work on the project
c. the reporting relationships of project team members
d. the successors of each activity

9. Communication planning is very important with:
a. pre-assignment
b. acquisition
c. virtual teams
d. multi-criteria decision analysis

10. The impact of the unavailability of resources must be:
a. kept quiet unless someone asks
b. reflected in key documents
c. used to blame senior management for project failure
d. not allowed to affect the project
ACQUIRE PROJECT TEAM - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.1.1
          b. The human resource plan is all about the team and therefore would be an input
Y
          of acquire project team.
          a. The communications management plan is about communications and not about
N
          the team. It would be an input of manage communications.
          c. The procurement management plan would describe the processes of
N
          procurement. It would be an input of conduct procurements.
          d. The stakeholder management plan is about the stakeholders. The team is a
N         subset of the stakeholders but there is a plan just about the team. The stakeholder
          management plan would be an input of manage stakeholder engagement.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.4
          d. If we have the opportunity to use virtual teams, we may be able to bring human
Y         resources to the team from any place in the world. This may allow us to recruit
          the best talent.
          a., b., and c. Feelings of isolation, difficulty in communicating, and expense of
N         technology are examples of negatives we may encounter when utilizing virtual
          teams.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.1
          c. Pre-assignment of resources may limit our flexibility when acquiring team
Y         members. As an example, specific human resources may have been promised in a
          proposal.
          a. Negotiation with other project managers, functional managers, etc. may be used
N
          to help us acquire the people we need.
          b. Acquisition may be used to help us acquire resources from outside the
N
          organization for the team.
          d. One of the positives of virtual teams is we may be able to recruit the best talent
N
          if the whole world can be viewed as a potential labor pool.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 9 - Introduction (implied)
          d. As the project manager we are responsible to achieve the project objectives. If
Y         we cannot get the human resources we need, we may need to request management
          support.
N         a. We have a responsibility to do the best job possible for our organization. When
          we run into issues we cannot just give up and try to move to another project.
N         b. As the project manager we are responsible to achieve the project objectives.
          c. We should never cut corners. We need to request support when we need
N
          support.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.1.2
          b. Organizational structure is an example of an enterprise environmental factor
Y
          that may affect how we acquire team members.
          a. Hiring policies is an example of an organizational process asset that may affect
N
          how we acquire team members.
          c. Negotiation with other project managers, functional managers, etc. may be used
N
          to help us acquire the people we need.
          d. Acquisition may be used to help us acquire resources from outside the
N
          organization for the team.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.3
          d. Acquisition may be used to help us acquire resources from outside the
Y
          organization for the team or to subcontract out a certain portion of project work.
          a. Hiring policies is an example of an organizational process asset that may affect
N
          how we acquire team members.
          b. Organizational structure is an example of an enterprise environmental factor
N
          that may affect how we acquire team members.
          c. Negotiation with other project managers, functional managers, etc. may be used
N
          to help us acquire the people we need.


7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.5
          d. Using criteria to rate potential team members is an example of multi-criteria
Y
          decision analysis.
          a. Hiring individual consultants is an example of the tool and technique
N
          acquisition.
          b. Negotiation with other project managers, functional managers, etc. may be used
N
          to help us acquire the people we need.
          c. One of the positives of virtual teams is we may be able to recruit the best talent
N         if the whole world can be viewed as a potential labor pool. Our team may be
          very geographically diverse.
8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.3.2
          b. If we want to know the time periods that each team member is available for the
Y
          project we should review the resource calendars.
          a. A resource assignment matrix shows who is responsible for what deliverables
N
          (or activities).
          c. The project organizational chart shows the reporting relationships for the
N
          project team members.
          d. The project network diagram shows predecessors and successors for
N
          activities.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.4
          c. Communication planning is important for all teams but even more critical with
Y
          virtual teams.
          a., b., and d. While any of these answers may look good, there is another answer
N
          that is much more associated with the question.


10. b.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2
          b. If key resources are not available for the project, this information must be
Y
          shared and the stakeholders informed.
N         a. We do not want to hide this type of information on the project.
          c. No one should be blamed for project failure. That being said, if the project
N         does fail, we want to collect lessons learned, not to cast blame, but to ensure we
          have a better chance of success on future projects.
          d. If key resources are not available, this may have an effect on the project.
N         Senior management should be informed to see if they are able to help get the
          resources we need to ensure project success.
Develop Project Team

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 9-10 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   There are two parts to develop the project team. One part is developing the
   competencies of the individual team members. The other part of this process is to
   develop the individuals into a working team. Both of these ideas together should
   lead to improved project performance.


   Building trust is a big part of building a successful team. And building a highly
   effective working team is a big part of being a project manager. As a project
   manager, we often have team members representing many different cultures. Learning
   to work with these other cultures and even using the different cultures to the
   advantage of the team is critical to team success.


INPUTs of develop project team

   Human resource plan - this plan, as a subset of the project plan,
   provides guidance on how to develop the competences of the individual team
   members and also how to develop these individuals into a team.


   Project staff assignments - to develop the team we need to know
   who is on the team.


   Resource calendars - the calendars show when team members are
   joining and leaving the teams. They may also show when members are available for
   different team activities, including training and team building.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of develop project team
     Interpersonal skills - these are those soft skills that help us get things
     accomplished, especially accomplished through other people. Empathy is an
     example. Empathy means to put ourselves in someone else's shoes to try to
     understand what they are experiencing.


     Training - is about improving the competency of an individual team member.

   EXAM TIP: An interesting question is who pays for the training of a project team
member. If the training is specific to project needs often the project budget will cover the
cost. If the training will be useful on other projects, then often the organization will cover
the cost.


     Team building activities - team building should start early on the
     project and continue for the life of the project. The goal is to improve relationships
     so as to improve the performance on the projects. Some organizations believe in
     professionally facilitated team building activities. While this is great, day-to-day
     activities may have just as much of a positive effect.

     Most teams progress through team development in various stages. One such model
     was developed by Tuckman. He first developed a four stage model and then later
     added a fifth stage. Most teams progress through this model sequentially. Teams need
     to be careful to not get STUCK in a stage or even move backwards. If new people
     join the team or current people leave the team, the team will often go back to stage
     one- Forming. The five states of Tuckman's model are:
                      1. Forming - this is when team members first meet and learn about
                  the project and each other. Individuals often are on their best behavior
                  and work independently.
                      2. Storming - at this stage different ideas and ways of progressing
                  are often discussed, conflict may arise. Some teams get STUCK here,
                  while others are more collaborative and move through this stage
                  quicker.
                      3. Norming - at this stage the team members often agree to a
                  common goal and a common approach to achieve the goal. Members
                  begin to put team goals ahead of individual goals.
                      4. Performing - often at this point team members are motivated and
                  begin to achieve results. Positive results lead to more positive results.
                  Not all teams reach a performing stage.
                    5. Adjourning - at this stage the work of the project is complete
                  and the team members go their separate ways.


   EXAM TIP: Know the name Tuckman as the originator of this model (sometimes
called the Tuckman ladder). Also know that some teams get STUCK in a stage and some
teams even move backwards. Expect 5 or 6 questions on this model.


     Ground rules - helps to set expectations on behaviors. The team together
     should develop the rules and also enforce the rules. Examples of ground rules
     include:
                   *    All team members attend required meetings or communicate in
                advance why they will not be there
                   *    All team members take responsibility for the completion of their
                own work
                   *    All team members bring up issues before they become personal
                   *    Action items from team meetings are distributed within 2 hours
                of meeting completion


     Colocation - this means that most if not all of the project teams members
     are physically located together for a period of time. The goal of colocation is to
     improve project performance. Examples include:
                    *    Kickoff meeting that may span several days with most team
                 members present
                    *    War room for team meetings, etc.
     While colocation may be very beneficial there are also some benefits of using
     virtual teams. The two ideas need to be evaluated to determine which, or a
     combination of both, is optimal for team performance.


   EXAM TIP: Another name for colocation is a tight matrix. A "tight matrix" has
nothing to do with a weak or a strong matrix though the phrase "tight matrix" may show
up on the exam as a wrong answer if the right answer is weak matrix, strong matrix, or
balanced matrix. The term colocation is often associated with a projectized team though a
team may be projectized and not collocated.
   Recognition and Rewards - some guidelines for recognition and
   rewards: Only reward desirable behavior- you can laugh but we have all witnessed
   undesirable behavior being rewarded.
                  *    The reward must be something the person wants (values), not
               something you want for them
                  *    Think about cultural differences when deciding on rewards
                  *    Recognize the team throughout the project, not just at the end
                  *    Tangible reward- money
                 *   Intangible rewards- may be even more valuable than money.
               Examples include:
                              Recognition privately or in front of others
                              Access to new technology
                              Ability to grow skills, meet new people, etc.


   Personnel Assessment tools - these are tools we use to help us
   really understand our team members including their strengths and weaknesses.
   Examples include:
                  *   The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)
                  *   The Everything DISC Profile


OUTPUTs of develop project team

   Team Performance Assessments -                                   both formally and
   informally the project manager will want to assess the effectiveness of the team. The
   expectation is that a focus on team building will lead to increased performance in
   many areas. Items that the project manager will evaluate:
                   *    Performance against requirements
                   *    Performance against schedule baseline
                   *    Performance against cost baseline
DEVELOP PROJECT TEAM - Sample Questions

1. Which plan is an input of develop project team?
a. communications management plan
b. human resource plan
c. procurement management plan
d. stakeholder management plan

2. Communication skills, emotional intelligence, and conflict resolution are
proficiencies also known as:
a. project management skills
b. general management skills
c. interpersonal skills
d. overrated skills

3. The five stage model used for team development was developed by whom?
a. Tuckman
b. Shewhart
c. Deming
d. Ishikawa

4. One of the purposes of team building activities is to:
a. help build trust and good working relationships
b. enhance the competencies of the team members
c. establish acceptable behavior expectations
d. place most of all of the team members in one location

5. In the five stages of team development, all of the following often occur except:
a. the stages occur in order
b. teams may get stuck in a stage
c. teams may slide back into a previous stage
d. teams skip a stage going forward

6. A tight matrix is another name for:
a. a team where the project manager has more authority than the functional manager
b. a team where the functional manager has more authority than the project manager
c. a team that has members geographically dispersed
d. a team that is co-located

7. Intangible rewards:
a. should never be used if money is available
b. include money
c. may be equally or even more effective than money
d. should be the same for everyone, to ensure fairness

8. Colocation may bring benefits such as:
a. lower costs
b. access to more skilled labor
c. lower relocation expenses
d. sense of community

9. Which input to develop project team has the purpose to identify the people who
are on the team:
a. human resource plan
b. staffing management plan
c. project staff assignments
d. resource calendars

10. Training:
a. is used to increase the competencies of the individual team members
b. should always be billed to the performing organization and not the project
c. has the objective to help team members work together
d. follows the five stages of team development
DEVELOP PROJECT TEAM - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.1.1
          b. The human resource plan is all about the team and therefore would be an input
Y
          of develop project team.
          a. The communications management plan is about communications and not about
N
          the team. It would be an input of manage communications.
          c. The procurement management plan would describe the processes of
N
          procurement. It would be an input of conduct procurements.
          d. The stakeholder management plan is about the stakeholders. The stakeholder
N
          management plan would be an input of manage stakeholder engagement.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.1
Y         c. Communication skills, etc. are examples of interpersonal skills.
          a. Project management skills include skills such as identifying requirements,
N
          building a schedule, etc.
N         b. General management skills would include skills in accounting, finance, etc.
N         d. An answer like overrated skills is not likely to be a good answer for this exam.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.3
Y         a. Tuckman developed the five stages of team development.
          b. Shewhart defined the plan-do-check-act cycle that is often associated with
N
          quality.
          c. Deming modified the plan-do-check-act cycle that is often associated with
N
          quality.
N         d. Ishikawa is best known for the fishbone diagram.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.3
          a. One of the main purposes of team building is to build trust among team
Y
          members.
N         b. Training is used to enhance the competencies of the team members.
N         c. Ground rules establish acceptable behaviors for team members.
          d. Colocation is placing most if not all of the team members in one physical
N
          location.
5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.3
Y         d. In general, teams do not skip stages of team development going forward.
N         a. In general, the stages of team development occur in the same sequence.
N         b. In general, teams may get stuck in a stage.
N         c. In general, teams may slide back a stage.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.5
Y         d. Another name for colocation is tight matrix.
          a. We call a team a strong matrix when the project manager has more authority
N
          than the functional manager.
          b. We call a team a weak matrix when the functional manager has more authority
N
          than the project manager.
          c. We call a team virtual when it has some of its members geographically
N
          dispersed.


7.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.6
          c. Intangible rewards, such as an opportunity to develop or test a new skill set
Y
          may be as effective or even more effective than money.
          a. Because intangible rewards may be as effective or even more effective than
N
          money they should be used even if money is available.
N         b. Money is a tangible, not an intangible reward.
          d. Different people may value intangible rewards differently. Not everyone needs
N
          to receive the same one.


8.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.5
          d. Location may bring a sense of community that is harder to develop with a
Y
          virtual team.
          a., b., and c. Some benefits often achieved with a virtual team include lower
N
          relocation costs, access to more skilled labor, lower costs overall, etc.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.1.2
Y         c. Project staff assignments tell us who is on the team and in what role.
          a. The human resource plan includes the organizational chart for the project, the
N
          staffing management plan, etc.
          b. The staffing management plan describes training needs, staff acquisition plan,
N
          staff release plan, etc.
N        d. Resource calendars show when each team member is available for the project.


10. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.2
         a. Training focuses on improving the competencies of the individual team
Y
         members.
         b. Training may or may not be billed to the performing organization. It depends on
N
         how much will the organization or the project benefit from the training.
         c. Team building, not training, has the focus of helping individuals work as a
N
         team.
N        d. Team building, not training, follows the five stages of team development.
Manage Project Team

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 9-12 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     In this process we interact with our team members on a day-to-day basis to work on
     improving project performance. This may involve dealing with issues and conflicts,
     etc. Regardless of the tools that we use, the goal is always improved performance
     for the project. This is the process in which the project manager really must utilize
     his management skills to not only provide appropriate feedback but also provide
     assignments that help the team members grow as individuals and as a team.


INPUTs of manage project team

     Human resource plan - this plan, as a subset of the project plan,
     provides guidance on how to manage the project team.


  EXAM TIP: Since we are in the H.R. chapter it is a good guess that the HR plan and
not another plan is an input.


     Project staff assignments - to manage the team we need a current
     list of members. This may seem simple but on a big project the team may change
     very quickly based on the current work.


     Team Performance assessments - these assessments, along
     with other inputs, drive improvements in team communication and interaction, as
     well as issue and conflict resolution.


  EXAM TIP: Team performance assessments (how the team is performing against the
project objectives) are often confused on the exam with project performance appraisals
(appraisals of individual team members against their performance goals).
Project Performance Appraisals                        Team Performance Assessments
Output of the process develop project team
Input of process manage project team                  tool and technique of process manage project team
The assessment of the effectiveness of the team. The
project manager may evaluate the team on performance The yearly performance reviews that managers perform on
against the requirements, the schedule baseline and the cost their people
baseline.




       Issue Logs- these logs are an output of manage stakeholder engagement.
       Issue logs should be utilized to ensure that all project issues are resolved and
       closed.




       Work Performance Reports - these reports are an output of
       monitor and control project work. These reports tell us the status or progress of the
       project against the project plan and include forecasts. This information can guide
       future requirements related to the team.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of manage project team

       Observation and conversation -                             some people call this
       manage by walking around. Think of this as interacting with our team members one-
       on-one on an on-going basis. This can be done face-to-face or virtually through
       instant messaging, etc.


       Project performance appraisals - the title of this tool may
     be confusing. These appraisals are the yearly performance reviews that managers
     perform on their workers. On some projects, the project manager owns these
     appraisals on their team members. On other projects, the functional manager owns
     these appraisals and the project manager provides input. Either way, the goal of the
     appraisals is to improve performance through communication, feedback, etc.


     Conflict Management -                      Historically, there has been a negative
     connotation with the term conflict. Not anymore. If conflict is managed in a healthy
     way it may lead to innovations that could not be achieved without conflict. There are
     many sources of conflict on a project:
                    1. Schedules
                    2. Project priorities
                    3. Resources


  EXAM TIP: Notice this list has numbers (1,2,3). Almost all the other lists in this book
are just bullets. For the exam, know the top 3 sources of conflict in order.


     When project team members initially run into conflict, they should try to resolve it
     themselves. Only if they cannot resolve it on their own should the project manager
     get involved. The success of a project, the project manager, and the project team is
     very much determined by how well they can overcome negative conflict and use
     healthy conflict to foster innovation and higher productivity.

     For the exam know these five (5) conflict resolution techniques and when you would
     use each one:
                    *     Withdrawal (avoid) - in this technique we walk away from a
                 conflict. If we walk away with the idea to never address the conflict,
                 this is very bad. If we walk away to calm down, or be better prepared
                 with facts then a temporary withdrawal can be a good thing.
                    *     Smooth (accommodate) - in this technique we often give in to
                 the other's wishes for the sake of maintaining a positive relationship.
                 We agree on what we can agree on and then often give in on areas
                 where we do not have agreement. If the issue is more important to the
                 other party than to you, smoothing may have merit.
                    *     Compromise (reconcile)- in this technique both parties try to
                 meet half way. This may result in a lose-lose situation. On the positive
                 side, if the conflict is not that important or if a quick resolution is
                 necessary this technique may have merit.
                    *     Force (direct) - in this technique one person pushes their
                 viewpoint at the expense of another. This will lead to a win-lose
                 solution. This technique may be the best technique in an emergency,
                 especially an emergency that deals with people's safety or security.
                    *     Collaborate (problem solving) - in this technique we work
                 with the other party to find a win-win. While this method may take more
                 time than the others, it often leads to a more beneficial result for both
                 parties. For this method to work, a high level of trust in each other and
                 commitment to resolving the conflict needs to be present.


  EXAM TIP: Notice each technique has two names listed. On the exam if you see a
question with answer (a) being withdrawal and answer (b) being avoid, both answers
need to be wrong since the two terms mean the same thing and you cannot have two
answers that are right.


   EXAM TIP: Collaborate is the method most likely to lead to a win-win. The negative
of collaborate is that it may take some time and you may not have time available. That
being said, collaborate is not always the best method. The most likely example is during
an emergency we most likely do not want to collaborate, we may want the person with
the most knowledge and experience to force the solution.


     Interpersonal skills - these are those soft skills that help us get things
     accomplished, especially accomplished through other people. Several specific skills
     to consider for the project manager include:
        Leadership - inspiring others to meet their goals and commitments.
        Influencing - often the project manager is not the manager, in the
     official reporting structure, over his team members. Therefore, the project manager
     cannot use positional power to influence the team members. He may need to rely on
     his ability to influence, without power, to get the work of the project accomplished
     in a timely manner. Great communication skills, including listening skills will help.


     Effective decision-making - there are several decision-making
     processes available to project managers. The appropriate process should be
     selected for the situation.
OUTPUTs of Manage project team (not all listed)

   Change requests - Changes related to people may have a huge effect
   on the project plan and other project documents.


   A few (many) additional ideas - there will be many questions
   on the exam related to teams where the information is not in the PMBOK(R) Guide.


Other HR concepts including Motivational theories

   MASLOW's Hierarchy of Needs -




   McGregor `s Theory X and Theory Y- perceptions that
   managers have of their workers.
                 *     Theory X view is that workers are generally lazy and will
              avoid work.
                 *     Theory Y view is that workers may be willing and eager to
              work and may be self-motivated.
                 *     An important idea is that McGregor's theories may be self-
             fulfilling. If the manager treats the workers as lazy (theory X) the
             workers may become lazy. If a manager treats the workers as self-
             motivated (theory Y) the workers may become self-motivated.


Ouchi's Theory Z-                  focused on increasing employee loyalty to the
company by providing a job for life with a strong focus on the well-being of the
employee, both on and off the job. According to Ouchi, Theory Z management tends
to promote stable employment, high productivity, and high employee morale and
satisfaction.


McClelland's Need Theory - created by a psychologist, David
McClelland, it is a motivational model that attempts to explain how
                 *    the need for achievement
                 *    the need for power
                 *    the need for affiliation
affects the actions of people from a managerial context.


Herzberg's Two Factor Theory - distinguishes between:
Motivators (e.g. challenging work, recognition, responsibility) that give positive
satisfaction, arising from intrinsic conditions of the job itself, such as recognition,
achievement, or personal growth, and
Hygiene factors (e.g. status, job security, salary, fringe benefits, work conditions)
that do not give positive satisfaction, though dissatisfaction results from their
absence. These are extrinsic to the work itself, and include aspects such as company
policies, supervisory practices, or wages/salary.
Essentially, hygiene factors are needed to ensure an employee is not dissatisfied.
Motivation factors are needed to motivate an employee to higher performance.


Fiedler's Contingency - the model states that there is no one best
style of leadership. Instead, a leader's effectiveness is based on the situation. This is
the result of two factors - "leadership style" and "situational favorableness". He
states there are two leadership styles: relationship oriented and task oriented.


Vroom's Expectancy Theory - states in very simplistic terms
that a person will be motivated based on the combination of 3 factors:
                            *      The person's effort will lead to success
                            *      The person will be rewarded
                            *      The reward is something the person values


         Power Sources -                        A project manager may have five types of power
         available
                          *    Formal- positional power (best)
                          *    Reward- the power to give positive consequences
                          *    Penalty- the power to give negative consequences (worst)
                          *    Expert- earned through a recognized level of knowledge (best)
                          *    Referent- power gained from knowledge/relationship with an
                       individual or group
                The first three listed (formal, reward, and penalty) come from a person's
                position. Expert and referent powers come from a person's knowledge or
                relationships.


         Leadership Styles -
         Autocratic: traditional view of a management- a boss who makes decisions without
         asking for input, valuable for quick decisions
         Laissez-faire: hands off view of management, valuable when creativity is required
         Democratic: manager involves team members in decisions
                         *     Participative- decisions made jointly
                         *     Consultative- manager asks for input but makes decisions alone


Constructive team roles                                    Destructive team roles
Initiators                                                 Aggressors
Information seekers                                        Blockers
Information givers                                         Withdrawers
Encourages                                                 Recognition seekers
Clarifiers                                                 Topic jumpers
Harmonizers                                                Dominators
Summarizers                                                Devil's advocates
Gate Keepers



Perquisites (Perks)                                        Fringe Benefits
Special rewards given to a specific team member usually for
                                                            Standard benefits given to all team members
performance above expectations
Example: Team member of the month award                    Example: health insurance
MANAGE PROJECT TEAM - Sample Questions

1. The technique used to manage conflict when a project situation is too important
to be compromised and involves incorporating multiple ideas and viewpoints from
people with different perspectives:
a. smoothing
b. collaborating
c. withdrawing
d. forcing

2. Which plan is an input to manage project team?
a. communications management plan
b. human resource plan
c. procurement management plan
d. stakeholder management plan

3. To clarify roles and responsibilities on the project, what tool and technique of
manage project team is often used?
a. team performance assessments
b. issue logs
c. work performance reports
d. project performance appraisals

4. During a fire drill, the safety manager mandates his point of view. This conflict
resolution technique is known as:
a. problem solve
b. force
c. compromise
d. smooth

5. Conflict should be:
a. addressed early and usually in private
b. addressed early and publicly
c. avoided
d. viewed as an individual and not a team issue

6. Observation and conversation is a tool and technique of:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

7. Another name for the collaborate technique to resolve conflict is:
a. problem solve
b. force
c. compromise
d. smooth


8. Issue logs are an input of manage project team. They are an output of what
process:
a. plan human resource management
b. manage stakeholder engagement
c. develop project team
d. acquire project team

9. Project performance appraisals is a tool and technique of:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

10. Team performance assessments are an output of:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

11. Which of the following represents the true Theory Y manager:
a. workers are inherently lazy
b. workers need to be constantly monitored
c. a hierarchy is the best way to manage workers
d. satisfaction of a job well done is a strong motivator

12. Which of the following sources of power is earned, regardless of a person's
position in an organization:
a. formal
b. reward
c. penalty
d. expert

13. There are multiple motivational theories today. Who created the theory that is
related to the management's view of workers and not the way workers behave:
a. Vroom
b. Maslow
c. McGregor
d. McClelland


14. The theory most associated with gaining long term loyalty from workers is:
a. McGregor's Theory X
b. McGregor's Theory Y
c. Maslow's Hierarchy
d. Ouchi Theory Z
MANAGE PROJECT TEAM - Solutions
1.    b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.3
           b. Collaborating is the conflict resolution technique that incorporates multiple
Y
           viewpoints in order to get to a better solution.
           a. Smoothing is the conflict resolution technique in which we agree on what we
N
           agree on and often do not resolve the disagreement.
           c. Withdrawing is the conflict resolution technique in which one party pulls back,
N
           either on a temporary or permanent basis.
           d. Forcing is the conflict resolution technique in which one party makes the other
N          party accept the forcer's solution. It is often used as a last resort. This technique
           may be appropriate in a safety or security situation. The outcome is win-lose.


2.    b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.1.1
Y          b. The human resource plan is a likely input as this plan addresses the team.
           a. The communications plan is a more likely input to communication processes,
N
           not team processes.
           c. The procurement plan is a more likely input to procurement processes, not team
N
           processes.
           d. The stakeholder plan is a more likely input to stakeholder processes, not team
N
           processes.


3.    d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.2
           d. Project performance appraisals are really appraisals of the individual team
Y
           member's performance. These appraisals help clarify roles and responsibilities.
           a. The team performance assessment is an input, not a tool and technique of
N
           manage team.
N          b. Issue logs are an input, not a tool and technique of manage team.
           c. Work performance reports are an input, not a tool and technique of manage
N
           team.


     EXAM TIP: "Logs" are never tools and techniques.


     EXAM TIP: "Reports" are never tools and techniques.
4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.3
          b. Forcing is the conflict resolution technique in which one party makes the other
Y         party accept the forcer's solution. It is often used as a last resort. This technique
          may be appropriate in a safety or security situation. The outcome is win-lose.
          a. Problem solving, another name for collaborating, is the conflict resolution
N         technique that incorporates multiple viewpoints in order to get to a better
          solution.
          c. Compromise is the conflict resolution technique in which both parties give in to
N
          the other so as to reach a partial solution.
          d. Smoothing is the conflict resolution technique in which we agree on what we
N
          agree on and often do not resolve the disagreement.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.3
          a. We want to address conflict early before people become locked into their
Y
          positions.
N         b. Conflict should be addressed in private.
          c. If conflict is managed in a healthy way it may lead to innovations that we could
N
          not achieve without conflict.
          d. Conflict may be a team issue. It is critical that the project manager knows how
N
          to address conflict.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.1
          d. Observation and conversation, sometimes called management by walking
Y         around, is a tool and technique of manage project team. We need to have a team to
          use this tool and technique.
          a. Plan human resource management is too early for the tool, observation, and
N
          conversation. We need to have a team to use this tool and technique.
          b. Develop project team is too early for the tool, observation, and conversation.
N
          We need to have a team to use this tool and technique.
          c. The focus on develop project team is to develop the individuals as individuals
N         and develop the individuals as a team. This is a little early for the tool and
          technique of observation and conversation.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.3
          a. Problem solving, another name for collaborating, is the conflict resolution
Y         technique that incorporates multiple viewpoints in order to get to a better
          solution.
          b. Forcing is the conflict resolution technique in which one party makes the other
N
          party accept the forcer's solution. It is often used as a last resort. This technique
          may be appropriate in a safety or security situation. The outcome is win-lose.
          c. Compromise is the conflict resolution technique in which both parties give in to
N
          the other so as to reach a partial solution.
          d. Smoothing is the conflict resolution technique in which we agree on what we
N
          agree on and often do not resolve the disagreement.


8.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 9-2
          b. Issue logs are an output of manage stakeholder engagement and an input to
Y         manage project team, control communications, and control stakeholder
          engagement.
N         a. The human resource plan is the output of develop human resource plan.
N         c. Team performance assessments are one of the outputs of develop project team.
N         d. The project staff assignments are one of the outputs of acquire project team.


9.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.2
          d. The project performance appraisals are a tool and technique of manage the
Y
          project team. These are appraisals on individual team members.
          a. Plan human resource management is too early for project performance
N
          appraisals. You need to have team members to use this tool and technique.
          b. Acquire project team is too early for project performance appraisals. You need
N
          to have team members to use this tool and technique.
          c. Develop project team is too early for project performance appraisals. The
N         purpose of this process is to develop the team members, not appraise their
          performance.


10. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.3.1
          c. The team performance assessment is the output of develop project team. This
Y         assessment helps us understand if the tools we are using to develop the team are
          improving project performance.
          a. Plan human resource management is too early for team performance
N         assessment. This assessment helps us understand if the tools we are using to
          develop the team are improving project performance.
          b. Acquire project team is too early for team performance assessment. This
N         assessment helps us understand if the tools we are using to develop the team are
          improving project performance.
          d. The team performance assessment is an input to manage project team. This
N        assessment helps us understand if the tools we are using to develop the team are
         improving project performance.


11. d.   Wikipedia search Theory X and Theory Y
         d. Theory Y states that management has a positive view of workers and that
Y
         workers can be self-motivated.
         a., b., and c. There statements could all be associated with Theory X not Theory
N
         Y.


12. d.   Wikipedia search power (social and political)
Y        d. Expert power can be developed by anyone, regardless of position.
         a., b., and c. Formal, reward, and penalty power all come from a person's
N
         position in the organization.


13. c.   Wikipedia search Theory X and Theory Y
         c. McGregor's Theory X and Y are related to the management's view of workers
Y
         and not the way the worker actually behaves.


14. d.   Wikipedia search Theory Z
         d. Ouchi's Theory Z, simplistically states that for an organization to achieve
Y        loyalty from its workers the organization must first be loyal to its workers. One
         way to do this is to provide long term stable employment.
Manage Communication

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 10-6 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


    In this process we follow the communications plan which includes all the details
    related to project communications including creating the information, sharing the
    information, and finally disposition of the information. Most people think this
    process is just about sharing information with the stakeholders. There is a lot more
    to it than that. We need to ensure that the appropriate information is created and put
    into a format that adds value. We need to think about the communication methods
    (push, pull, interactive) to ensure the best method is Selected for the situation.


INPUTs of manage communications (not all listed)

    Communications management plan -                                 all information
    about what, when, and how to communicate with stakeholders should be in this plan.


   EXAM TIP: If you get a question asking who you will be providing specific
information to, the best answer is usually: follow the communications plan.



    Work performance reports - these are an output of monitor and
    control project work. These reports are the physical (hard copy or electronic)
    representation of work performance information.


TOOLs    and                   TECHNIQUEs                        of        manage
communications

    Communication technology - many factors affect the type of
    technology used for project communication. The project manager should select the
    technology that best fits the needs of the stakeholders based on certain factors:
               *     What technology is available to different stakeholders
               *     What level of knowledge, experience, and comfort do the
            stakeholders possess on the different technologies
               *     How quickly do stakeholders require information
               *     What is the project environment- do people meet face-to-face,
            is the team virtual, are people working on different shifts in different
            time zones, etc.


Communication methods -                            it is important to choose the
appropriate communication methods based on the needs of the stakeholders, the
project, and the particular type of communication.




Information management systems - as a project manager
we want standardized ways to collect and distribute information. Information may be
distributed in several ways:
                 *    Hard-copy document management- while this may be
              appropriate for some communications, much of project communications
              is moving away from this distribution method
                 *    Electronic communications management- these are the basic
              electronic methods we would see regardless of whether we are
              involved in project management or not
                 *    Electronic project management tools- these are electronic tools
              specific to managing projects. Ex. project management software tools


Performance reporting -                         this is specific to performance
information. It is the collection and distribution of that information. Often, it is
reported in a form that compares actual performance with planned performance (as
documented in the scope, schedule, and cost baselines).
OUTPUTs of manage communications (not all
listed)

     Project communications - these are the actual artifacts (reports,
     etc.) related to communications. These artifacts will vary greatly from project to
     project based on the stakeholder needs, project environment, etc.


  EXAM TIP: Make certain you are very clear that every project should have three (3)
baselines:
           *   Scope baseline--made up of three components
                         Scope statement
                         WBS
                         WBS Dictionary
              *    Schedule baseline
              *    Cost baseline
MANAGE COMMUNICATIONS - Sample
Questions

1. Which plan is an input to manage communications?
a. communications management plan
b. human resource plan
c. procurement management plan
d. project management plan

2. Which of the following is an input of manage communications?
a. work performance data
b. work performance information
c. work performance reports
d. project communications

3. Which of the following in an output of manage communications?
a. work performance data
b. work performance information
c. work performance reports
d. project communications

4. Awareness of the impact of body language is an example of:
a. meeting management technique
b. presentation technique
c. facilitation technique
d. listening technique

5. The performance measurement baseline typically integrates:
a. scope, schedule, and cost
b. schedule, cost, and risk
c. cost, risk, and procurement
d. risk, procurement, and scope

6. Building consensus and overcoming obstacles are examples of:
a. meeting management techniques
b. presentation techniques
c. facilitation techniques
d. listening techniques

7. The project management information system is an example of:
a. meeting management techniques
b. enterprise environmental factors
c. facilitation techniques
d. organizational process assets
MANAGE COMMUNICATIONS - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2.1.1
Y         a. The communications plan is an input to manage communications.
          b. The human resource plan would be associated with processes in the human
N
          resource area, not the communication area.
          c. The procurement plan would be associated with processes in the procurement
N
          area, not the communications area.
          d. The project management plan is an input to both plan communications
N
          management and control communications.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2.1.2
          c. Work performance reports, which are an output of monitor and control work,
Y
          become an input of manage communications.
N         a. Work performance data is not an input of manage communications.
N         b. Work performance information is not an input of manage communications.
          d. Project communications are an output of, not an input of, manage
N
          communications.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2.3.1
Y         d. Project communications are an output of manage communications.
          a. and b. Work performance data and work performance information are both not
N         outputs of manage communications. If the work performance reports are an input,
          the data or information certainly would not be an output.
          c. Work performance reports, which are an output of monitor and control work,
N
          become an input of manage communications.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2
          b. Presentation techniques include awareness of our own body language and its
Y
          impact as well as awareness of the body language of our audience members.
          a. Having an agenda, using the agenda, collecting action items, etc. are all
N
          examples of meeting management techniques.
          c. Facilitation techniques such as encouraging and balancing help a group reach
N
          an agreement.
          d. Listening techniques such as restating or paraphrasing help with effective
N         communication.
5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2.3.2
          a. The performance measurement baseline typically integrates the triple constraint
Y
          of project management: scope, schedule, and cost.
          b. Risk is not one of the three primary elements integrated in the performance
N
          measurement baseline.
          c. and d. Risk and procurement are not included as two of the three primary
N
          elements integrated in the performance measurement baseline.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2
Y         c. Facilitation techniques often help us build consensus and overcome obstacles.
          a. Having an agenda, using the agenda, collecting action items, etc. are all
N
          examples of meeting management techniques.
N         b. How we set-up our visual aids is an example of a presentation technique.
          d. Listening techniques such as restating or paraphrasing help with effective
N
          communication.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2.1.3
Y         b. The PMIS is an example of an enterprise environmental factor.
          a. Having and using the agenda, collecting action items, etc. are meeting
N
          management techniques.
          c. Facilitation techniques such as encouraging and balancing help a group reach
N
          an agreement.
          d. Lessons learned would be an example of an organizational process asset that
N
          may be used in manage communications.
Conduct Procurements

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 12-5 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In the process conduct procurements we follow the procurement management plan.
   We send out our procurement documents, decide who (which supplier) we are going
   to buy from, and award a contract to them. If we are purchasing an off the shelf item,
   the process of conduct procurements may be very simple. For a larger, more
   complicated purchase, the process may require much more work. On very large
   purchases we often will go through two rounds. In round one we eliminate all the
   bidders who are not technically qualified based on preliminary proposals. At this
   point we short list those bidders who are technically qualified. Then with the short
   list we go through a more detailed approach.

   The timing of the details of this process are worth reviewing.
                   1. In general, we (the buyer) send out the request for proposal.
                   2. We (the buyer) may hold a bidder conference.
                   3. The bidder (seller) then submits his proposal.
                   4. We (the buyer) evaluate the proposal (see tools and techniques).
                   5. We (the buyer) decide who we will buy from and award the
               contract to the selected seller.


INPUTs of conduct procurements
   Some of the inputs we just covered as outputs in the last process.
                  *    Procurement management plan
                  *    Procurement documents
                               Request for information
                               Invitation for bid
                               Request for quote
                               Tender notice
                               Request for proposal
                  *    Source selection criteria
                  *    Make or buy decisions
                  *    Procurement statement of work
  Sellers' proposals - the term proposal here is used to represent bids,
  quotes, and proposals.
  The timing of this input is interesting. In general, we (the buyer) send out the request
  for proposal. We may hold a bidder conference. The bidder (seller) then submits
  their proposal. (This is the input we are discussing). At that point we evaluate the
  proposal (see tools and techniques). Then we decide who we will buy from and
  award the contract.


  Project documents - there are several project documents we may
  review at this point. An important one is the updated risk register that may include
  any contract related decisions made during plan risk responses. An example we used
  already: We may have made the decision to purchase insurance so as to transfer a
  risk to the insurance company.


TOOLs    and                 TECHNIQUEs                         of         conduct
procurements

  Bidder conference - this is a meeting we hold with potential bidders.
  At this point the bidders already have received our procurement document (request
  for bid, etc.) including our procurement statement of work. The bidders often will
  submit questions in writing to the buyer before the meeting. At the meeting we
  answer all their questions. All the bidders hear all the answers, even the answers to
  questions submitted by other bidders (their competition). If the project is a
  construction type project there may be a walkthrough of the construction site.
  We (the buyer) want to be sure we are being fair to all the bidders and also that we
  are giving off the perception (a true perception) that we are being fair. The objective
  is to ensure the bidders have the information they need to submit a good response to
  our request. The bidders are often required to submit their bid (or proposal) within a
  certain number of days after the bidder conference.


  Proposal evaluation technique -                              often as buyers we will
  weigh our selection criteria. As an example:
                 *    30% of decision based on price
                 *    20% of decision based on past performance
                 *    50% of decision based on advanced technical ideas
     A committee may be used to evaluate the proposals against the criteria and then a
     recommendation is made to management for the final selection.


     Independent estimates - with some procurements the organization
     will have a third party prepare an independent estimate. The reason is to ensure that
     when the proposals are received, we (the buyer) know if the prices proposed truly
     reflect the market. There are several reasons we could receive prices that are very
     different from the prepared independent estimate:
                     *     the bidder(s) did not understand our needs
                     *     our procurement documents were not clear
                     *     a bidder is buying-in (this term is sometimes used to describe a
                  bidder who bids low with the hope of winning). Some unethical bidders
                  will do this with the hope of making up the difference with change
                  orders once they win the work


   EXAM TIP: A most likely question... when are we more likely to want an
independent estimate, when we receive a few proposals back or when we receive many
proposals? The answer is just a few. The fewer the number of proposals the less likely
we are to really know a fair price.


     Advertising - the primary reason to advertise is to let others know we are
     planning to make a purchase. By advertising we hope to get more and higher quality
     responses to our request for bid (or proposal). Some government agencies are
     required to advertise.


     Analytical techniques - many different analytical techniques may be
     used to help select a seller. The goal is to make sure we select a seller who can meet
     our needs including technical, cost, and schedule needs.


     Procurement negotiations - on complex procurements often the
     contract cannot be signed right after the bidder is selected. Most people will assume
     negotiations are all about price, and that is true to some degree. Many other items
     may need to be negotiated to provide clarity. Often one of the biggest items is
     centered around responsibility. What will the buying organization be responsible for
     and what will the selling organization be responsible for. For simple procurements
        the terms and conditions may be standard and not require much if any negotiation.


OUTPUTs of conduct procurements (not all listed)

        Selected seller(s) -                  these are the sellers from whom we plan to
        purchase the procurement item.


        Agreement- this is the document that clearly describes the responsibilities
        of the buying organization and the selling organization. Other names include:
        contract, sub-contract, understanding, or purchase order.
                        *     A purchase order is often a simple contract. Most purchase
                     orders are set-up to be firm fixed price.
                        *     A contract is a legal document between two separate legal
                     entities with remedies in the courts. It is important that our team
                     members understand the legal implications of their actions when we
                     have a contract in place. We stated earlier that in a contract the buyer
                     must provide some sort of compensation (this does not have to be
                     money) and a seller must provide a product, service, or result of value.


        Resource calendars -                       these calendars tell us when contracted
        personal or resources will be available.


Other Ideas:
Centralized Contracting                          De-Centralized Contracting
The procurement group is a corporate group.      There is a procurement person sitting on your project team.
Advantages:                                      Advantages:
Volume discounts                                 More loyalty to team and project
Better able to specialize                        Quicker response to project requests




        The five (5) elements of a contract - For a contract to be
        legal there needs to be:
                        1. An offer
                     2. An acceptance
                     3. Competent parties- needs to be two separate legal entities
                     4. Legality of purpose- the contract cannot be to buy or sell
                  something that is illegal to buy or sell
                     5. Consideration- something of value needs to be exchanged
                  though it need not be money


Contract terminology
   Force majeure - translated as "a major force", often translated as an act
     of God or an act of nature. A party of the contract may be temporarily relieved of
     contract commitments if a force majeure clause is in the contract and the force
     majeure occurs.
     Typical force majeure includes: an epidemic, an earthquake, etc.
     Typical items not considered force majeure include: an employee getting sick, the
     organization running out of money, etc.


     Negotiating techniques -                         Fait accompli- stating during a
     negotiation that an item has already been negotiated and cannot be reopened for more
     negotiation


     Other documents -
     A letter of intent is not a contract. It states that if the buyer decides to buy they most
     likely will buy from the seller (who receives the letter). A letter of intent is not a
     commitment. It is not a contract.


  EXAM TIP: The contract should reflect what both parties are doing and what both
parties are doing should match the contract.
                *    If something is in the contract then it needs to be accomplished (or
             the contract adjusted).
               *     If something is not in the contract then it should not be accomplished
            (or the contract should be adjusted).
CONDUCT PROCUREMENTS - Sample
Questions

1. Purchase orders are usually set-up in what form:
a. firm fixed price
b. cost plus fixed fee
c. cost plus award fee
d. fixed price economic price adjustment

2. Bidder conferences:
a. are used to ensure that all sellers have a clear understanding of the requirement
b. are held after the proposals have been submitted
c. are a meeting between the buyer and the winning seller(s)
d. are used by the buyer to select the winning seller(s)

3. Some government jurisdictions require what tool and technique of conduct
procurements:
a. advertising
b. seller proposals
c. procurement statement of work
d. make-or-buy decisions

4. Independent estimates:
a. serve as a standard... what should the work cost?
b. are always prepared internally
c. are always prepared externally
d. are prepared by the potential sellers who are bidding on the work

5. If sellers deviate greatly from the independent estimate we need to ask all of the
following questions except:
a. was the procurement statement of work clear
b. is there a misunderstanding
c. is there a seller who failed to respond fully
d. did the negotiations take too long
CONDUCT PROCUREMENTS - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section12.2.3.2 (this idea is not explicit in the book)
Y         a. Purchase orders are usually simple contracts set-up as firm fixed price.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.2.2.1
          a. The bidder conference is a meeting in which the buyer invites all the potential
          sellers. The sellers are allowed to ask questions, though in general the questions
Y
          are submitted in writing before the conference. The primary goal is to ensure that
          all potential sellers truly understand the needs of the buyer.
          b. The bidder conference is held before the proposals are submitted. Often sellers
N
          need to have questions answered at the bidder conference to write the proposals.
N         c. All the potential sellers are invited to the bidder conference.
          d. The bidder conference is not about selecting the winning seller. The meeting is
N
          to ensure that all potential sellers understand the needs of the buyer.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.2.2.5
          a. Some government jurisdictions require that certain government procurements
Y
          be advertised.
          b., c., and d. While these answers are all good ideas, the question is getting at a
N
          legal requirement.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.2.2.3
Y         a. Independent estimates tell us how much "should" the work cost.
          b. and c. Be careful of the term always. Independent estimates may be developed
N
          internally or externally.
          d. Independent estimates are independent. They are not developed by the potential
N
          sellers.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.2.2.3
          d. Negotiations occur after the proposals are submitted. Therefore, they do not
Y
          affect the proposal price.
          a. If the procurement statement of work was not clear, the sellers may propose
N
          prices different from the independent estimates.
          b. If there is a misunderstanding, especially regarding requirements, the sellers
N
    may propose prices different from the independent estimates.
    c. If there is a seller who fails to respond fully, the seller's proposed price may
N
    be different from the independent estimates.
Manage Stakeholder Engagement

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 13-9 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.

   In this process we follow the stakeholder management plan to actively engage with
   our stakeholders to increase the likelihood of success.


INPUTs of Manage stakeholder engagement (not all
listed)

   Stakeholder management plan -                            this plan tells us very
   specifically how to engage our key stakeholders to increase the chance of project
   success.


   Communication management plan -                                 this plan tells us
   what communication goes to what stakeholders at what time, in what format, etc.


   Change log - stakeholders request changes on the project. Regardless of
   whether they were the stakeholder who requested the change, stakeholders want to
   be informed of what changes were approved and what ones were rejected and the
   status of the approved changes.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of manage stakeholder
engagement

   Communication methods -                            it is important to choose the
   appropriate communication methods based on the needs of the stakeholders, the
   project, and the particular type of communication.
OUTPUTs of manage stakeholder engagement (not
all listed)

   Issue logs should be utilized to ensure that all project issues are resolved and
   closed. They also are a great communication tool as they let our stakeholders know
   that their issues are important to us, that owners have been assigned and resolution
   will occur.




   Change requests - many executing processes and all monitoring and
   controlling processes have change requests as an output.
MANAGE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT -
Sample Questions

1. The ability of the stakeholders to influence the project is:
a. lowest at the start and gets progressively higher as the project progresses
b. flat throughout the life of the project
c. highest at the start and gets progressively lower as the project progresses
d. lowest at the start, peaks during execution, and gets lower throughout closure

2. How is the change log related to manage stakeholder engagement?
a. an input
b. a tool and technique
c. an output
d. not related

3. Issue logs are an input to what processes?
a. manage project team, control communications, and control stakeholder engagement
b. manage stakeholder engagement and manage project team
c. control communications and manage stakeholder engagement
d. control communications and perform integrated change control

4. Interpersonal skills include:
a. presentation skills
b. negotiating
c. writing skills
d. building trust

5. The change log is an output of what process?
a. manage stakeholder engagement
b. monitor and control project work
c. perform integrated change control
d. control stakeholder engagement
MANAGE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT -
Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.3
          c. The ability of any stakeholder to influence the project is highest at the start and
Y
          gets lower throughout the project.
N         a. In general the cost of changes is lowest at the start and get progressively higher.
N         b. Hard to imagine anything that stays flat throughout the project life cycle.
          d. Often our cost and staffing levels are lowest at the start, peak during an
N
          implementation type phase, and drops off during closure.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.3.1.3
          a. The change log is an input to manage stakeholder expectations. The
Y
          stakeholders want to know the status of their change requests.
N         b. Logs are never tools and techniques.
N         c. The issue log is an output of manage stakeholder expectations.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-9
          a. Issue logs are an input to manage project team, control communications, and
Y
          control stakeholder engagement.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.3.2.2
Y         d. Interpersonal skills include building trust.
          a. and c. These are great skills to have but would not be considered interpersonal
N
          skills.
N         b. Negotiating is a management skill, not an interpersonal skill.


5.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-9
          c. The change log is an output of perform integrated change control and an input to
Y         manage stakeholder expectations. All change requests are either approved or
          rejected as part of perform integrated change control.
EXECUTING- Knowledge and Skills
The ideas discussed below are based on information provided by the PMP(R) Exam
Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) and may or may not be directly referenced in the
PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Interdependencies among project elements -                                        The
     project management plan is a central document that integrates the outputs of the other
     planning processes. Since there are a large number of interdependencies among the
     many project elements, the project manager must understand and manage these
     interdependencies. The PMIS (project management information system) is a tool and
     technique of both the direct and manage project work process and the monitor and
     control project work process. The PMIS provides access to many project tools and
     techniques.
MINI-TEST after EXECUTING PROCESSES -
Questions

It is strongly recommended that you do not mark the questions below so you may attempt
them again later. These questions are drawn from all areas of the PMP(R) Exam, and many
are from outside of the PMBOK(R) Guide.

1. Your manager has just returned from a two-hour executive briefing on project
management. He has the PMBOK(R) Guide in hand and is very excited to teach you
everything he has learned. What should be your response when he explains the
importance of following the PMBOK(R) Guide processes on all your projects?
a. the project manager, along with the project management team should determine which
PMBOK(R) Guide processes are appropriate as well as the appropriate degree of rigor
b. the PMBOK(R) Guide processes should all be applied uniformly to every project
c. the probability of project success increases based on the number of PMBOK(R) Guide
processes applied to the project
d. the PMBOK(R) Guide is a methodology. It should either be applied completely or not at
all on projects

2. The system upgrade project is almost ready to enter into the planning processes.
What is often the last task in initiating before moving to planning?
a. perform a project assessment
b. conduct benefit analysis
c. inform stakeholders of the approved charter
d. propose an implementation strategy

3. Most successful organizations today have a strategic plan. A key element of the
plan is the organization's mission. One definition of a mission is:
a. why the organization exists and what it plans to achieve
b. what the future state of the organization will look like
c. how the organization will evaluate necessary trade-offs and balance the decisions to
be made
d. what benefits the project is expected to deliver

4. The project manager should participate in the development of the project charter
and inform stakeholders of the approved project charter. The charter should
include:
a. a strategy to engage project stakeholders
b. key deliverables
c. the project exclusions
d. the project schedule baseline

5. All of the following are considered characteristics of a good estimate except:
a. clear identification of tasks
b. narrow participation in preparing the estimate
c. recognition of inflation
d. recognition of excluded costs


6. Currently you are overseeing the planning for a large software upgrade project.
Your team is in the process of deconstructing the scope. A likely tool and technique
they may use is:
a. the scope backlog
b. a precedence diagraming method
c. a cause and effect diagram
d. dependency determination

7. After an exhaustive search on best practices related to knowledge management it
was concluded that one person or organization should own responsibility for
knowledge management on projects. As the head of your organization's PMO you
have also been named chief knowledge officer. Research also tells you that people
place a strong value on:
a. capturing all the knowledge of an organization
b. identifying critical knowledge in the organization
c. focusing on knowledge outside and not inside the organization
d. limiting sharing of knowledge across such boundaries as research, development and
operations

8. Leadership is important throughout the life of the project. Effective leadership is
most important:
a. early in the project to communicate the vision
b. during project planning to obtain a detailed project plan
c. late in the project as the plan is being executed and the team is getting off track
d. at the end of the project as we are obtaining final acceptance
9. As a project manager you are hearing multiple "unofficial" complaints about the
safety of the work site. In fact, some suppliers now are hesitant to have people
support your project. What should you do first?
a. have the site inspected for safety and then follow up with any required actions
b. remind your suppliers that they are under contract and must perform
c. find out who is making the complaints and discuss the situation with them so they feel
better
d. do nothing. If there was really a problem your safety manager would have brought it to
your attention.

10. Geert Hofstede's cultural dimension of long term orientation refers to:
a. virtues such as perseverance and thrift
b. minimizing unstructured situations
c. our obligation to others
d. unequal distribution of power is a basic fact of life

11. Most of your project team is struggling with Jeff, the lead developer on the
team. Jeff has trouble managing relationships to move people in the desired
direction. Based on Daniel Goleman's mixed model for emotional intelligence Jeff
needs to work more on:
a. self-awareness
b. self-regulation
c. social skills
d. empathy

12. Your current web upgrade project is at an impasse. The current platform the
team is using is working well but a new platform is being proposed. There are pros
and cons to switching. At this point, you realize that acceptance and buy in to the
decision are more important than the actual decision. The most likely decision
making model you will use is:
a. command
b. consultation
c. consensus
d. coin flip

13. Early on in the project you are working with the critical stakeholders to
determine requirements. You have many years of experience as a technologist and
now as a project manager on this type of work. Stakeholders want to meet with you
separately to share their unique point of view. At this point you should:
a. request each stakeholder write a detailed description of his or her ideas and then
merge all the ideas together
b. write a detailed list of requirements based on your past experience for stakeholder
approval
c. set up focus groups and have a facilitator walk the stakeholders through an interactive
discussion on requirements
d. demand that stakeholders agree with your ideas on requirements since you are the most
qualified person from a technical standpoint to determine requirements

14. Historically, your organization has struggled with cost management. While
running projects, it is often confusing to the team how much money has been
allocated for each activity. Even more confusing is how to collect actual cost data.
Therefore, you have decided on your current project to put a much stronger focus
on cost management. At an early team meeting the members of the core team are
arguing as to what is really the first thing to do to address this issue. You tell them
we must focus first on:
a. developing a cost management plan
b. using specific levels of accuracy to estimate costs
c. tracking every cost on the project regardless of the size of the cost
d. gaining management approval for the project budget

15. General financial management techniques such as return on investment are
considered part of project cost management:
a. for every project
b. for all projects with large budgets
c. for capital facilities projects
d. never for projects

16. Often spending less money on the project than we should leads to:
a. a higher quality product
b. more detailed requirements
c. spending less money to maintain the project's product long term
d. spending more money to maintain the project's product long term

17. A general management technique sometimes used in cost management is:
a. make or buy analysis
b. discounted cash flow
c. leading teams
d. organizational theory

18. The cost baseline is developed as part of which process?
a. plan cost management
b. estimate costs
c. determine budget
d. control costs

19. The amount of cost variance allowed on a project usually:
  a.    increases over the life of the project
  b.    decreases over the life of the project
  c.    remains the same over the life of the project
  d.    starts low, gets much higher in the intermediate phases, and drops off during the
 final phase

20. It is easier to have a large influence on project cost:
a. late in the project
b. early in the project
c. after the scope has been defined
d. throughout the project life cycle

21. Historically, your organization has struggled with quality management. In fact if
you asked most team members about quality on projects their response may be -
what quality? Therefore, you have decided on your current project to put a much
stronger focus on quality management. At an early team meeting the members of
the core team are arguing as to what is really the first thing to do to address this
issue. You tell them we must focus first on:
a. analyzing the quality processes
b. assessing current performance
c. recommending changes
d. developing a quality management plan

22. Shewhart and Deming are famous for what cycle?
a. concept-development-execution-closeout
b. plan-do-check-act
c. forming-storming-norming-performing
d. initiating-planning-executing-monitoring, and controlling-closing
23. The monitoring and controlling process group corresponds to what component of
the plan-do-check-act cycle?
a. do-check
b. check-act
c. act-plan
d. plan-do

24. Conformance to requirements means:
a. the product or service needs to satisfy the real needs
b. category for products having the same use but different characteristics
c. fitness for use
d. the project produces what it was created to produce


25. Fitness for use means:
a. the product or service needs to satisfy the real needs
b. category for products having same use but different characteristics
c. conformance to requirements
d. the project produces what it was created to produce

26. Accuracy is:
a. the product or service needs to satisfy the real needs
b. an assessment of correctness
c. conformance to requirements
d. a measure of exactness

27. Precision is:
a. the product or service needs to satisfy the real needs
b. an assessment of correctness
c. conformance to requirements
d. a measure of exactness

28. Which of the following statements is true related to prevention and inspection:
a. quality management believes in inspection over prevention
b. prevention and inspection result in the same costs
c. prevention and inspection mean the same thing
d. quality management believes in prevention over inspection

29. Modern quality management wants to:
a. minimize variation
b. focus on inspection over prevention
c. increase grade on all products
d. increase the cost of quality

30. The process of auditing the results of quality control measurements is called:
a. plan quality management
b. project quality management
c. perform quality assurance
d. control quality


31. Quality management plans:
a. should be created for all projects
b. should be created for all large projects
c. should be created for all projects with complex products
d. should be created only for software projects

32. The basis for quality improvement is:
a. Monte Carlo analysis
b. plan-do-check-act
c. configuration management
d. change control system

33. Which of the following statements is true related to quality and grade?
a. low quality may not always be a problem
b. we should always deliver high grade
c. quality and grade are basically the same thing
d. low grade may not always be a problem

34. Grade is:
a. category for products having the same use but different characteristics
b. conformance to requirements
c. fitness for use
d. a measure of exactness

35. At the end of your last project your team spent a large amount of time collecting
lessons learned. The most important lessons were related to the project team itself.
Many team members did not understand their responsibilities but also did not
understand the responsibilities of other members of the project team. Most senior
members did not understand the reporting structure or when and how to acquire and
release other team members. Therefore, you have decided to put a strong focus on
human resource management on your current project. You believe the first thing to
do is:
a. hire more experienced team members for senior positions
b. monitor more closely how senior team members interact with junior team members
c. be more involved with the acquisition and release of each team member
d. create a human resource management plan

36. The project management team is another name for:
a. the project team
b. the project stakeholders
c. the core, executive, or leadership team
d. the program managers

37. Conflict management is a tool and technique of:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

38. The process of improving the overall team environment is called:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

39. Team performance assessments are an output of:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

40. Project performance appraisals are a tool and technique of:
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

41. Matters such as funding are often the responsibility of the:
a. project team
b. project management team
c. project manager
d. project sponsor
MINI-TEST after EXECUTING PROCESSES -
Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 1.1
          a. The project manager and project management team must determine what
Y
          specific information from the PMBOK(R) Guide will benefit the project.
N         b., c. and d. The PMBOK(R) Guide is not a methodology. It should not be applied
          uniformly. Not all processes may be required or be beneficial on all projects.


2.   c.   PMP(R) Examination Content Outline Initiating-Task 8- June 2015
Y         c. Based on the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline, the last task of initiating is
          to inform stakeholders of the approved charter.


3.   a.   Web search on Vision, Mission, Values
Y         a. An organization's mission states why the organization exists.
N         b. The desired future state of an organization is the organization's vision.
          c. Organizations often look to their values to add them in making necessary trade-
N
          offs and general decision-makings.
          d. The benefits register should list the expected benefits from a project or
N
          program.


4.   b.   PMP(R) Examination content outline Initiating-Task 2- June 2015
Y         b. The key deliverables should be included in the project charter.
          a. The stakeholder management (engagement) plan should describe the strategy
N
          employed to engage the stakeholders.
N         c. The project exclusions should be included in the scope statement.
N         d. The project schedule baseline should be included in the project plan.


5.   b.   PMI(R) Practice Standard for Project Estimating 2011
          b. A best practice with project estimating is wide participation in preparing the
Y
          estimate. Multiple people may be involved in preparing estimates.


6.   a.   PMP(R) Examination Content Outline June 2015
          a. Multiple tools and techniques may be used to deconstruct the scope including
Y         the scope backlog.
N         b. and d. These tools and techniques are related to time and not scope.
          c. The cause and effect diagram is often associated with quality though it could be
N
          applicable in many other areas.


7.   b.
Y         b. The key term in the answer is "critical".
N         a. I would eliminate this answer because of the term "all".
          c. Knowledge originating both inside and outside the organization may be
N
          captured.
N         d. An important aspect of knowledge sharing is sharing across boundaries.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section X3.1
          a. Leadership is important throughout the project but is most important early in the
Y
          project's lifetime when the vision underlying the project is communicated.


9.   a.
          a. If there are concerns related to safety we must investigate and take corrective
Y
          action as required.
N         b. We should not force our contractors into situations where they feel unsafe.
          c. The last part of this statement makes it wrong. We need to address the safety
N
          concern, not just make people feel better.
          d. As project manager, we assume responsibility for all aspects of the project,
N
          including safety.


10. a.    Wikipedia - Hofstede's cultural dimensions theory
          a. According to Hofstede's cultural dimension of long-term orientation we value
Y
          the future and therefore view perseverance and thrift as virtues.
          b. A society exhibiting strong uncertainty avoidance will try to minimize the
N
          occurrence of unstructured situations.
N         c. A society with a collective view will focus on our obligations to others.
          d. A society that accepts large discrepancies in power may view unequal
N
          distribution of power as a basic fact of life.


11. c.    Wikipedia - Emotional Intelligence
          c. Jeff is struggling with social skills. Social skills help us manage relationships
Y        in order to move people in the desired direction.



12. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide X3.6
         c. If buy-in is more important than the decision itself we most likely will use the
Y
         consensus style of decision making style.


13. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 5.2.2.2
         c. In general when we have an issue with stakeholders or stakeholders have an
Y
         issue with one another, we will want to hold a meeting to resolve the issue.


14. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 7 - Introduction
Y        a. The cost management plan defines all the other cost processes.
         b., c., and d. The cost management plan defines how to perform each of these
N
         activities. Therefore, the cost management plan must come first.


15. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 7 - Introduction
         c. Capital facility projects often employ return on investment (ROI) as part of cost
Y
         management.
         a., b., and d. Exercise caution when the term "every", the term "all", and the term
N        "never" are used. ROI is not considered part of "every" projects cost
         management processes.


16. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 7 - Introduction
         d. We need to balance spending decisions on the project as they relate to the
         project's long term costs. For example, by spending less on the project, we may
Y
         end up spending more in the long term maintaining the product. If we use cheap
         material to build a product, it may cost more long term to maintain the product.
N        a. Spending less on the project may lead to a lower quality product.
         b. Spending less on the project may mean we spend less on developing good
N
         requirements.
         c. When we spend less on the project we may end up spending more, not less, to
N
         maintain the product long term.


17. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 7 - Introduction
         b. Discounted cash flow is a general management technique sometimes used in
Y        project cost management. Discounted cash flow is a way of estimating the value
         of a project by using the time value of money.
         a. Make-or-buy analysis is a general management tool and technique sometimes
N
         used in project procurement management.
N        c. Team leadership is employed in project human resource management.
         d. Organizational theory is a tool and technique of plan human resource
N
         management.


18. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 7 - Introduction
Y        c. The cost baseline is an output of determine budget.
         a. Plan cost management is the process whereby the cost management plan, not the
N
         cost baseline is developed.
N        b. The output of estimate costs is the cost estimates, not the cost baseline.
N        d. The input, not the output of control costs is the cost baseline.


19. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: 7.1.3.1 (control thresholds)
         b. The closer we get to project completion the less cost variance we will often
Y
         allow. The PMBOK(R) Guide does not clearly define this.
N        a. This statement is just the opposite of what is true.
         c. and d. At the beginning of a project, a wide cost variance is typically
N        permissible. As we approach completion, the cost variance allowed tends to
         decrease.


20. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 2-9 and Chapter 7 - Introduction (implied)
Y        b. Influencing costs is easier, earlier in the project.
N        a. Influencing costs is more difficult, later in the project.
N        c. and d. Influencing costs is easier, earlier in the project.


21. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         d. Since the quality management plan defines how to perform these other
Y
         activities, it must be developed first.
         a., b., and c. The quality management plan defines how to inspect deliverables,
N
         assess performance, and recommend changes.


22. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
Y
         b. Shewhart and Deming are famous for developing the plan-do-check-act cycle.
N        a. For some organizations these may be the phases of their project life cycle.
N        c. These are four of the five phases of Tuchman's ladder.
N        d. These are the five process groups.


23. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-2
Y        b. Monitoring and controlling corresponds to check-act.
N        a., c., and d. Planning corresponds to plan. Executing corresponds to do.


24. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         d. Conformance to requirements, as defined by Crosby, means the project
Y
         produces what it was created to produce.
         a. and c. Fitness for use, as defined by Juran, means the product or service should
N
         satisfy real needs.
         b. Grade is employed to categorize products having the same use but differing
N
         characteristics.


25. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         a. Fitness for use, as defined by Juran, means the product or service should satisfy
Y
         real needs.
         b. Grade is employed to categorize products having the same use but differing
N
         characteristics.
         c. and d. Conformance to requirements, as defined by Crosby, means the project
N
         produces what it was created to produce.


26. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         b. Accuracy is a measure of how close a measurement is to its true value and thus;
Y
         it is a measure of correctness.
         a. Fitness for use defines how well a product or service meets the real-world
N
         needs it was created to satisfy.
         c. Conformance to requirements measures how successful a project is in
N
         producing what it was created to produce.
         d. Precision is quantified by the degree to which repeated measures produce the
N
         same results. Thus, it is a measure of exactness.


         PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction d. Precision is
27. d.   quantified by the degree to which repeated measures produce the same results.
Y        Thus, it is a measure of exactness.
         a. Fitness for use defines how well a product or service meets the real-world
N
         needs it was created to satisfy.
         b. Accuracy is a measure of how close a measurement is to its true value and thus;
N
         it is a measure of correctness.
         c. Conformance to requirements measures how successful a project is in
N
         producing what it was created to produce.


28. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
Y        d. This is a true statement.
N        a. Quality management focuses on prevention over inspection.
         b. Preventing errors is usually much less expensive than inspecting and correcting
N
         errors.
N        c. Prevention is proactive whereas inspection is reactive.


29. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
Y        a. Reducing variation in processes is a goal of quality management.
N        b. Quality management focuses on prevention over inspection.
         c. Our goal should not be to increase grade of all products but to produce the
N
         grade the customer requires.
         d. Our goal should be to decrease the cost of quality while maintaining the same
N
         (or higher) quality standards.


30. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         c. Auditing quality control measurements is an element of perform quality
Y
         assurance.
         a. Plan quality management is the process of determining our quality standards
N
         and developing a plan to achieve these standards.
N        b. Project quality management is a knowledge area, not a process.
         d. Control quality is the process of monitoring and recording results of executing
N
         the quality activities to access performance and recommend necessary changes.


31. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         a. Quality management plans should be created for all projects. NOTE- In general
         during test taking, we should pay special attention to answers with the word "all"
Y        in them. Here, however, is an example where the answer with the word "all" is
         the best answer.

N        b. and c. These answers are true. Answer "a" is a better answer.
         d. Pay special attention to answers with the word "only". Quality management
N
         plans should be created for all projects.


32. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
Y        b. Plan-do-check-act is the basis for quality improvement.
N        a. Monte Carlo analysis is a simulation tool.
         c. Configuration management is a system for establishing control of products (and
N
         services).
N        d. A change control system helps maintain the project's scope.


33. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Introduction
         d. Producing a product categorized as low grade may not always be a problem.
Y        Low grade is acceptable if the customer only requires a product classified as low
         grade.
         a. Quality products should always be delivered. Quality is measured as the
N
         degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements.
         b. We should deliver the grade the customer needs--no more, no less. c. Quality
         and grade are very different concepts. Quality is the degree to which a set of
N        inherent characteristics fulfills requirements. Grade is a category assigned to
         products or services having the same functional use but differing technical
         characteristics.


34. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Project Quality Management - Introduction
         a. Grade is a category for products having the same use but different
Y
         characteristics.
N        b. Crosby defined quality in terms of conformance to requirements.
N        c. Joseph Juran defined quality in terms of fitness for use.
         d. Precision sometimes is defined as a measure of exactness. Thus it is a measure
N
         of repeatability.


35. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 9 - Introduction
         d. The human resource plan will describe the roles and responsibilities of each
Y        position on the team. It will also include an organizational chart to show reporting
         relationships.
N        a. The question does not tell us if our senior team members lacked experience.
         b. The question does not tell us if there are issues between the senior and junior
N
         team members that need to be monitored more closely.
         c. It may not be a good use of our time to be involved in the acquisition and
N
         release of each team member.


36. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 9 - Introduction
         c. The project management team are the members of the project team that help
Y        with the work related to managing the project. This team is sometimes also called
         the core, executive, or leadership team.
         a. The project management team is a subset of the project team. As an example,
N        the project management team may have 10 members while the project team has
         1,000 members.
         b. The project management team is a subset of the project team, which, in turn, is
         a subset of the stakeholders. The project team does the work of the project. The
N
         stakeholders are anyone and everyone who could affect or be affected by the
         project.
N        d. Program managers manage the programs, not the projects.


37. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 9-1
Y        d. On a day-to-day basis, we manage the project, including managing conflict.
         a. Organizational theory is a tool and technique of plan human resource
N
         management.
N        b. Pre-assignment is an example of a tool and technique of acquire project team.
         c. Training and team building are examples of tools and techniques of develop
N
         project team.


38. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 9 - Introduction
         c. During the process of develop project team, we want to improve the
Y
         environment so as to improve project performance.
         a. During the process of plan human resource development we want to develop
N        our human resource plan, including the organizational chart, staffing management
         plan, etc.
         b. During the process of acquire project team we acquire the people we need for
N        the project team. Be aware that, in all likelihood, we will not acquire the whole
         team at once, but rather in stages, based on our need for particular skill sets.
N        d. During the process of manage project team we interact with our team members
         in a way to help them perform their work on the project. This may include conflict
         management, etc.


39. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 9-1
         c. As we develop the project team we will want to create team performance
Y        assessments to measure how the team and the project are performing against the
         project objectives.
         a. It is too early to assess team performance during the process plan human
N
         resource management because we have not acquired the project team.
         b. It is too early to assess team performance during the process acquire project
N        team because our focus at this point is on acquiring the team members, not
         measuring performance.
         d. Manage project team is the process in which we interact with our team
N        members and measure their individual performance. It is not the process related
         to measuring how the team is performing against project objectives.


40. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 9-1
         d. The title of this tool and technique may be misleading to many of us, including
         me. The tool and technique, project performance appraisals, is used to measure
Y
         the performance of individual team members. It is used during manage project
         team.
         a. and b. The tool and technique, project performance appraisals, is used to
N        measure the performance of individual team members. The processes, plan human
         resource management and acquire project team, would be too early.
         c. The tool and technique, project performance appraisals, is used to measure the
N        performance of individual team members. We use this tool during the process,
         manage project team.


EXAM TIP: Do not confuse the phrase "team performance assessment" with the phrase
"project performance appraisals".


41. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 9 - Introduction
Y        d. A project's sponsor is at a high enough level to secure funding for the project.
         a., b., and c. The project team, the project management team, and the project
N        manager are usually not high enough in an organization's hierarchy to secure
         funding.
 MONITORING AND CONTROLLING
         PROCESSES
Monitoring and Controlling Process Group - Based on
the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are 11 processes of Monitoring and Controlling. There are
several important aspects to the monitoring and controlling process group:
*    Monitoring includes those activities when we ask how work is progressing on the
      project
*    Controlling includes recommending corrective action to get us back on plan and
      preventative action to keep us on plan
*    During the monitoring and controlling process group the project manager should be
      very proactive regarding change control. Change management includes:
                            Ensuring that all approved changes are implemented
                            Ensuring that only approved changes are implemented


Based on the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) there are seven (7)
tasks of Monitoring and Controlling. These tasks represent 25% of your exam content. Key
phrases associated with each task are:


Task                       Key Phrases
Task 1                                               Measure project performance
Task 2                                              Manage changes to the project
Task 3                            Verify that the project deliverables conform to the quality standards
Task 4                                                 Monitor and assess risks
Task 5                          Review the issue log, update if necessary and determine correct actions
Task 6                                      Capture, analyze, and manage lessons learned
Task 7                                              Monitor procurement activities


The PMBOK(R) Guide, the most often selected reference in studying for the PMP(R) exam,
does not list the tasks comprising the monitoring and controlling process group but
emphasizes processes instead. Although not as robust as the PMBOK(R) Guide for in-depth
study, the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline presents the tasks shown in the table
above. Although memorizing these tasks for the exam is not necessary, reviewing them from
time to time is recommended because they form the basis of the PMP(R) exam's questions on
monitoring and controlling. As we cover the 11 processes in the monitoring and controlling
process group in the upcoming pages, you can see how these tasks relate to the processes.
Monitor and Control Project Work

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 4-9 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


Monitor project work is what we do day by day to track, review, and report on how we are
progressing against the project plan. This process is important because the project reports
are created to keep the stakeholders informed of project status and forecasts.
Monitoring and Controlling:
MONITORING                                                  CONTROLLING
                                                              Controlling helps the project manager determine what:
Monitoring should be continuous over the life of the project. * corrective action is needed to get the project back on
It gives the project manager and the project management           plan and
team insight into how the project is going.                   * preventative action is needed to make sure the project
                                                                  doesn't get off of plan.



   EXAM TIP: The process "monitor and control project work" can easily be confused
with the process group "monitoring and controlling." Be very careful to read the
questions when you see these terms to know if they are referring to just the one process
or the entire process group.


MONITOR           and     CONTROL PROJECT
                                                            MONITORING AND CONTROLLING
WORK
Process of the Monitoring and Controlling Process Group.    Process Group composed of 11 processes
                                                           Those processes required to track, review, and orchestrate
The process of tracking, reviewing, and reporting the
                                                           the progress and performance of the project, identify any
progress to meet the performance objectives defined in the
                                                           areas in which changes to the plan are required, and initiate
project plan.
                                                           those changes.




INPUTs of monitor and control project work

       Project management plan -
                          *     the baselines of the project plan are used to help you see how
                        your project is progressing against the plan
                 *    The management plans are used to help you control the project


  Schedule forecasts - these forecasts come from the control schedule
  process. They help you understand how your project is progressing against your
  schedule baseline and if you need to request changes.


  Cost forecasts - these forecasts come from the control cost process. They
  help you understand how your project is performing against the cost baseline and if
  you need to request changes.


  Validated Changes - these come from the control quality process.
  Validated means the change was implemented correctly. This information is required
  for the work performance reports.


  Work performance information -                            this information comes
  from several controlling processes. This information, based on work performance
  data, may be used for decision-making.


  Enterprise environment factors -                  this is your project
  environment. The PMIS (project management information system) is an
  environmental factor.


  Organizational process assets - Example - Organizational
  communication requirements- knowing these requirements may help you as you
  create work performance reports from the work performance information.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of monitor and control
project work

  Expert judgment - go out and seek experts to help monitor (see how
  your project is doing) and control (determining what corrective or preventative
     action is required) the project work


     Analytical techniques -                     these techniques are used to forecast
     potential future events on the project


     Project management information system (PMIS)
     provides access to other systems to help with monitoring and controlling


   EXAM TIP: Work authorization system is a subset of the PMIS. The work
authorization system ensures that work is performed at the appropriate time, in the
appropriate sequence, and by the appropriate organization. Do you have a system that
helps you do this?


     Meetings -used to help you monitor and control project work. Remember the
     types of meetings and rules for meetings?


OUTPUTs of monitor and control project work

     Change requests - these requests will be outputs of many processes.
     Change requests become an input to integrated change control for approval (or
     rejection).


   EXAM TIP: All monitoring and controlling processes and many of the executing
processes have change requests as an output.


     Work performance reports                    are the physical or electronic
     versions of work performance information. Reports are required to keep the
     stakeholders informed.


     Project management plan updates - after change requests
are approved through perform integrated change control they may lead to project
management plan updates.


Project documentation updates - after change requests are
approved through perform integrated change control they may lead to project
documentation updates. Note: work performance reports are an example of project
documentation.
MONITOR AND CONTROL PROJECT WORK -
Sample Questions

1. Approved change requests are an input to which process:
a. monitor and control project work
b. perform integrated change control
c. develop project management plan
d. direct and manage project work

2. The enterprise environmental factor that ensures activities start at the right time
and in the right sequence is:
a. work authorization system
b. lessons learned database
c. process measurement database
d. financial control procedures

3. The project management plan has many elements including:
a. forecasts
b. issue log
c. performance reports
d. scope baseline

4. The project management information system (PMIS) is:
a. considered work performance information
b. considered an organizational process asset
c. a tool and technique of monitor and control project work
d. a tool and technique of integrated change control

5. Which of the following statements is true about change requests:
a. most monitoring and controlling processes have change requests as output
b. all executing processes have change requests as output
c. all planning processes have change requests as output
d. all initiating processes have change requests as output

6. It has been determined that several of the deliverables due today do not meet the
technical specifications. A change request has been generated and approved. The
defects are repaired. Defect repair is really another name for:
a. corrective action
b. preventive action
c. rework
d. scope updates

7. It seems that project activities never follow the sequence of the project plan.
What system may help address this problem?
a. the configuration management system
b. the change control system
c. the information distribution system
d. the work authorization system
MONITOR AND CONTROL PROJECT WORK -
Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-7
          d. The project plan and the approved changes are inputs to direct and manage
Y
          project work.
N         a. Change requests are an output of monitor and control project work.
          b. Approved changes are an output, not input, of perform integrated change
N
          control.
          c. Approved changes are not an input or output of develop project management
N
          plan.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.4.1.6 and 4.5.1.4
Y         a. In general systems are EEFs.
          b., c., and d. Databases, though not commercial databases, and procedures are
N
          normally organizational process assets (OPAs).


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.1.1
Y         d. The project plan has at least three (3) baselines: scope, schedule, and cost.
          a., b., and c. These are examples of project documents, not elements of the project
N
          plan.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.4.2.3
          c. PMIS is a tool and technique of direct and manage project work and monitor
Y
          and control project work.
          a. This answer is not related. Work performance information comes from work
N
          performance data.
N         b. Systems are usually considered EEFs not OPAs.
N         d. PMIS is not a tool of perform integrated change control.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.1.3 and Figure 4-9
Y         a. Most monitoring and controlling processes have change requests as output.
N         b. Many executing processes have change requests as output.
N         c. Only one planning process has change requests as output.
N         d. No initiating processes has change requests as an output.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.3.3.3
Y         c. Rework is another name for defect repair.


7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Glossary
          d. The work authorization system ensures that work is performed at the
Y         appropriate time, in the appropriate sequence, and by the appropriation
          organization.
Perform Integrated Change Control

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 4-11 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


Perform integrated change control is the process where change requests are evaluated and
either approved or rejected. Notice Figure 4-11 in the PMBOK(R) Guide. On the left hand
side of this Figure, we can see that change requests come from many processes (most of the
monitoring and controlling processes and many of the executing processes).

It is important to ensure that only approved changes make it into the documents.
A few important ideas about perform integrated change control
                 *     Change requests may come from any stakeholder
               *     Change requests should always be put in writing
               *     When a change request is initiated:
                     1. Evaluate the change request to see how each of the six
                   constraints may be affected.
                      2.    Determine options along with a recommendation
                              a. One recommendation may be to not accept the change
                           request
                              b. Another recommendation may be to accept the change
                           request but add X amount of money to the budget and Y amount of
                           time to the schedule
                      3.    Get change approved through the change control board (CCB)
                      4. If the customer is not on CCB, get change approved through
                   customer
               *     This is a high level way to think about integrated change control.


   EXAM TIP: On the exam you may get questions that say such things as: "You have
received a change request. It will have no effect on the project schedule. What should be
done next?" This is tricky. What you want to do next is see if the change request will
have an effect on any of the other project constraints. You want to do this first before you
determine options.


     A few important ideas about configuration control:
                   *     Focused on the specification of deliverables and processes
                   *     Change control is a subset of configuration management
                   *     Configuration management is a subset of the PMIS (project
                management information system)
                   *     The PMIS is a subset of the EEF (enterprise environmental
                factors)


INPUTs of perform integrated change control

     Project management plan - this plan contains information that
     will help us with change control.
                     *    Change management plan
                     *    Configuration management plan
                     *    Scope baseline- scope changes may drive changes to other
                  baselines
     Work performance reports - ex. Earned value reports help us
     understand how the project is performing from an integrated scope, time, and cost
     standpoint against the plan.


     Change requests - this is the only process where change requests are
     an input. Remember that all change requests are processed for approval or rejection
     through integrated change control.


  EXAM TIP: Corrective action and preventative action affect performance against the
baselines, not the baselines themselves.



     Enterprise environmental factors -                         ex. PMIS (project
     management information system). The PMIS includes configuration management.
     Change management is a subset of configuration management.
     Organizational process assets -                               ex. Change control
     procedures: steps to modify documents


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of perform integrated
change control

     Expert judgment - bring in experts from inside the team. Also utilize
     the stakeholders to help evaluate change requests and approve or reject changes.


     Meetings -          the change control board (or boards) will have meetings to
     evaluate change requests and approve or reject changes.


     Change control tools - may help streamline:
                    *    Managing the change requests
                    *    Managing the decision process
                    *    Communicating with stakeholders
                    *    Distribution of decisions


OUTPUTs of perform integrated change control

     Approved change requests -                       change requests are either
     approved or rejected. Approved change requests become an input for direct and
     manage project execution. Requested changes may be fully rejected or rejected
     temporarily until more information is available.


     Change log - this log documents all change requests and the decisions to
     approve or reject changes. The change log becomes an input into manage stakeholder
     expectations.


Question- You have just been handed a change request. Your team member tells you that
the change will lead to a three week delay in project completion. What should you do
next:
a. recommend options to your management
b. make the change as soon as possible so as to shorten the three week delay
c. reject the change since it will delay the project
d. evaluate the change request

Solution- Answer d is the best answer. I know you are thinking that we already did this
and we know the project will be delayed three weeks. Even if we know this, we still
need to see how the proposed change may affect the cost, risk, etc. on the project. Just
because we know the schedule impact does not mean we know the other impacts.



A few other ideas:

Corrective and preventative actions                             normally do not change
baselines, only the performance against baselines.


Approved change requests -
               *     If an approved change request has an effect on the project scope, then
            the scope statement, the WBS and the WBS dictionary are revised and
            reissued to reflect the approved changes through the perform integrated change
            control process.

               *     If the approved change requests have an effect on the project besides
            the project scope, then the corresponding schedule baseline and cost baselines
            are revised and reissued to reflect the approved changes.


Updating baselines -
               *    The schedule baseline may be updated to reflect changes caused by
            schedule compression techniques.
              *     In some cases, cost variances can be so severe that a revised cost
            baseline is needed to provide a realistic basis for performance measurement.
PERFORM INTEGRATED CHANGE CONTROL
- Sample Questions

1. Change requests are approved or rejected in which process:
a. monitor and control project work
b. perform integrated change control
c. develop project management plan
d. direct and manage project work

2. Corrective action and preventative action normally affect the:
a. scope baseline
b. schedule baseline
c. cost baseline
d. performance against the baselines

3. Every change request related to the project, regardless of where they originate,
are inputs into which process:
a. monitor and control project work
b. perform integrated change control
c. develop project management plan
d. direct and manage project work

4. Who may request changes on a project:
a. the customer
b. the sponsor
c. the project team members
d. any stakeholder involved with the project

5. Which of the following statements is true about configuration management and
change control:
a. configuration management is focused on the specification while change control is
focused on baselines
b. change management is focused on the specification while configuration control is
focused on baselines
c. a configuration management knowledge base and change control procedures are
considered enterprise environmental factors
d. a configuration management knowledge base is considered an organizational process
asset while change control procedures are considered enterprise environmental factors

6. The change log is a(n):
a. subset of the project plan
b. project document
c. subset of the work authorization system
d. enterprise environmental factor

7. History tells you that projects in your organization have been troubled by the
lack of a system to submit, track, and validate changes. A configuration
management system is certainly what is needed. The configuration management
system is considered a subset of the:
a. organizational process assets
b. project management information system
c. change control system
d. expert judgment

8. You are managing a highway reconstruction project. The project includes several
miles of highway that have been damaged because of a recent flood. The local
government has created a new regulation that may affect your project. The goal of
the new regulation is to reduce the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding. A change request has been initiated. What should you do first in regard to
this request?
a. meet with your management to discuss the potential change
b. meet with the project sponsor to discuss the potential change
c. evaluate the change request
d. make the change since it is government mandated

9. The customer has requested another change to your public safety project. The
requested change is for public safety volunteers to act as scribes at geographically
diverse locations during safety incidents. This requested change seems to be a great
idea to you but you realize this idea was discussed before the project charter was
signed and the sponsor rejected the idea. At this point you should:
a. reject the change
b. make the change as soon as possible since the customer has requested it
c. get the change approved internally first
d. see how the change effects the other project constraints
PERFORM INTEGRATED CHANGE CONTROL
- Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
          b. The primary purpose of perform integrated change control is to approve or
Y
          reject change requests.
          a. and d. Change requests are an output of direct and manage project work and of
N         monitor and control project work and therefore cannot be approved or rejected in
          these processes.
          c. Change requests are not an input to develop a project management plan and
N
          therefore cannot be approved or rejected in this process.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.1.3
          d. Corrective and preventative action are the actions we take to stay on baseline
Y
          or to get back on the baseline. They normally do not change the baselines.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-11
Y         b. All project change requests are an input into perform integrated change control.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
Y         d. Any stakeholder may request a change.
N         a., b., and c. While all these answers are true answer d best answers the question.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
Y         a. This answer is true.
N         b. This answer is reversed.
N         c. and d. Knowledge bases and procedures are normally considered OPAs.


6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 4-1
Y         b. Change logs, issue logs, etc. are project documents; not part of the project plan.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.1.4
          b. The configuration management system is a subsystem of the PMIS which is a
Y         subset of the enterprise environmental factors (EEFs).

N         a. Systems are not organizational process assets (OPAs).
N         c. The change control system is a subset of the configuration management system.
N         d. Expert judgment is not related to this question.


8.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
          c. Evaluate the change request is the first thing we do when a change request
Y
          comes to us, regardless from whom the change request came.
          a. and b. We don't want to meet with our management or sponsor until we have
N         information about the impact of the requested change and are able to recommend
          alternatives.
          d. Every change request must be evaluated, even if it is mandated by the
N
          government. We may decide to cancel the project instead of making the change.


9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
          a. Since this idea was already discussed and the sponsor has already rejected it,
Y         we should reject it again. The question tells us nothing to make us believe that it
          would be considered now.
Control Scope

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 5-17 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


    CONTROL SCOPE, CONTROL SCHEDULE, and CONTROL COST are similar to
    each other. Seeing trends in processes may make the processes easier to understand
    and remember. We will look at these three processes one after the other in this book.


    As we review the definitions we can see similarities.




   EXAM TIP: Control scope is only about scope. Control schedule is only about
schedule. Control costs is only about costs.



    Scope creep - uncontrolled changes to the project scope. We do NOT want
    there to be scope creep on our project.


INPUTs of control scope

    Project management plan - contains multiple documents that we
    may use now.
                   *     Scope baseline- made up of three documents:
                               the scope statement
                               the WBS
                               the WBS dictionary
                  *    Other plans inside the project management plan:
                        *    Scope management plan- describes how to develop and
                      manage scope
                        *    Change management plan- defines how we make changes
                        *    Configuration management plan- defines items that fall
                      under the configuration management system and how to make
                      changes to those items
                        *    Requirements management plan- describes how to
                      manage requirements


   Requirements     documentation           and         the
   requirements traceability matrix - notice how we often see
   these two documents together. We use these to monitor how we are doing as far as
   scope.


   Organizational process assets - related to scope
   Work performance data - related to scope

TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of control scope

   Variance analysis - this is a tool and technique of many monitoring and
   controlling processes. In this process, we are asking: How are we varying from the
   scope baseline?


OUTPUTs of control scope

   Project plan updates               - specifically, the scope baseline updates
   correspond to the input of scope baseline, yet now the scope baseline may be
   updated.


   Project documentation updates - corresponds to the inputs of
requirements documentation and the requirements traceability matrix but now they
may be updated.


Organizational process assets updates - corresponds to
the input of organizational process assets, yet now there may be updates.


Work performance information                           - this corresponds to the
input of work performance data. Think of the data as raw data points. The work
performance information shows a comparison of the data with the scope baseline.


Change requests - every monitoring and controlling process has change
requests as an output. They all go to perform integrated change control for approval
or rejection.
CONTROL SCOPE - Sample Questions

1. Which of the following is an input of control scope?
a. cost baseline
b. schedule baseline
c. scope baseline
d. performance measurement baseline

2. The change requests that are an output of validate scope become an input of
which process?
a. develop project management plan
b. monitor and control project work
c. perform integrated change control
d. close project or phase

3. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of which process?
a. plan scope management
b. define scope
c. validate scope
d. control scope

4. Work performance information is an input to which process?
a. develop project management plan
b. monitor and control project work
c. perform integrated change control
d. close project or phase

5. Scope creep is another name for:
a. uncontrolled expansion of project scope
b. small changes that are processed through the change control system
c. changes that are rejected during the change control process
d. changes sent to integrated change control for processing

6. Project management plan updates become an input to which process?
a. develop project management plan
b. monitor and control project work
c. perform integrated change control
d. close project or phase

7. Work performance data is an input to control scope. This data comes from what
process?
a. develop project management plan
b. monitor and control project work
c. perform integrated change control
d. direct and manage project work

8. You are trying to introduce project management to your organization. The other
project managers see no reason to use standard project management practices
including no reason to use work breakdown structures. You explain that work
breakdown structures:
a. show the dependencies between project activities
b. describe the project objectives
c. list the project exclusions
d. help with project communications

9. You have completed 90 percent of your project deliverables. The customer has
been involved on a regular basis and to this point, has seemed very pleased with
your on schedule and on budget performance. The customer informs you that they
were expecting several additional deliverables that are not part of your plan. What
process may have prevented this situation?
a. define scope
b. control scope
c. control costs
d. perform control quality

10. The project team seems overwhelmed with the number of documents required
for the project. Which of the following documents should be created first?
a. scope statement
b. work breakdown structure
c. requirements documentation
d. scope baseline

11. Define scope is the process of:
a. creating the project scope management plan
b. creating the project scope statement
c. creating the work breakdown structure
d. creating the project management plan

12. The change management plan is an output of what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. integrated change control
c. monitor and control project work
d. plan communications
CONTROL SCOPE - Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.6.1.1
Y         c. Since the process is about scope, the input will be the scope baseline.
N         a. The cost baseline is an input of control cost.
N         b. The schedule baseline is an input of control schedule.
N         d. The performance measurement baseline integrates scope, schedule, and cost.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-17
Y         c. All change requests become an input of perform integrated change control.
          a. Change requests are neither an input of nor an output of develop project
N
          management plan.
          b. Change requests are an output of, not an input of, monitor and control project
N
          work.
N         d. Change requests are neither an input of nor an output of close project or phase.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.6.2.1
          d. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of both control scope and control
Y
          cost.
          a. and b. Variance analysis would not be a tool and technique of any planning
N
          process.
          c. Inspections and group decision-making techniques are tools and techniques of
N
          validate scope.


4.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-15
          b. All work performance information is an input of monitor and control project
Y
          work and only monitor and control project work.
          a., c., and d. Work performance information is only an input of monitor and
N
          control project work.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.6
          a. Scope creep in another name for uncontrolled changes to the project scope. We
Y
          do not want scope creep on our projects.
          b. and d. We want all change requests to be processed through integrated change
N
          control.
N         c. Changes that are rejected are called rejected changes.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-17
          a. This is a tricky question. If you look, outputs from other processes is an input to
Y         develop project management plan. If you look at the details you see that project
          plan updates is an example of an output from other processes.
N         b. The project plan is an input of monitor and control project work.
N         c. The project plan is an input of perform integrated change control.
N         d. The project plan is an input of close project or phase.


7.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-17
          d. All work performance data come from (is an output of) direct and manage
Y
          project work.
          a., b., and c. All work performance data come from (is an output of) direct and
N
          manage project work and only from direct and manage project work.


8.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
          d. The WBS does help with communication. Mostly though, I know this is the
Y
          right answer because I know the other three answers are wrong.
          a. The schedule or the network diagram show the dependencies between
N
          activities.
N         b. The project charter describes the project objectives.
N         c. The scope statement lists the project exclusions.


9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3
          a. Define scope helps us communicate what work we will be performing and
Y
          what work we will provide, and what work will be excluded.
          b., c., and d. Control scope, Control costs, and control quality are all processes of
N         the monitoring and controlling column. They are reactive not proactive processes
          and therefore most likely would not prevent this situation.


10. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 3-1
          c. From the list the order would be: requirements documentation, scope statement,
Y
          WBS, and finally the scope baseline (much later).
11. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.3.1
Y        b. Creating the project scope statement is the purpose of the define scope process.
         a. The scope management plan is created during the develop project management
N
         process.
N        c. Creating the work breakdown structure is the purpose of create WBS.
         d. Creating the project management plan is the purpose of develop project
N
         management plan.


12. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.3.1
         a. The change management plan is a subset of the project plan. Therefore, it is an
Y
         output of develop project management plan.
Control Schedule

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 6-23 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Control scope, control schedule, and control cost are similar to each other. Seeing
     trends in processes may make the processes easier to understand and remember.




   EXAM TIP: Control scope is only about scope. Control schedule is only about
schedule. Control cost in only about costs.


  EXAM TIP: Notice how some of the inputs have matching outputs. As an example: the
scope baseline is an input and the scope baseline updates are an output.



INPUTs of control schedule

     Project management plan - contains multiple documents that we
     may use now.
                   *      Schedule baseline- we review how the project is progressing
                 against the baseline
                    *    Another plan inside the project management plan:
                               Schedule management plan - describes how to develop
                        and manage the schedule
   Other documents related to the schedule
   Project schedule - this is the working schedule
   Project calendars - shows work periods for the project, etc.
   Schedule data - data related to the planning of the schedule. Ex. Milestones


   Work performance data                        - data (actuals) on what is occurring
   related to the schedule


   Organizational process assets - related to the schedule

TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of control schedule

   Performance reviews -                    review of how the project is performing
   against the schedule baseline.
                    *     Trend analysis- collects data to see if project performance is
                 getting better or worse against the schedule baseline.
                    *     Critical path method- looks at how the project is performing
                 on the critical path.
                    *     Critical chain method- looks at how the project is performing
                 on the critical chain. Specifically asks if we have enough buffer left to
                 protect the project end date.
                    *     Earned value method- earned value looks at schedule
                 performance based on what work should be complete (from the
                 schedule baseline) to what work is complete. Much more on this when
                 we get to control costs.


   Other tools and techniques from develop
   schedule - in simplistic terms, the same tools and techniques we use to
   develop the schedule we will use to control the schedule. Examples include:
                  *    Project management software
                  *    Resource optimization techniques
                  *    Modeling techniques
                  *    Leads and lags
                  *    Schedule compression
                  *     Scheduling tool


OUTPUTs of control schedule

   Work performance information                           - this corresponds to the
   input of work performance data. Think of the data as raw data points. The work
   performance information shows a comparison of the data with the schedule baseline.


   Schedule forecasts - based on actual performance. Now that we know
   how the project is performing against the schedule baseline we can forecast future
   performance. (more on this in control costs in earned value discussion).


   Change requests                 - most monitoring and controlling processes have
   change requests as an output. Change requests all go to perform integrated change
   control for approval or rejection.


   Project plan updates - - specifically the schedule baseline updates
   corresponds to the input of schedule baseline.


   Project documentation updates - correspond to the input- the
   project schedule.


   Organizational process assets updates - corresponds to
   the input of Organizational process assets.

   NOTE- See sample questions after control costs
Control Costs

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 7-11 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Control Scope, Control Schedule, and Control Costs are similar to each other.
     Seeing trends in processes may make the processes easier to understand and
     remember.




     We already reviewed Control scope and Control schedule. Now, do you see how
     control cost is similar?


  EXAM TIP: Notice how some of the inputs have matching outputs.
As an example: the cost baseline is an input and the cost baseline updates are the outputs.



INPUTs of control costs

     Project management plan - contains multiple documents that we
     may use now.
                     *    Cost baseline
                     *    Cost management plan - describes how to develop and manage
                  the costs

     Other documents related to the schedule:
     Project funding requirements - this is what funding is required
     for the project
   Work performance data and Organizational
   process assets - related to costs

TOOLs and TECHNIQUES of control costs

   Earned Value Management
   Forecasting (EAC and ETC)
   To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI)
   Performance reviews
           *  Variance analysis - looks at how the project is
               varying from the cost baseline.
                 *     Trend analysis              - collects data to see if project
               performance is getting better or worse against the cost baseline.
                  *    Earned value performance                         - earned value
               looks at cost performance based on what work is complete, what we
               should have spent on that work that is complete, and what we did spend
               on the work that is complete. Much more on this shortly.
   Project Management Software
   Reserve Analysis

OUTPUTs of control costs

   Work performance information                           - this corresponds to the
   input of work performance data. Think of the data as raw data points. The work
   performance information shows a comparison of the data with the cost baseline.


   Cost forecasts - based on actual performance. Now that we know how the
   project is performing against the cost baseline we can forecast future performance.
     Change requests - every monitoring and controlling process has change
     requests as an output. All change requests go to perform integrated change control
     for approval or rejection.


   EXAM TIP: It would be difficult to memorize all the inputs, tools, and techniques, and
outputs of the 47 processes. When you see a summary statement like "every ..." above,
that is a good way to cover a lot of outputs with just one statement.


     Project plan updates                     - specifically the cost baseline updates
     corresponding to the input of cost baseline.


     Project documentation updates - corresponds to the inputs
     related to the cost estimates.


     Organizational process assets updates - corresponds to
     the input of Organizational process assets.


  EXAM TIP: At this point we have talked about all three (3) baselines. Make sure you
know when each baseline is created and when each is updated.
Earned Value Management

Critical Terms:
     Let's walk through an Earned Value example using the scenario below.


You are building a fence for your horses. The fence will have four sides, all exactly the
same. Your budget for the project is $400, or $100 per side. The schedule for the project
is four days, one side per day. You started the project on Monday morning. It is now the
end of the day on Tuesday. You have 25% of the total work complete. You have spent
$400 for the work that is complete.




Planned Value
Example 1. What is the planned value as of today?
a. $ 100
b. $ 200
c. $ 400
d. $ 1600
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 218, the top paragraph on planned value. PV (planned value)
is the budgeted cost of the work scheduled. The scenario states, "You started the project
on Monday. It is now the end of the day on Tuesday." Therefore, two days of work should
be complete. The schedule is one side per day. Therefore, we should have two sides
completed. The budget for each side is $100; therefore, $200 worth of work should be
completed. Therefore, PV= $200. Answer b.

Earned Value
Example 2. What is the earned value as of today?
a. $ 100
b. $ 200
c. $ 400
d. $ 1600


Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 218, on earned value. EV (earned value) is the budgeted
cost of the work performed. The scenario states, "You have 25% of the total work
complete." The budget for the total project is $400. Therefore you have 25% of a $400
project complete. The value of the work complete is $100 . Therefore, EV= $100.
Answer a.

Actual Cost
Example 3. What is the actual cost for the project?
a. $ 100
b. $ 200
c. $ 400
d. $ 1600
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 218, the paragraph on actual cost. AC (actual cost) is the
amount of money spent for the work completed. The question states, "You have spent
$400 for the work that is complete." Therefore, AC= $400. Answer c.

Schedule Variance
Example 4. The project schedule variance is:
a. -$ 300
b. -$ 200
c. -$ 100
d. $ 0
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 218, the paragraph on schedule variance.
Schedule variance = ( EV - PV ) = ( $100 - $200 ) = -$100. The project is running
behind schedule. It took two days to complete one day's worth of work (one side). You
are behind by one day's worth of work (one side). A negative schedule variance means
you are behind schedule. Answer c.
NOTE- a positive schedule variance means you are ahead of schedule (a good thing).
A zero schedule variance means that you are on schedule.

Cost Variance
Example 5. The project cost variance is:
a. -$ 300
b. -$ 200
c. -$ 100
d. $ 0
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 218, the paragraph on cost variance. Cost variance = ( EV-
AC ) = ($100 -$400 ) = -$300. The project is running over budget. You spent $400 to
complete one side ($100 worth of work). A negative cost variance means you are running
over budget. Answer a.
NOTE- a positive cost variance means you are under budget (a good thing).
A zero cost variance means that you are on budget.

Schedule Performance Index (SPI)
Example 6. The schedule performance index for the scenario is:
a. 0.5
b. 1
c. 0.25
d. 1.5
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 219, the paragraph on schedule performance index.
SPI=EV/PV= 100/200= 1/2= 0.5. Answer a. Since the SPI is less than one, the project is
running behind schedule. What this really means is that the project is progressing at 1/2 the
rate expected. We expected to have two sides complete as of today and we only have one
side complete.
NOTE- if the SPI=1 the project is running on schedule.
If the SPI is greater than one the project is running ahead of schedule (a good thing).

Cost Performance Index (CPI)
Example 7. The cost performance index for the scenario is:
a. 0.5
b. 1
c. 0.25
d. 1.5
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 219, the paragraph on cost performance index. CPI=
EV/AC= 100/400=1/4= .25. Answer c. Since the CPI is less than one the project is
running over budget. What this really means is that only 1/4 of the expected work is being
completed for the money spent. We have spent $400. According to the project we should
have 4 sides complete for $400 but we only have one side complete.
NOTE- if the CPI=1 the project is running on budget.
If the CPI is greater than one the project is running under budget (a good thing).

Forecasting EAC- most likely for the exam
Example 8. If the workers continue to spend at the same rate as they have so far, what do
you forecast the entire project will cost?
a. $ 700
b. $ 2800
c. $ 400
d. $ 1600
Read PMBOK(R) Guide page 220, the bottom bullet point. For the assumption described in
the question:
EAC = ( BAC/CPI ) = $400/(.25)= $1600. We now expect the entire project to cost
$1600. Answer d. We spent $400 for the first side. If we continue to spend at the same
rate each side will cost $400. Since there are four sides the estimate for the total project
is 4 sides* $400/side = $1600.
To-complete performance index
Example 9. Assuming that you are given no more money for the project, what is your
TCPI?
a. not possible to complete the project with the money available
b. 1.00
c. 1.25
d. 1.50

EAC= (BAC-EV)/(BAC-AC)= (400-100)/ (400-400)= 300/0. Ask if this makes sense
for this project. We have already spent all of the budget. Is there any index possible that
would allow us to finish the job with the money that is left? No... since there is no money
left.

To-complete performance index
Example 10. Assuming that you are given the EAC of $1600, what is the TCPI (to-
complete performance index)?
a. .25
b. 1.00
c. 1.25
d. not possible to complete the project with the money available
If the BAC is no longer a viable number then the TCPI= (BAC-EV)/(EAC-AC).

TCPI= (400-100)/(1600-400)= .25. The TCPI is the calculated projection of cost
performance that must be achieved on the remaining budget to meet a specified
management goal.

VAC- variance at completion
Example 11: Based on the above scenario what is the VAC (variance at completion) for
the project?
a. $1200
b. -$1200
c. $1600
d. -$1600
VAC is how much we expect to vary from the budget. Since the budget was $400 (this is
our BAC) and our estimate to complete the whole project is $1600 (this is our EAC) then
our VAC is -$1200. The answer is a negative number because we expect to overrun the
project budget. If you like equations: VAC= BAC-EAC= 400-1600= -1200.

ETC- estimate to complete
Example 12: Based on the above scenario what is the ETC (estimate to complete) for the
project?
a. $1200
b. -$1200
c. $1600
d. -$1600

ETC is how much more we estimate we need to spend over what we have already spent.
We are estimating a total cost of $1,600. We have already spent $400. Therefore our ETC
is $1,200.
If you like equations:
ETC = EAC - AC = $1,600 - $400 = $1,200.




     Trick- negative variances are bad, positive variances are good.




     Trick- CPI and SPI indexes greater than one are good, less than one are bad.


     Earned Value Measurement Methods- there are multiple methods to measure
     earned value. We will discuss four here.

     Fixed formula- a specific percentage of the PV (planned value) is assigned to the
     start of a work package (or activity) and the remaining percentage is assigned to the
     completion. Often used for smaller work packages.
     0/100 rule. The activity obtains 0% credit when the activity begins and 100% credit
     when the activity is completed. The 0/100 rule is often used for material delivery.
     20/80 rule. The activity obtains 20% credit when the activity begins and 80% credit
     when the activity is completed.
     50/50 rule. The activity obtains 50% credit when the activity begins and 50% credit
     when the activity is completed.
     Weighted milestone- this method breaks the work package into milestones. A
     weighted value is assigned to the completion (not partial completion) of each
     milestone. Often used for longer work packages with tangible outputs.


     Percent complete- at the end of each time period the percent complete of the work
     package is multiplied by the BAC of the work package to calculate the earned value
     (EV). For this method to have real meaning, the measurement of percent complete
     should be as objective as possible.
     Ex. The value (BAC) of the work package is $1000. 75% of the work is complete
     and therefore the EV (earned value) for the work package is 75% of $1000= $750.


     Physical measurement- relates very much to the amount of work completed. Ex.
     1000 feet of cable should be laid on the construction project. 600 feet of cable have
     been laid and therefore the EV (earned value) is $600.


  EXAM TIP: If a question provides you quantitative information (ex. Your CPI is .98
and qualitative information (you are two weeks behind schedule), focus on the
quantitative information. See example below.


     Question- Your project assistant just informed you that the project has 320
     stakeholders in 35 countries. You are now managing over 75 team members. The
     project has a CPI =.98 and is eight weeks behind schedule. What should you focus
     on first?
     a. cost
     b. schedule
     c. stakeholders
     d. human resources

     Solution- answer (a) is the best answer to this question. CPI (cost performance
     index) is a quantitative measurement. .98 is less than 1.0 and therefore the project is
     running over budget. Put your focus here. I know, you are saying but we are eight
     weeks behind schedule. This is not quantitative from the standpoint that we do not
     know how long the schedule is. Therefore, we want to look at SPI (schedule
     performance index). The question does not say anything about issues with
     stakeholders or team members.
CONTROL SCHEDULE AND CONTROL
COSTS - Sample Questions

1. The scope baseline is an input to which process:
a. control scope
b. control schedule
c. control costs
d. develop schedule

2. The cost baseline is an input to which process:
a. control scope
b. control schedule
c. control costs
d. determine budget

3. The schedule baseline is an input to which process:
a. control scope
b. control schedule
c. control costs
d. develop schedule

4. Control scope, control schedule, and control costs all have what input in common:
a. work performance data
b. work performance information
c. work performance reports
d. variance analysis

5. Control scope, control schedule, and control costs all have what output in
common:
a. work performance measurements
b. work performance information
c. work performance data
d. variance analysis

6. Earned value management is a tool and technique of which process:
a. plan cost management
b. estimate costs
c. control costs
d. determine budget

7. Schedule compression is a tool and technique of which process(es):
a. control scope and create WBS
b. control schedule and develop schedule
c. control costs and development schedule
d. determine budget and develop schedule

8. Project funding requirements are an:
a. input of control costs
b. input of plan cost management
c. input of estimate costs
d. input of determine budget

9. Project funding requirements are an:
a. output of control costs
b. output of plan cost management
c. output of estimate costs
d. output of determine budget

10. Which of the following is an example of a cost estimate?
a. schedule variance (SV)
b. budget at completion (BAC)
c. cost performance index (CPI)
d. Estimate at completion (EAC)

11. The project CPI= .8 and your SPI= 1.1. This means:
a. over budget, behind schedule
b. over budget, ahead of schedule
c. under budget, behind schedule
d. under budget, ahead of schedule

12. The project SPI = .92. This means:
a. the project is ahead of schedule
b. the project is over budget
c. the project is progressing at 92% of the rate expected
d. you have completed 92% of the work on the project

13. The project CPI= 1.2. This means:
a. the project costs are 20% higher than planned
b. for every dollar spent on the project the earned value is $1.20
c. it is costing $1.20 to complete $1.00 worth of work
d. you are likely to run out of money on the project

14. The planned value (PV) is $200. The actual cost (AC) is $400. The earned value
(EV) is $300. The schedule variance is equal to:
a. $200
b. -$100
c. -$200
d. $100

15. The total project budget is $1,000. 80% of the total work should be complete as
of today. 60% of the total work is complete. You have spent 50% of the project
budget. At this point, your cost variance is:
a. $100
b. $200
c. $300
d. $400

16. You are leading a team on a very large product development project. Your CPI is
.90. You are running two weeks behind schedule and you have over 30 stakeholders
in 10 different countries. Where should you increase your focus?
a. schedule
b. cost
c. stakeholder management
d. conflict management

17. Your organization will be using earned value for the first time. You realize that
different types of work packages should utilize different earned value measurement
methods. Work packages associated with equipment deliveries often use:
a. the 0/100 rule
b. the 20/80 rule
c. the 50/50 rule
d. the 100/0 rule
18. An example of a cost usually considered direct is:
a. cost for a subcontractor working on the project
b. cost for health insurance
c. cost for utilities in your office area
d. cost of office space
CONTROL SCHEDULE AND CONTROL
COSTS - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.6.1.1
Y         a. The scope baseline is an input of control scope.
N         b. The schedule baseline is an input of control schedule.
N         c. The cost baseline is an input of controls costs.
N         d. The scope baseline would not be an input of a schedule process.


2.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.1.1
Y         c. The cost baseline is an input of controls costs.
N         a. The scope baseline is an input of control scope.
N         b. The schedule baseline is an input of control schedule.
N         d. The cost baseline is an output, not an input of determine budget.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.7.1.1
Y         b. The schedule baseline is an input of control schedule.
N         a. The scope baseline is an input of control scope.
N         c. The cost baseline is an input of controls costs.
N         d. The schedule baseline is an output of not an input of develop schedule.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections A1.7.4, A1.7.5, and A1.7.6
          a. Work performance data is an input of control scope, control schedule, and
Y
          control costs.
          b. Work performance information is an output of control scope, control schedule,
N
          and control costs.
N         c. Work performance reports is an output of monitor and control project work.
N         d. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of control costs and control scope.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections A1.7.4, A1.7.5, and A1.7.6
          b. Work performance information is an output of control scope, control schedule,
Y
          and control costs.
N         a. Work performance reports is an output of monitor and control project work.
          c. Work performance data is an input of control scope, control schedule, and
N         control costs.

N         d. Variance analysis is a tool and technique of control costs and control scope.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-1
Y         c. Earned value management is a tool and technique of control costs.
N         a., b., and d. Earned value management is not a tool of any planning processes.


7.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 6-1
          b. Schedule compression is a tool and technique of control schedule and develop
Y
          schedule.
N         a. Schedule compression would not be a tool and technique of scope processes.
          c. and d. Schedule compression would not be a tool and technique of a cost
N
          process.


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.1.2
          a. Project funding requirements are an input to control costs. We need these to
Y
          monitor cost performance as part of control costs.
N         b., c. and d. Project funding requirements are an output of determine budget.


9.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-1
Y         d. Project funding requirements are an output of determine budget.
          a. Project funding requirements are an input to control costs. We need these to
N
          monitor cost performance as part of control costs.
N         b. and c. Project funding requirements are an output of determine budget.


10. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.2.2
          d. Estimate at complete is our estimate on what we believe the entire project will
Y
          cost.
          a. Schedule variance is not an estimate. It is the difference between earned value
N
          and planned value.
N         b. Budget at completion is the original project budget.
N         c. The cost performance index is the earned value divided by the planned value.


11. b.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
Y        b. If your CPI is less than one you are over budget. If your SPI is greater than one
         you are ahead of schedule.


12. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
Y        c. An SPI of .92 means that the project is progressing at 92% of the rate expected.


13. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
         b. A CPI greater than 1.0 is a good thing. A CPI= 1.2 means that for every dollar
Y
         spent on the project the earned value is $1.20.


14. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
Y        d. Schedule variance (SV)= EV - PV= $300-$200 = $100


15. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
         a. What we know. The BAC (total project budget ) is $1,000. The planned value
         (a measure of how much work should be complete as of today ) is 80% $1,000=
Y        $800= PV. The earned value (a measure of how much work is complete ) is 60%
         of $1,000= $600=EV. The actual cost is 50% of $1,000=$500=AC. Cost Variance
         (CV) = EV-AC=$600-$500=$100.


16. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: 7.4.2.1 (not explicit)
         b. You have a CPI that is less than one. You are therefore running over budget and
Y
         need to put your focus on cost first.
         a. The question says you are two weeks behind schedule. This is noise. You do
N        not know if it is a two week or ten year project. You need to know your SPI
         before deciding to put your focus on schedule.
         c. There is nothing in the question that states we need to put more focus on
N
         stakeholder management. 30 stakeholders is noise.
         d. There is no information in the question to lead us to believe we need a larger
N
         focus on conflict management. 30 stakeholders is noise.


17.      a. PMBOK(R) Guide: 7.1.3.1 (not explicit)
         a. Often earned value for equipment deliverables uses the 0/100 rule. The
Y        equipment is often useless until it is delivered and therefore all the earned value
         credit is taken at delivery.
18.     a. PMBOK(R) Guide: 7.2 (not explicit)
        a. The work of a subcontractor is billed direct to the project as long as their work
Y
        is 100% associated with the project.


Control Quality and Validate Scope - Understand the terms deliverables, verified
deliverables and accepted deliverables.
Control Quality

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 8-12 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


        There are two focuses of control quality:
                       *    Ensuring that the deliverables are correct and forwarding them
                    to validate scope for acceptance.
                       *    Identifying and eliminating causes of poor quality.
        Make sure you know the difference between control quality and validate scope. See
        diagram on the previous page.


               CONTROL QUALITY                                                VALIDATE SCOPE
Measuring deliverables (products)                            Measuring deliverables (products)
Performed internally                                         Performed by the customer
Usually performed before validate scope                      Usually performed after control quality
Product may fail control quality and the customer may Product may pass control quality and the customer may not
accept it anyway as part of validate scope            accept it as part of validate scope




CONTROL QUALITY
PREVENTION                                                   INSPECTION
Proactive                                                    Reactive
Keeping errors out of the process                            Catching errors before the customer does



ATTRIBUTE SAMPLING                                           VARIABLE SAMPLING
Pass-fail testing                                            Measuring results along a scale
Example: A person must be 48 inches tall to ride the roller
coaster. Your son is 46 inches tall and therefore he is not Example: You are 65 inches tall. Your son is 46 inches tall.
allowed to ride.



TOLERANCES                                                   CONTROL LIMITS
Set by the customer                                          Set by the process
Represents what the customer will accept                     Represents how well we control the process
We want the customer's tolerances to be wider (bigger)
than our control limits.
INPUTs of Control quality

   Project management plan - the quality plan as part of the project
   plan describes how the control quality process will be performed.


   Quality metrics - measures of different aspects of the project or product.

   Work performance data - this is the raw data related to elements
   of the project. It is an output of direct and manage project work.


   Approved change requests                       - these are outputs of integrated
   change control where requested changes are approved or rejected. In control quality
   we verify that approved changes have been implemented.


   Deliverables - this is a very important input. The deliverables are an output
   of direct and manage project work. They come to control quality to be measured for
   correctness. After they are measured and deemed correct, we call them verified
   deliverables and send them to validate scope for the customer to inspect and accept
   them.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of control quality
   Seven basic quality tools- at this point you should recognize what tools make-up this
   list.
                 *      Cause and effect diagrams
                 *      Flowcharts
                 *      Checksheets
                 *      Pareto diagrams
                 *      Histograms
                 *      Control charts
                 *      Scatter diagrams
  EXAM TIP: Understand why you would use one of these tools instead of another.



     Statistical sampling - with this tool we want to select a sample of the
     population that is representative of the entire population. The two primary reasons
     for testing a sample instead of an entire population is that it is quicker and less
     expensive. A third reason may be that the testing you want to do is destructive so you
     can only test a sample if you want any product left.


     Inspection           - we often measure deliverables to ensure they were built
     correctly.


   EXAM TIP: Audits in general refer to processes while inspections refer to
deliverables and products. Therefore, we are more likely to:
               *    Audit a process (and not a deliverable).
                  *   Inspect a deliverable (and not a process).
This little tip may help you get multiple questions on the exam correct.


     Approved change request review - as part of control quality
     we want to review the approved change requests to ensure that all of them were
     implemented correctly.


OUTPUTs of control quality

     Quality control measurements                          - these are the physical
     representations of the measurements taken. They become an input to perform quality
     assurance where they are used to help determine which processes need
     improvements.


     Validated changes               - we are validating that all approved change
     requests have been implemented correctly.
Verified deliverables - we want to ensure that all deliverables were
built correctly. After they are measured and deemed correct we call them verified
deliverables and send them to validate scope for the customer to inspect them.


Work performance information - the work performance data
(raw data) is processed in control quality and used to develop work performance
information.


Change requests - every monitoring and controlling process has change
requests as an output.
CONTROL QUALITY - Sample Questions

1. Accepted deliverables are:
a. an input of control quality
b. an output of control quality
c. an input of validate scope
d. an output of validate scope

2. Deliverables are an input to control quality. These deliverables come from which
process:
a. validate scope
b. control quality
c. perform quality assurance
d. direct and manage project work

3. Verified deliverables are:
a. an input of control quality
b. an output of control quality
c. an input of direct and manage project work
d. an output of validate scope

4. Verified deliverables are:
a. an input of validate scope
b. an input of control quality
c. an input of direct and manage project work
d. an output of validate scope

5. Quality control measurements are:
a. an input of control quality
b. an input of perform quality assurance
c. an input of validate scope
d. an input of direct and manage project work

6. Another name for an Isikawa diagram is:
a. fishbone diagrams
b. Pareto chart
c. control chart
d. scatter diagram

7. The requirements documentation and traceability matrix are:
a. inputs of validate scope
b. outputs of validate scope
c. inputs of control quality
d. outputs of control quality

8. Quality metrics are:
a. inputs of validate scope
b. outputs of validate scope
c. inputs of control quality
d. outputs of control quality

9. Control quality is related to validate scope in that:
a. control quality is about acceptance, whereas validate scope is about meeting
requirements
b. control quality is normally performed after validate scope
c. control quality is about building the products correctly, whereas validate scope is
about the customer accepting the products
d. control quality and validate scope are always performed in parallel

10. Control quality is:
a. applying the planned, systematic quality activities to ensure that the project employs
all processes needed to meet requirements
b. identifying which quality standards are relevant to the project and determining how to
satisfy them
c. monitoring specific project results to determine if they comply with relevant quality
standards and identifying ways to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory performance
d. all the activities of the performing organization that determine quality policies,
objectives, and responsibilities so that the project will satisfy the needs for which it was
undertaken.
CONTROL QUALITY - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.3.1
Y         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.
N         a. Deliverables are an input of control quality.
N         b. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.
N         c. Verified deliverables are an input of validate scope.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-12
Y         d. Deliverables are created as an output of direct and manage project work.
N         a. "Accepted" deliverables are an output of validate scope.
N         b. "Verified" deliverables are an output of control quality.
          c. Deliverables in any form are not an input or output of perform quality
N
          assurance.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.4
Y         b. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.
N         a. Deliverables are an input of control quality.
          c. There are no type of deliverables that are an input of direct and manage project
N
          work.
N         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.4
Y         a. Verified deliverables are an input of validate scope.
N         b. Deliverables are an input of control quality.
          c. There are no type of deliverables that are an input of direct and manage project
N
          work.
N         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.1.4
          b. Quality measurements are an output of control quality and an input of perform
          quality assurance. During quality assurance we may use the quality control
Y
          measurements to give us insight into which processes need improving and which
          do not.
          a., c., and d. Quality measurements are an output of control quality and an input of
N         perform quality assurance. We see them as inputs and outputs to no other
          processes.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
          a. The name fishbone, cause and effect, and Isikawa diagram may all be used
Y
          interchangeably.
N         b. Pareto diagrams help us set priority.
N         c. Control charts help us understand if our process is running under control and is
          stable.
N         d. Scatter diagrams show data for two variables using an X and Y plot.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.2 and 5.5.1.3
          a. We need both the requirements documentation and the traceability matrix of
Y
          validate scope.
N         b. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.
N         c. Deliverables and the quality metrics are inputs of control quality.
N         d. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.


8.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.3.1.2
          c. Quality metrics are an output of plan quality and an input of control quality and
Y
          also perform quality assurance.
N         d. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.
N         d. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.


9.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5
Y         c. This is the only true answer.
N         a. Think control quality- correctness and validate scope- acceptance.
N         b. This answer is reversed.
          d. Be careful of the word "all". Control quality is normally performed before
N
          validate scope.


10. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.3
          c. This is the definition of control quality. The word "monitoring" is the key
Y
          word.
          a. This is the definition of perform quality assurance. The word "processes" is
N
          the key word.
N   b. This is the definition of plan quality. The word "identifying" is the key word.
N   d. This is the definition of quality management.
Validate Scope

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 5-15 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


        The process validate scope is often confused with the process of control quality.
        Here is a table to get at the high level differences.

CONTROL QUALITY                                             VALIDATE SCOPE
Measures deliverables (products)                            Measures deliverables (products)
Performed internally                                        Performed by the customer
About building deliverables correctly                       About acceptance
Usually performed before validate scope                     Usually performed after control quality
Product may fail control quality and the customer may Product may pass control quality and the customer may not
accept the product anyway as part of validate scope   accept the product as part of validate scope
Input of control quality is: deliverables (from direct and
                                                           Input of validate scope is verified deliverables (from control
manage project work)
                                                           quality)
Output of control quality is: verified (meaning correct)
                                                           Output of validate scope is: accepted deliverables
deliverables



   EXAM TIP: Validate scope is not about making sure the customer agrees with our
plans for scope. Validate scope is a process of monitoring and controlling. It is about
making sure the customer accepts the completed deliverables.



INPUTs of validate scope (not all listed)

        Project plan - the plan includes two documents that we will use at the
        point:
                            *    Scope management plan - since we are in the scope
                         knowledge area I hope it makes sense now that the scope management
                         plan tells us the processes for obtaining acceptance of the completed
                         scope from our customer.
                            *    Scope baseline - contains 3 documents that are used to ensure
                         we are delivering everything we said we would deliver. The 3
                         documents of the scope baseline include: Scope statement, WBS, and
                         WBS Dictionary.
   EXAM TIP: Know what three documents make-up the scope baseline. The scope
management plan is not part of the scope baseline since there is no scope listed in the
scope management plan. The scope management plan provides a description of the
processes to define and manage scope.



     Requirements     documentation           and           the
     requirements traceability matrix - the verified deliverables
     will be measured against these requirements.


     Verified deliverables - these have already been inspected internally as
     part of control quality for correctness. Now the team sends the verified deliverables
     to the customer (or sponsor) for acceptance.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of validate scope

     Inspections - the customer (or sponsor on internal projects) inspects the
     deliverable to determine if the deliverables meet the requirements.


     Group decision-making techniques                               - used to determine
     whether the customer (or sponsor) will accept the deliverables.


OUTPUTs of validate scope (not all listed)

     Accepted deliverables                  - the customer or sponsor may accept or
     reject the deliverables. Accepted deliverables and the documentation become inputs
     to close project/phase.
VALIDATE SCOPE - Sample Questions

1. Accepted deliverables are:
a. an input of control quality
b. an output of control quality
c. an input of validate scope
d. an output of validate scope

2. The requirements traceability matrix used in validate scope comes from what
process?
a. define scope
b. collect requirements
c. develop project management plan
d. control quality

3. Verified deliverables are:
a. an input of control quality
b. an output of control quality
c. an input of direct and manage project work
d. an output of validate scope

4. Verified deliverables are:
a. an input of validate scope
b. an input of control quality
c. an input of direct and manage project work
d. an output of validate scope

5. Verified deliverables:
a. have passed the validate scope process
b. have passed the control quality process
c. are an output of direct and manage project work
d. are an output of close project or phase process

6. Which of the following is an input into validate scope?
a. work performance data
b. work performance information
c. work performance reports
d. quality metrics

7. The requirements documentation and the requirements traceability matrix are:
a. inputs of validate scope
b. outputs of validate scope
c. inputs of control quality
d. outputs of control quality
VALIDATE SCOPE - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.3.1
Y         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.
N         a. Deliverables are an input of control quality.
N         b. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.
N         c. Verified deliverables are an input of validate scope.


2.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section Figure 5-15
Y         b. The traceability matrix is an output of collect requirements.
N         a. The scope statement is an output of define scope.
N         c. The project management plan is an output of develop project management plan.
N         d. The verified deliverables are an output of control quality.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.4
Y         b. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.
N         a. Deliverables are an input of control quality.
          c. There are no type of deliverables that are an input of direct and manage project
N
          work.
N         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.4
Y         a. Verified deliverables are an input of validate scope.
N         b. Deliverables are an input of control quality.
N         c. There are no deliverables that are an input of direct and manage project work.
N         d. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.


5.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.4
          b. Verified deliverables have passed the control quality process and are viewed
Y
          as correct.
          a. Accepted deliverables have passed the validate scope process and are
N
          accepted.
N         c. Deliverables are an output of direct and manage project work.
          d. The transition of ownership of the product is an output of close product or
N
          phase.
6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.5
Y         a. Work performance data (raw data) is an input of validate scope.
N         b. Work performance information is an output of validate scope.
N         c. Work performance reports are an output of monitor and control project work.
N         d. Quality metrics are an input of control quality.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5.1.2 and 5.5.1.3
          a. We need both the requirements documentation and the traceability matrix to
Y
          validate scope.
N         b. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.
N         c. Deliverables and the quality metrics are inputs of control quality.
N         d. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality.
Control Communication

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 10-8 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       Control communications is the day-to-day work we do to ensure that the
       communications processes are working and stakeholders are receiving the
       information they need for their role on the project.


Manage Communications                                Control Communications
                                                     In this process we ask if the communications plan is
In this process we follow the communications plan.
                                                     working and we may recommend changes to the plan.




INPUTs of control communications (not all listed)

       Project management plan - this plan, and more specifically the
       communications plan describe the process for controlling communication.


       Project communication                            - this is the actual information being
       communicated.


       Issue logs - these logs are an output of manage stakeholder engagement. Issue
       logs should be utilized to ensure that all project issues are resolved and closed.
       They also are a great communication tool as they let our stakeholders know that their
       issues are important to us, that owners have been assigned, and resolution will
       occur.
   Work performance data - this data is an output from the process,
   direct and manage project work. This is the data that we may want to share with our
   stakeholders.


TOOLs    and                  TECHNIQUEs                         of         control
communications

   Information management systems - as a project manager
   we want standardized ways to collect and distribute information. Information may be
   distributed in several ways:
                    *    Hard-copy document management- while this may be
                 appropriate for some communications, much of project communications
                 is moving away from this distribution method
                    *    Electronic communications management- these are the basic
                 electronic methods we would see regardless of whether we are
                 involved in project management
                    *    Electronic project management tools- these are electronic tools
                 specific to managing projects. Ex. Project management software tools
   Meetings - this is a tool and technique of many processes. There are three
   types of meetings.
                  *     Information exchange- to give updates to other parties
                  *     Brainstorming, etc.- to generate ideas
                  *     Decision-making- to come to a decision


OUTPUTs of control communications (not all listed)
Work performance information                          - work performance data
from the direct and manage project work process is examined in context and turned
into information.
CONTROL COMMUNICATIONS - Sample
Questions

1. Issue logs are an input of control communications. They are an output of what
process:
a. direct and manage project work
b. manage stakeholder engagement
c. manage communications
d. plan communications management

2. Work performance information is an output of control communications. It is an
input of what process:
a. direct and manage project work
b. manage stakeholder engagement
c. manage communications
d. monitor and control project work

3. Control communications is really about:
a. everything to do with project information
b. developing a strategy to ensure stakeholders have the information they need
c. following the communications plan
d. ensuring the stakeholders' information needs are being met

4. The tool and technique that allows the project manager to capture, store, and
distribute information is:
a. information management system
b. issue log
c. communications requirements analysis
d. communications model

5. Work performance data is an input of control communications. It is an output of
what process:
a. direct and manage project work
b. manage stakeholder engagement
c. manage communications
d. plan communications management
CONTROL COMMUNICATIONS - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 10-8
Y         b. Issue logs are an output of manage stakeholder engagement.
N         a. Work performance data is an output of direct and manage project work.
N         c. Project communications is an output of manage communications.
N         d. The communications plan is the output of plan communications management.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 10-8
Y         d. Work performance information is an input of monitor and control project work.
N         a. Work performance data is an output of direct and manage project work.
          b. Work performance data, information, and reports are not inputs or outputs to
N
          manage stakeholder engagement.
N         c. Work performance reports are an input to manage communications.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
          d. Control communications is about making sure the stakeholders information
Y
          needs are being met.
N         a. The knowledge area of communications is all about project information.
          b. The process plan communications management is developing a strategy to
N
          ensure that the stakeholders have the information they require on the project.
          c. Manage communications is the process in which we the team follow the
N
          communications plan.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.3.2.1
          a. The information management system is used to capture, store, and share
Y
          information.
N         b. The issue log is not a tool and technique.
          c. Communications requirements analysis is the tool and technique in which we
N
          analyze the information needs of the project stakeholders.
          d. The communications model helps us visualize the importance of encoding,
N         decoding, choosing a communication method, noise, and the feedback loop in
          communicating.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 10-8
Y   a. Work performance data is an output of only one process: direct and manage
    project work.
N   b. Issue logs are an output of only one process: manage stakeholder engagement.
N   c. Project communications are an output of manage communications.
N   d. The communications plan is an output of plan communications management.
Control Risks

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 11.6 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


        This process is the day-to-day work we do to control risks.


INPUTs of control risks

        Project management plan - Contains the risk management plan
        that includes a description of the process to control risks.


        Risk register - all the information we have so far on the project risks are in
        the risk register.


        Work performance data - this is raw                      data from the direct and
        manage project work process. We will review this data to check for new risks, etc.


        Work performance reports - these are the reports that compare
        what is actually occurring on the project to our project plan. We will review these
        reports to check for new risks, etc.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of control risks

   EXAM TIP: Know the difference between a risk reassessment and a risk audit


Risk reassessment                       Risk audit
Identification of new risks             Evaluation of effectiveness of risk processes
                                        Evaluation of effectiveness of risk responses on risk and their root
Reassessment of current risks
                                        causes
Closing of outdated risks




       Variance and trend analysis                   - we want to review project
       variances (cost variance, schedule variance, etc.) as well as trends (cost
       performance index, schedule performance index, etc.) to review risks in the
       variances and trends.


       Technical performance measurement                                 - we want to
       review these measurements (ex. Number of product returns) to review risks.


       Reserve analysis - we want to ensure that we have enough reserve (both
       cost and schedule) to cover the amount of risk that is still present.


OUTPUTs of control risks (not all listed)

       Work performance information                          - if we have work
       performance data coming into a monitoring and controlling process we should
       assume that the data will be turned into work performance information (useful
       information... not just raw data).


         Tricky question on contingency:

Your software development project is going very well. At your review it is reported that
you have closed out several risks that did not occur as expected. There is contingency
reserve associated with these risks. In general we should:
a. keep the contingency reserve on the project in case other risks occur unexpectedly
b. return the contingency reserve back to the organization to free up resources for other
projects and operations
c. move the contingency reserve into a category called workaround funds for the project
d. hide the contingency reserve in case we planned poorly and need it later

Solution- Hopefully, you were able to see that this unused contingency should be returned
to free up resources for other projects and/or operations. If we require it later for a new
risk we would need to request it and be able to justify that request.
CONTROL RISKS - Sample Questions

1. Risk audits look at:
a. identification of new risks
b. Reassessment of current risks
c. closing of outdated risks
d. effectiveness of the risk management processes

2. Risk reassessment looks at all of the following except:
a. identification of new risk
b. Reassessment of current risks
c. closing of outdated risks
d. effectiveness of the risk responses

3. Risk management should be:
a. a topic at periodic status meetings
b. only discussed if there is extra time
c. only discussed at review meetings with the customer
d. a topic at risk management meetings only

4. The purpose of reserve analysis as part of control project risks is to ask:
a. are new risks emerging
b. what risks require responses
c. how much risk do we have left compared to how much reserve we have left
d. are the risk management processes working

5. Sensitivity analysis, expected monetary value analysis and modeling and
simulation are all tools and techniques of which process:
a. identify risk
b. control risk
c. perform qualitative risk analysis
d. perform quantitative risk analysis

6. You are deeply involved in the monitoring and control of your design/build project.
Several risk events have occurred unexpectedly and you do not have risk response
plans in place. Therefore, you are most likely to go to a:
a. contingency plan
b. fallback plan
c. backup plan
d. workaround

7. Project risks are:
a. always negative
b. always positive
c. may be positive or negative
d. may begin positive but always turn negative

8. Workarounds are:
a. unplanned before the risk event occurs
b. developed to aid in risk avoidance
c. associated with risk mitigation
d. the same as contingency plans
CONTROL RISKS - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.2
          d. The key word in the question is the word audit. Audits are usually associated
Y         with our processes. During a risk audit we examine how well our risk processes
          are working as well as how well are the risk responses working.
          a., b., and c. During the risk reassessment we identify new risks, reassess the
N
          current risks, and close out the outdated risks.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.1
Y         d. During the risk audit we look at the effectiveness of the risk responses.
          a., b., and c. During the risk reassessment we identify new risks, reassess the
N
          current risks and close out the outdated risks.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.6
          a. Risk management should be a topic at all of our project status meetings. Risk is
Y
          so important, we want to keep it high visibility.
          b., c., and d. Be careful of the word "only". We should be reviewing risk
N
          regularly.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.5
          c. As we perform reserve analysis as part of control risks we should ask: How
Y         much risk is left compared to how much reserve is left? We do not want to run out
          of reserve.
          a. and b. As part of risk reassessment we ask questions such as: Are new risks
N
          emerging? What risks require responses, etc.?
N         d. As part of the risk audit we ask: Are the risk management processes working?


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
          d. These tools and techniques listed are all part of perform quantitative risk
Y
          analysis.
          a. Documentation reviews and assumption analysis are examples of tools and
N
          techniques of identify risks.
          b. Risk reassessment, risk audit, and reserve analysis are examples of tools and
N
          techniques of control risks.
N         c. Risk probability and impact assessment and the probability and impact matrix
          are examples of tools and techniques of perform qualitative risk analysis.


6.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.3.2
Y         d. Workarounds are unplanned responses to risk events.
          a. Contingency plans are set-up proactively. The question states that you have no
N
          risk plans in place.
          b. and c. Fallback and backup plans are two names for the same idea. They
N         represent your second contingency and would be set-up proactively. The question
          states that you have no risk plans in place.


7.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
          c. Risks are uncertain events that may have either a positive or negative effect on
Y
          at least one project objective.
          a., b., and d. Risks can have either a positive or negative effect. (these lines need
N
          moving up)


8.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.3.2
Y         a. Workarounds are unplanned responses to emerging risks.
          b. Clarifying requirements, obtaining information, improving communication, and
N         acquiring expertise are examples of changing the project management plan to aid
          in risk avoidance.
N         c. Designing redundancy is associated with risk mitigation.
N         d. Contingency plans are planned responses associated with active acceptance.
Control Procurements

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 12-7 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   In the process control procurements we are ensuring that the contracted supplier is
   meeting all their obligations under the contract and that we (the buyer organization)
   are meeting all of our obligations.

   Due to the legal implications of actions and decisions, often the contract
   administrator for both the buying and the selling organization reports into an
   organization separate from the project organization.

   Financial elements- as the buying organization we hold the responsibility to ensure
   the seller is receiving payments in a fair and timely manner. On most procurements
   we try to tie payment to work accomplished and not just to time or activity. From the
   other perspective if the seller is not performing we need to document it and take
   corrective action. This documentation may be required later in the case of early
   termination.


INPUTs of control procurements
   A few of the inputs are the outputs of the last two processes:
                   *    Project management plan - specifically the procurement
                management plan describes the process of control procurements
                   *    Procurement documents - this may include our RFP (request for
                proposal) of other such documents, the procurement statement of work
                (describes the items we are purchasing from the supplier), and
                documents related to contract award
                   *    Agreements - documents the obligations of both parties (buyer
                and seller)


Other inputs include:
   Approved change requests                         - these are the approved change
   requests specific to the contract relationship. They are implemented in the control
   procurement process.


   Work performance reports - these are the reports from the seller
   on their work performance. We may take these reports and make them part of our
   work performance reports on the project.


   Work performance data - this is the raw data collected. This data
   will be turned into work performance information and then later the information will
   be documented in the work performance reports.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of control procurements

   Contract change control system                           - this system defines the
   processes to make changes on the procurement. Since the procurement has legal
   implications this system needs to be very clear with information on required
   documentation. In some organizations this system is linked to the integrated change
   control system on the project.


   Procurement performance reviews - this is a review of the
   seller's ability to meet the requirements of the contract. Requirements may include
   technical, schedule, cost, quality, and others.


   Inspections and audits - the buyer will inspect the deliverables of
   the seller to ensure these deliverables meet the requirements of the contract. The
   buyer will audit the seller's processes to ensure these processes meet the
   requirements of the contract.


 EXAM TIP: Keep in mind the difference between an inspection and an audit.
                      * We inspect deliverables (or products).
                          *   We audit processes.
Performance reporting - the seller supplies work performance data
and reports (see inputs) to us (the buyer). We evaluate this information against the
contract requirements to see how the seller is performing and also to report to our
management on that performance.


Payment systems - systems should be in place to ensure the seller is
paid in a fair and timely manner. As an example:
                 1. Seller completes deliverable (or group of deliverables)
                 2. Seller submits invoice to buyer (may be someone in
              procurement)
                 3. Invoice is forwarded to designated member of project team for
              approval or non-approval
                 4. If approved, the invoice (with approval) is forwarded to
              accounts payable
                 5. Accounts payable makes payment to the seller
The key idea is that the seller should be paid, if possible, based on completed
deliverables and not based on time or effort. Different contract types will allow for
different rules regarding payment.


Claims administration                      - contracts are relationships and often
disagreements arise. A system should be in place to deal with these claims, disputes,
and appeals. If possible, work should continue as claims and disputes are processed.
Below is a list, in order of preference in dealing with claims, etc.
                1. Negotiations - both parties negotiate and work out
             disagreements (preferred method)
                2. Mediation - a third party mediator is brought in to help parties
             work out their disagreements
                3. Arbitration - a third party arbitrator is brought in to make a
             decision
                4. Litigation - the disagreement goes to court and a decision is
             made (least desirable method due to time, cost, and potential loss of
             reputation)


Records management system                             - contract documentation,
including correspondence, is archived in a records management system. Due to the
legal nature of contracts it is important to archive appropriate information in a
system where that information can be retrieved later.
OUTPUTs of control procurements (not all listed)

   Work performance information - this information relates to
   the performance of the supplier. It is closely tied to the work performance data that
   is an input to this process. This information is necessary for several reasons:
                     *    In case of later claims or disputes
                     *    To aid in future procurements
                     *    To help us better plan based on historical records


   Change requests - since this is a monitoring and controlling process we
   should expect change requests as an output. As we monitor we often request changes.
   We need to be careful of actions that may be considered constructive changes to the
   contract. Examples may include direction provided by the buyer and/or actions taken
   by the seller.


Other Ideas -

   Privity of Contract - privity is                the legal relationship between two
   parties of a contract.
                   *      Buyer A buys from Seller B who then subcontracts to
                 Subcontractor C.
                   *      Buyer A has privity with Seller B but not with Subcontractor C.
                 In simplistic terms, Buyer A should not be giving direction to
                 Subcontractor C.
CONTROL PROCUREMENTS - Sample
Questions

1. As part of control procurements the project manager should focus on all the
following except:
a. managing the relationships with our suppliers
b. making sure both parties are living up to the contract (us and our supplier)
c. monitoring payments to the seller
d. writing requests for proposals

2 . Which of the following statements are true about inspections and audits:
a. inspections focus more on the product while audits focus more on the processes
b. inspections focus more on the processes while audits focus more on the products
c. the customer performs inspections while internally we perform audits
d. we perform inspections while the customer performs audits

3. The preferred method for settling claims and disputes is:
a. litigation
b. arbitration
c. mediation
d. negotiation

4. During the control procurement process, the project team should be focusing on:
a. the bidder conference
b. the weighting factors
c. the make-or-buy analysis
d. the procurement performance reviews

5. When making payments to the seller we hope to establish a close relationship
between:
a. payments to work accomplished
b. payments to work periods
c. payments to work attempted
d. payments to work promised
CONTROL PROCUREMENTS - Solutions
1.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.3.2
          d. During control procurements, we are past the point of writing requests for
Y
          proposals. The seller has already been selected and is under contract.
          a. During control procurements, the buyer's project manager should be managing
N
          the relationship with the sellers.
          b. During control procurements, the buyer's project manager should be ensuring
N
          that both parties are living up to the obligations of the contract.
          c. During control procurements, the buyer's project manager should be ensuring
N         that deliverables are being received and accepted (or rejected) and payments
          being made appropriately.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.3.2.3
          a. Inspections focus more on the product while audits focus more on the
Y         processes. As an example, during a quality audit the processes are reviewed and
          process improvements recommended.
N         b. This statement is reversed.
          c. and d. Either we or the customer may perform inspections or audits. At times,
N         audits are defined as independent reviews, meaning they are performed by
          someone outside of the team, though not necessarily the customer.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.3.2.6
          d. Negotiation is the preferred method. If possible we want to try to resolve
Y
          issues in a timely manner and dispassionately.
          a. Litigation is often the least preferred method because of the time, the cost, and
N
          the risk to our reputation.
          b. Mediation means bringing in a third party to help us work out the issue. If we
N         cannot work things out between ourselves and the supplier through negotiation,
          then mediation may be a good fallback option.
          c. Arbitration means bringing in a third party to hear both sides and make a
          decision on the issue. If we cannot work things out between ourselves and the
N
          supplier through negotiation, then mediation or arbitration may be good fallback
          options.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.3.2.2
Y         d. During the control procurement process we should be focused on the
          procurement performance reviews as well as other items.
N         a. The bidder conference is used during the conduct procurement process.
          b. Weighting factors may be used during the conduct procurement process to
N
          select the seller.
          c. The make-or-buy analysis is a tool and technique of the plan procurement
N
          process.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.3
Y         a. In general we should try to tie payments to work performance.
          b. At times we may need to tie payments to work periods but when it makes sense
N
          we want to try to tie payments to work accomplished.
N         c. The word "attempted" makes this a wrong answer.
N         d. The word "promised" makes this a wrong answer.
Control Stakeholder Engagement

   Exam Tip: Review Figure 13-11 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


       In this process we interact with our stakeholders. The primary question to ask: Is the
       stakeholder engagement strategy working? Stakeholder engagement strategies, as
       found in the stakeholder management plan, may need to be adjusted.


Manage Stakeholder Engagement                                Control Stakeholder Engagement
                                                             In this process we ask if the stakeholder management plan
In this process we follow the stakeholder management plan.
                                                             is working and we may recommend changes to the plan.




INPUTS of control stakeholder engagement

       Project management plan - This plan contains the stakeholder
       management plan. Both ideas from the overall project plan and the stakeholder
       management plan are used to guide us in this process.


       Issue logs - these logs are an output of manage stakeholder engagement. Issue
       logs should be utilized to ensure that all project issues are resolved and closed.
       They also are a great communication tool as they let our stakeholders know that their
       issues are important to us, that owners have been assigned, and resolution will
       occur.
     Work performance data - this is the raw data as collected during
     direct and manage project work.


   EXAM TIP: If work performance data is an input, you should be able to guess one of
the outputs- yes... it is work performance information.


     Project Documents - multiple documents outside of the project plan
     may aid in this process. An example includes the change log. Stakeholders will want
     to know the status of their change requests.


TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of control stakeholder
engagement (not all listed)

     Information management systems - these systems allow
     the project manager to consolidate information from several systems so as to
     provide the stakeholders the information they need in a format that works for them.


OUTPUTs of control stakeholder engagement (not
all listed)

     Work performance information - this information is really
     the work performance data that now has been correlated and contextualized.


  EXAM TIP: If work performance information is an output, we should be able to guess
one of the inputs- yes ... work performance data is one of the inputs.


     Change requests - as we work with our stakeholders we may request
     changes on the project.
  EXAM TIP: At this point we should be able to guess that change requests would be an
output. Why? Because change requests are an output of most monitoring and controlling
processes.
CONTROL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT -
Sample Questions

1. The process of communicating and working with stakeholders is:
a. identify stakeholders
b. plan stakeholder management
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

2. The process of monitoring overall project stakeholder relationships is:
a. identify stakeholders
b. plan stakeholder management
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

3. The work performance data that is an input to control stakeholder engagement
comes from:
a. direct and manage project work
b. monitor and control project work
c. integrated change control
d. validate scope

4. The change management plan is a subset of:
a. project documents
b. work performance data
c. project management plan
d. work performance information

5. The issue log and the change log are subsets of:
a. project documents
b. work performance data
c. project management plan
d. work performance information

6. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
a. develop project charter
b. identify stakeholders
c. develop schedule
d. collect requirements
CONTROL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT -
Solutions
1.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.3
          c. The process of actively communicating and working with our stakeholders is
Y
          called manage stakeholder engagement.
          a. Identify stakeholders is the process of determining who are the project
N
          stakeholders and setting priority.
          b. Plan stakeholder management is the process of coming up with a strategy to
N
          actively engage our stakeholders.
          d. Control stakeholder engagement is the process of reviewing our stakeholder
N
          engagement practices and making changes as needed.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.4
          d. Control stakeholder engagement is the process of reviewing our stakeholder
Y
          engagement practices and making changes as needed.
          a. Identify stakeholders is the process of determining who are the project
N
          stakeholders and setting priority.
          b. Plan stakeholder management is the process of coming up with a strategy to
N
          actively engage our stakeholders.
          c. The process of actively communicating and working with our stakeholders is
N
          called manage stakeholder engagement.


3.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-11
          a. All work performance data comes as an output of direct and manage project
Y
          work.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.4.1.1
          c. The change management plan and the configuration management plan are both
Y
          subsets of the project management plan.


5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: 13.4.1.4
          a. Issue logs, change logs, the risk register, etc. are all a subset of the project
Y
          documents.
6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: 13.1.2.1
Y         b. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique of identify stakeholders.
MONITORING and CONTROLLING -
Knowledge and Skills
The ideas discussed below are based on information provided by the PMP(R) Exam
Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) and may or may not be directly referenced in the
PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Trend analysis- Trend analysis                is a mathematical technique that uses
     history to predict the future. In trend analysis, we often compare data against a
     baseline such as scope, schedule or cost to predict future variance.


     Process analysis techniques-
     Lean is a system in which we maximize customer value while minimizing waste.
     Examples of lean project management include:
                    *     6 sigma DMAIC (define, measure, analyze, improve and
                 control)
                    *     Deming cycle (called A3)
                               Statement of the problem
                               Statement of the current situation
                               Statement of the root cause of the problem
                               Suggestions for alternative solutions
                               Suggestions for a recommended solution
                               Statement of a cost-benefit analysis


     Kanban is a pull system that provides a focused sustainable pace and regular
     delivery.
     Why use it-
               * It ensures a sustainable (manageable) pace of work for your team
           members
               * It ensures faster delivery to your customers
               * It supports small continuous improvements

     Kanban is based on four foundational principles
             *     Start with your existing process
         *    Respect the current process, roles and responsibilities, job titles
         *    Agree to pursue incremental evolutional improvements
         *    Encourage acts of leadership at all levels

Kanban is based on core practices
        *     Visualize your work flow
        *     Limit work in progress (WIP)
        *     Make process policies explicit
        *     Improve collaboratively
        *     Manage flow


Six Sigma is a set of tools and techniques for process improvement. Six
Sigma seeks to improve the quality of the output of a process by identifying and
removing the causes of defects and minimizing variability.


Project quality best practices and standards - Many
organizations that produce standards related to quality best practices. An example of
a few are:


ISO - International Organization for Standards.
ISO 9001 is often associated with project management and covers documentation,
design, development, production, testing, installation, servicing, and other
processes.


BS - British Standards are standards produced by the BSI Group.
The BSI Group produces British Standards.


CMMI - The capability maturity model was developed
by the Software Engineering Institute. The model has five levels of organizational
maturity. Level one - characterized by chaos, periodic panics, and heroic efforts
required by individuals to successfully complete projects. Few if any processes in
place; successes may not be repeatable.
Level two - software project tracking, requirements management, realistic planning,
and configuration management processes are in place; successful practices can be
      repeated.
      Level three - standard software development and maintenance processes are
      integrated throughout an organization; a Software Engineering Process Group is in
      place to oversee software processes. Training programs are used to ensure
      understanding and compliance.
      Level four - metrics are used to track productivity, processes, and products. Project
      performance is predictable, and quality is consistently high.
      Level five - the focus is on continuous process improvement. The impact of new
      processes and technologies can be predicted and effectively implemented when
      required.


Quality validation and verification techniques - CMMI
(see previous section) helps us understand the terms verification and validation by:

Verification addresses the question: Are we building the product correctly? This process
looks at specifications, standards and guidelines. The PMBOK(R) Guide associates the
process Control quality with the verification process. You may remember that verified
deliverables are an output of control quality.

Validation addresses the questions: Are we building the correct product? If we place the
deliverable (or product) in the proper environment does it fulfill the needs of the end user
as expressed in the requirements? The PMBOK(R) Guide associates the process validate
scope with the validation process. The customer is testing the deliverable (or product) to
determine if the customer will accept the deliverable. The requirements along with the
verified deliverables are inputs of the validate scope process.
MINI-TEST after MONITORING and
CONTROLING PROCESS GROUP - Questions

It is strongly recommended that you: not circle the answers below so you may attempt
these questions again later.

1. Your project is constantly plagued by the right activities starting at the wrong
time or not starting at all. What tool and technique most likely can help you resolve
this issue?
a. the responsibility assignment matrix (RAM)
b. the work authorization system
c. the human resource management plan
d. the stakeholder management plan

2. While initiating the project the project manager along with relevant stakeholders
conducts benefit analysis. The primary reason to perform benefit analysis at this
point is to:
a. formalize the authority of the project manager
b. validate project alignment with organizational strategy and expected business value
c. gain commitment and acceptance of the project
d. ensure a common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones and stakeholder
roles and responsibilities

3. Typical financial analysis techniques used to establish project feasibility include
all of the following except:
a. return on investment (ROI)
b. internal rate of return (IRR)
c. net present value (NPV)
d. earned value analysis

4. Business value is the sum of all tangible and intangible elements. Benefit analysis
is conducted in part to validate project alignment with business value. An example
of an intangible element of business value is:
a. trademarks
b. monetary assets
c. stockholder equity
d. utility

5. In general an important person who should be involved in creating the estimate
for a given activity is the:
a. project manager
b. person who will perform the activity
c. person who will audit the activity
d. risk manager

6. Your organization is starting to implement a product backlog on your software
upgrade project. A critical rule concerning this backlog is:
a. the backlog should be set as a baseline as early as possible on the project
b. the items in the backlog should be prioritized
c. the product backlog should be a subset of the sprint backlog
d. only the development team may update the product backlog

7. High performing organizations are likely to focus on a number of foundational
practices including knowledge transfer. A typical knowledge transfer life cycle
includes:
a. forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning
b. initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, closing
c. plan, do, check, act
d. identifying, capturing, sharing, applying, assessing

8. Your organization is using both Lean and Six Sigma as process analysis
techniques. While these two techniques complement each other, there are often
disagreements between the Lean supporters and the Six Sigma supporters. One of
the tenets of Six Sigma is the reduction of:
a. extra processes
b. extra features
c. wait time
d. variation and defects

9. Several of your team members are tasked with collecting the requirements for
the project. They have brainstormed and believe they have too many ideas related
to requirements. The suggestion is to vote on their ideas. What group creatively
idea is being suggested:
a. multi-criteria decision analysis
b. affinity diagrams
c. idea/mind mapping
d. nominal group technique

10. An organization scoring high on Geert Hofstede's power distance index
believes:
a. power is distributed equally in their organization
b. many highly powerful people in their organization have expert power as their primary
power source
c. unequal distribution of power is a basic fact of the organization
d. there are many opportunities to move up in the organization based on knowledge and
skills


11. Goleman's model of emotional intelligence includes:
a. forming, storming, norming, performing and adjourning
b. self-awareness, self-regulation, social skill, empathy and motivation
c. withdraw, smooth, compromise, force and collaborate
d. formal, reward, punishment, expert and referent

12. Change management can be a long and tedious process. In your organization, the
last step of change management is often overlooked. From the list below, which item
would you perform last?
a. submit change request
b. establish or adjust work packages
c. implement change if approved
d. approved change request review

13. Your project is to plan and host the largest soccer competition in the history of
your country. One of the most important early decisions is the location of the event.
There are many items to consider including stadium size, infrastructure, and
security. You recommend that clear evaluation criteria be defined as an input into
the decision-making. Most likely you are in what decision making phase:
a. solution action planning
b. problem definition
c. ideas to action
d. problem solution generation

14. Your organization is struggling with the perceived attitudes and lack of
experience of your younger workers. Many of the older and more experienced
workers seem to not value the enthusiasm of these newer employees. One proactive
way to bridge the gap is through:
a. training sessions for the more experienced workers on the value of our new hires
b. reverse mentoring
c. ensuring that teams do not have mixed generations so that the more experienced
workers will not be frustrated by these younger workers
d. limiting the number of new hires

15. At the end of your last project your team spent a large amount of time collecting
lessons learned. The most important lessons were related to project
communications. Many team members did not understand who should get what
information and in what format. Many stakeholders complained that they felt they
did not have visibility into the project. Others stated that they struggled to make
good decisions based on a lack of information. Interestingly, some stakeholders
stated that they were in information overload and therefore looked at little of the
information supplied to them. Therefore you have decided to put a strong focus on
communications management. You believe the first thing to do is:
a. distribute every project report to every stakeholder. Therefore, no stakeholder can
complain they were not informed of the project status.
b. post all project communications using an electronic knowledge repository. Therefore,
each stakeholder can find the information and only the information they require.
c. develop a communications plan
d. develop a stakeholder register to ensure every stakeholder

16. Body language is an example of what dimension of communication?
a. written
b. oral
c. verbal
d. nonverbal

17. Communication with peers is considered:
a. vertical
b. horizontal
c. up
d. down

18. The annual report is an example of what dimension of communication?
a. official
b. un-official
c. verbal
d. non-verbal

19. Voice inflections are an example of what dimension of communication?
a. written
b. oral
c. verbal
d. nonverbal


20. Reports are an example of what type of communication?
a. formal written
b. formal oral
c. informal written
d. informal oral

21. At the end of your last project your team spent a large amount of time collecting
lessons learned. The most important lessons were related to risk management. Most
team members felt that there was a lot of talk about risk management but very little
risk management actually occurring. The project experienced multiple delays and
overruns. Some team members believe that, if the team had been more proactive in
relation to risk, delays and overruns would not have occurred. You have decided to
put a strong focus on risk management. You believe the first thing to do is:
a. have more risk experts involved when identifying project risks
b. perform quantitative risk analysis and not just qualitative risk analysis
c. incorporate the risk response technique of avoidance into your risk plans
d. develop a risk management plan

22. A risk that may have a positive result is called:
a. an opportunity
b. a threat
c. there is no such thing as a positive risk
d. an issue

23. The amount of risk that an organization is willing to accept is called the
organization's:
a. risk appetite
b. risk tolerance
c. risk threshold
d. risk probability

24. A risk that may lead to a negative result is called:
a. an opportunity
b. a threat
c. all risks are negative
d. an issue

25. Overall project risk is:
a. the sum of all individual risks on a project
b. the effect of uncertainty associated with a project
c. the sum of all negative risks on a project
d. the sum of all positive risks on a project

26. What is the difference between a risk and an issue?
a. a risk is an issue that has occurred
b. an issue is a negative risk that has occurred
c. issues and risks are the same thing
d. there is no relationship between risks and issues

27. At the end of your last project your team spent a large amount of time collecting
lessons learned. The most important lessons were related to procurement
management. Most team members felt that it was unclear what work would be
performed in-house and what work would be performed by an outside supplier. It
was unclear how long-lead time products would be handled when an outside supplier
was selected. Therefore, the project experienced multiple delays and overruns.
Some team members believe that, if the team had been more proactive with respect
to procurement, these delays and overruns would not have occurred. You have
decided to put a strong focus on procurement management on your current project.
You believe the first thing to do is:
a. write more detailed procurement statements of work for the suppliers
b. use letters of intent to get suppliers working while we put official contracts in place
c. include strong penalties in contracts for late deliveries of critical items
d. develop procurement management plans

28. A contract may also be called a:
a. purchase order
b. request for proposal
c. request for quote
d. request for information

29. Before the seller is called the selected source they are often referred to as:
a. contracted vendor
b. contracted supplier
c. bidder
d. client


30. The process of awarding contracts is called:
a. plan procurement management
b. conduct procurements
c. control procurements
d. close procurements

31. Make or buy analysis is a tool and technique of what process:
a. plan procurement management
b. conduct procurements
c. control procurements
d. close procurements

32. A contract obligates the buyer to provide:
a. monetary compensation
b. nothing
c. monetary or other valuable compensation
d. product, service, or result
MINI-TEST after MONITORING and
CONTROLLING- Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK (R) Guide Section 4.3.2.2
          b. The work authorization system is used to ensure that the right organization or
Y
          person is doing the right work at the right time and in the right sequence.
N         a. There is no time element associated with the RAM.
N         c. and d. Plans are documents. Plans are not tools and techniques.


2.   b.   PMP(R) Exam content outline Initiating-Task 7- June 2015
          b. We conduct benefit analysis with relevant stakeholders in order to validate
Y
          project alignment with organizational strategy and expected business value.


3.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide Sections 4.1.1.2 and 7.4.2.1
          d. Earned value analysis is used to assess project performance and predict future
Y         performance. Earned value analysis is often an important input of project
          decisions.
N         a. ROI, IRR and NPV may all be contained in the business case.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 1.6
          a. Trademarks as well as good will would be considered intangible elements of
Y
          business value.
          b., c and d. Monetary assets, stockholder equity, and utility are all examples of
N
          tangible elements of business value.


5.   b.
          b. Multiple people may be involved in creating an estimate. It is important to
Y         include the person who will be performing the activity in the estimate if
          reasonable.


6.   b.
Y         b. It is important to prioritize the items in the product backlog.


7.   d.
          d. A typical knowledge transfer life cycle includes identifying, capturing, sharing,
Y
          applying, and assessing.
N         a. These are the five stages of team development.
N         b. These are the five process groups.
N         c. This life cycle is the basis for quality improvement.


8.   d.
Y         d. Six sigma means reducing variation and defects on any product.
          a., b. and c. Lean focuses on waste. Extra processes, extra features, and wait time
N
          may be examples of waste.


9.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide 5.2.2.4
          d. Nominal group technique is often used after brainstorming. It is a voting
Y
          technique.


10. c.    Wikipedia- Hofstede's cultural dimensions theory
          c. An organization scoring high on Hofstede's power distance index believes that
Y
          an unequal distribution of power is a basic fact of the organization.
          a., b. and d. An organization scoring low on Hofstede's power distance index may
N
          believe these ideas.


11. b.    Wikipedia-Emotional Intelligence
          b. Based on Goleman's mixed model, the five main emotional intelligence
Y         constructs are: self-awareness, self-regulation, social skill, empathy, and
          motivation.
N         a. These are the five stages of team development.
N         c. These are five methods for conflict resolution.
N         d. These are five sources of power.


12. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide section 8.3.2.3
          d. As part of the control quality process, we need to ensure that the approved
Y
          change request was implemented as approved.


13. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide X3.6
          c. During the ideas to action phase, we define the evaluation criteria, rate pros
Y
         and cons of alternatives and select the best solution.


14. b.
         b. Reverse mentoring is often a very proactive method to bridge the generation
Y        gap. It allows people of different generations to get to know each other, to learn
         from each other, and to value each other.


         PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction c. The communications plan tells
15.
    c.   us who gets what information, etc. It also tells us how to manage and control
Y
         communications.
N        a. and b. Be careful of questions containing the words "all" and "every".
         d. The stakeholder register helps us list and prioritize our stakeholders. It does
N
         not tell us who should receive what communication.


16. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y        d. Body language is an example of nonverbal communication.
N        a. Reports are an example of written communication.
N        b. Speeches are an example of oral communication.
N        c. Voice inflections are an example of verbal communication.


17. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y        b. Communication with peers is considered horizontal.
         a. Communication with your management or your team members is considered
N
         vertical.
N        c. Communication with your management is considered up communication.
N        d. Communication with your team members is considered down communication.


18. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y        a. The annual report would be considered official communication.
N        b. Off the record comments would be considered unofficial communication.
N        c. Voice inflections are an example of verbal communication.
N        d. Body language is an example of nonverbal communication.


19. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y        c. Voice inflections are an example of verbal communication.
N        a. The annual report would be considered written communication.
N        b. Speeches are an example of oral communication.
N        d. Body language is an example of nonverbal communication.


20. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y        a. Reports are an example of formal written communication.
N        b. Speeches are an example of formal oral communication.
N        c. E-mails are an example of informal written communication.
N        d. Hallway conversations are an example of informal oral communication.


21. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
         d. Developing a risk management plan is the first thing we should do in risk
Y
         management. This plan will tell us how to perform the other risk processes.
N        a. The risk management plan tells us who should be involved in identifying risks.
         b. The risk management plan will help us understand if it makes sense to perform
N
         quantitative risk analysis. There are many factors to consider.
         c. At this point we do not know if the risk response technique avoid would be
N
         appropriate or not for our project. There are many factors to consider.


22. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
Y        a. An opportunity is a risk that has the potential for a positive outcome.
N        b. A threat is a risk that has the potential for a negative outcome.
         c. An opportunity is a risk that has the potential for a positive outcome. Many
N        organizations use the term risk only in association with possible negative
         outcomes. Be careful on the exam. Risk is a neutral word.
N        d. An issue is a negative risk that has occurred.


23. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
Y        b. Risk tolerance is the amount of risk an organization is willing to take.
         a. Risk appetite is how much risk an entity will assume in anticipation for
N
         receiving a certain reward.
N        c. Risk threshold is used to determine which risks require responses.
N        d. Risk probability is the chance of a risk occurring.


24. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
Y        b. A threat is a risk that may lead to a negative outcome.
N        a. An opportunity is a risk that has the potential for a positive outcome.
         c. An opportunity is a risk that has the potential for a positive outcome. Many
N        organizations only use the term risk in association with possible negative
         outcomes. Be careful on the exam. Risk is a neutral word.
N        d. An issue is a negative risk that has occurred.


25. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
         b. The overall project risk is the total effect of uncertainty associated with a
Y
         project.
         a. Adding up the value of the individual risks does not give us the overall risk of
N        the project. Overall project risk looks at the project as a whole and not just
         individual elements added together.
         c. Adding up the value of the negative individual risks does not give us the
N
         overall risk of the project.
         d. Adding up the value of the positive individual risks does not give us the
N
         overall risk of the project.


26. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
Y        b. An issue is a negative risk that has occurred.
N        a. This statement is reversed.
         c. Issues and risks are not the same thing. Issues are negative risks that have
N
         occurred.
         d. There is a strong relationship between risks and issues. An issue is a negative
N
         risk that has occurred.


27. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 12 - Introduction
         d. A procurement management plan(s) would make it clear what items will be
Y        purchased from outside suppliers. Also these plans should address items with
         long lead times.
N        a. The question states nothing about issues with procurement SOWs.
         b. and c. The procurement management plans will tell us if we should use letters
N
         of intent and penalties with our suppliers.


28. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 12 - Introduction
Y        a. A purchase order is often considered a simple contract.
         b. and c. A request for proposal and a request for quote are documents that
N        request the seller to make an offer to sell. These documents themselves are not
         contracts though they may be referenced in the final contract.
         d. A request for information is a document that requests potential sellers to
N        provide information. This document is not a contract though it may be referenced
         in the final contract.


29. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 12 - Introduction
Y        c. Sellers are often referred to as bidders before they are selected.
         a. and b. Sellers are often referred to as contracted vendors or contracted
N
         suppliers once they are under contract to the buyer.
N        d. The customer is sometimes referred to as the client.


30. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 12 - Introduction
Y        b. Awarding a contract occurs in the conduct procurements process.
         a. Creating a plan for procurement occurs in the plan procurement management
N
         process.
         c. Overseeing the day-to-day work of the contracted supplier, including making
N
         payments, occurs in the control procurements process.
         d. Ending the contract relationship with the contracted supplier occurs in the
N
         close procurements process.


31. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 12 - Introduction
         a. Make or buy analysis is a general management technique used in the plan
Y
         procurements process.
         b. A bidder conference is an example of a tool and technique used in the conduct
N
         procurements process.
         c. A contract change control system is an example of a tool and technique used in
N
         the control procurements process.
         d. The procurement audit is an example of a tool and technique used in the close
N
         procurements process.

32. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 12 - Introduction
Y        c. In a contract both the buyer and the seller have obligations. At a minimum the
         buyer has the obligation to provide monetary or other valuable compensation.
         a. The buyer has an obligation but it does not always need to be in the form of
N
         money. The buyer may have an obligation to write a review of the seller's work.
N        b. The buyer and the seller both have obligations under a contract.
N        d. The seller has the obligation to provide a product, service, or result.
                    CLOSING PROCESSES
      Closing Process Group - Based on the PMBOK(R) Guide, there are
      two (2) processes of closing. These processes ensure that all processes across all
      process groups are finished so as to close out the phase, project or contractual
      obligation.

      Closing may occur when all the work is completed or may occur prematurely. An
      example of a premature close would be a terminated contract with a supplier.

      Normally we would close out all procurements on a project before we would state
      that the project is officially closed. Also releasing final resources is often the final
      activity on a project.


      Based on the PMP(R) Examination Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) there are
      seven (7) tasks of Closing. These tasks represent seven (7) % of your exam content.
      Key phrases associated with each task are:


           Task                                           Key Phrases
           Task 1                        Obtain final acceptance of the project deliverables
           Task 2                        Transfer the ownership of the project deliverables
           Task 3                         Obtain financial, legal and administrative closure
           Task 4                            Prepare and share the final project report
           Task 5                                      Collate lessons learned
           Task 6                                    Archive project documents
           Task 7                           Obtain feedback from relevant stakeholders



The PMBOK(R) Guide, the most often selected reference in studying for the PMP(R) exam,
does not list the tasks comprising the closing process group but emphasizes processes
instead. Although not as robust as the PMBOK(R) Guide for in-depth study, the PMP(R)
Examination Content Outline presents the tasks shown in the table above. Although
memorizing these tasks for the exam is not necessary, reviewing them from time to time is
recommended because they form the basis of the PMP(R) exam's questions on closing. As
we cover the two processes in the closing process group in the upcoming pages, you can
see how these tasks relate to the processes.
Close Procurements

  Exam Tip: Review Figure 12-9 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


     In the process close procurements we take the steps necessary to close-out each
     procurement. This may include many administrative items (administrative close-out)
     such as:
                    *    Dealing with claims and disputes
                    *    Managing records

     Some procurements close even before all the deliverables are complete. We call this
     early termination. There are three (3) types of early termination:

                                The contract ends because one party believes the other party is not living up to its
Termination for default         obligations.
Termination   for   mutual Both parties agree it is in their mutual best interest to end the contract even though
agreement                       there are still open obligations.
                                The contract may stipulate that the buyer has the right to terminate the contract at
                                any time without a reason other than "it is convenient." In some countries the
Termination               for   government of the country sets up all their purchases this way. In reality, the seller
convenience                     could also have this right stipulated in the contract though the focus here is on the
                                buyer having the right.




INPUTs of close procurements

     Project management plan - the procurement management plan, as
     a subset of the project management plan, provides guidance on the process of close
     procurements.


     Procurement documents - appropriate documents associated with
     the procurement should be collected and archived. The documentation may be used
     in the future to help plan new procurements and even to help select seller.
TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of close procurements

     Procurement audit - during close procurements we may audit all the
     procurement processes to collect lessons learned.


  EXAM TIP: Remember the word audit is associated with processes not deliverables.
We are auditing the procurement processes, not inspecting the deliverables from the
supplier.



     Procurement negotiation - as our contract with our supplier ends
     we want to reach a fair settlement. As stated earlier, below is a list in order of
     preference of methods to help us reach a fair settlement, etc.
                    1. Negotiations- both parties negotiate and work out disagreements
                 (preferred method)
                    2. Mediation- a third party mediator is brought in to help parties
                 work out their disagreements
                    3. Arbitration- a third party arbitrator is brought in to make a
                 decision
                    4. Litigation- the disagreement goes to court and a decision is
                 made (least desirable method due to time, cost, and potential loss of
                 reputation)


     Records management system - hopefully we were archiving
     our documents related to this procurement throughout the control procurements
     process. At the end we want to archive the final documents.


OUTPUTs of close procurements (not all listed)

     Closed procurements - after the final deliverable has been accepted
     and the final invoice submitted and paid, the buyer, through its procurement
     administrator should give the seller formal written notice that the contract is closed
     out.
CLOSE PROCUREMENTS - Sample Questions

1. Which of the following is the most desirable option to deal with disagreements on
contracts:
a. negotiation
b. mediation
c. arbitration
d. litigation

2. Administrative items that are part of close procurements include all of the
following except:
a. finalizing open claims
b. updating records
c. archiving information
d. responding to request for proposals

3. All of the following are types of early termination except:
a. termination for default
b. termination for completion
c. termination by mutual consent
d. termination for convenience

4. A procurement audit is:
a. a review of the procurement processes
b. a review of the accepted procurement product
c. a review of the rejected procurement product
d. a review of the contract for missed requirements

5. Which of the following is the least desirable option to deal with disagreements on
contracts:
a. negotiation
b. mediation
c. arbitration
d. litigation

6. Reserve analysis as a tool and technique of risk monitoring and control looks at:
a. plan versus actual on cost performance
b. plan versus actual on schedule performance
c. the amount of contingency reserve remaining versus the amount of risk remaining
d. the amount of money remaining versus the amount of work remaining
CLOSE PROCUREMENTS - Solutions
1.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4.2.2
          a. Negotiation is the preferred method. If possible we want to try to resolve
Y
          issues in a timely manner and dispassionately.
          b. Mediation means bringing in a third party to help us work out the issue. If we
N         cannot work things out between ourselves and the supplier through negotiation,
          then mediation may be a good fallback option.
          c. Arbitration means bringing in a third party to hear both sides and make a
          decision on the issue. If we cannot work things out between ourselves and the
N
          supplier through negotiation, then mediation or arbitration may be good fallback
          options.
          d. Litigation is often the least preferred method because of the time, the cost, and
N
          the risk to our reputation.


2.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4
          d. Responding to requests for proposal is an action the seller would take during
Y
          the conduct procurements process, not the close procurements process.
N         a. During close procurements we may have open claims that need to be closed.
N         b. During close procurements we may have records that need to be updated.
N         c. During close procurements we may have information that needs to be achieved.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4
          b. There is no such phrase as termination for completion. The word termination
Y
          implies ending something before it is completed.
          a. Termination for default is the premature end of a contract because one (or
N
          more) of the parties is not meeting its obligations.
          c. Termination by mutual agreement is the premature end of a contract with all
N
          parties in agreement even though there are open obligations.
          d. Termination for convenience must be defined in the contract. It is the premature
N         end of a contract because one party, usually the buyer, feels it is in their best
          interest to end the contract and the contract gives them the right to do this.


4.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4.2.1
Y         a. A procurement audit is the review of the procurement processes.
N         b. and c. Audits usually are associated with processes not products.
N         d. The procurement audit is performed at the end of the contract life. This would
          be too late to look for missing requirements.


  EXAM TIP: Remember the word audit is associated with processes not deliverables.
We are auditing the procurement processes, not inspecting the deliverables from the
supplier.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4.2.2
          d. Litigation is often the least preferred method because of the time, the cost, and
Y
          the risk to our reputation.
          a. Negotiation is the preferred method. If possible we want to try to resolve
N
          issues in a timely manner and dispassionately.
          b. Mediation means bringing in a third party to help us work out the issue. If we
          cannot work things out between ourselves and the supplier through negotiation,
N
          then mediation may be a good fallback option. Mediation is preferred over
          litigation.
          c. Arbitration means bringing in a third party to hear both sides and make a
          decision on the issue. If we cannot work things out between ourselves and the
N
          supplier through negotiation, then mediation or arbitration may be good fallback
          options. Arbitration is preferred over litigation.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide 11.6.2.1
          c. Reserve analysis as part of risk monitoring and control compares the amount of
Y
          contingency reserve remaining versus the amount of risk remaining.
          a. Earned value analysis compares plan versus actual on cost performance
N
          through the CPI.
          b. Earned value analysis compares plan versus actual on schedule performance
N
          through the SPI.
          d. Earned value analysis compares the amount of money remaining versus the
N
          amount of work remaining through the TCPI (to complete performance index).


   EXAM TIP: The last question has nothing to do with close procurements. Every time
you read a question ask yourself- What knowledge area am I in? What process group am I
in? Do I know what process I am in? These answers may give you clues to the right
answers.
Close Project or Phase

 Exam Tip: Review Figure 4-13 of the PMBOK(R) Guide.


   Close project or phase is the process of completing all work for the project or the
   phase. Closure is measured against the scope baseline.

   A big element of close project or phase is administrative closure. Administrative
   closure includes actions to:
                  *     meet exit criteria
                  *     transition of ownership of product
                  *     manage project records
                  *     release final resources
                  *     etc.


INPUTs of close project or phase

   Project management plan                           - completion of the project is
   measured against the project and specifically the scope baseline.


   Accepted deliverables - these accepted deliverables are an output of
   validate scope. The customer has already accepted the deliverables as part of
   validate scope and now are going to receive ownership.


   Organizational process assets - ex. Closure guidelines

TOOLs and TECHNIQUEs of close project or phase

   Expert judgment - bring in experts to ensure all closure standards are
   met.
     Analytical techniques                     - these techniques are used to measure
     performance against project metrics.


     Meetings - multiple meetings may be needed at the end of the project or
     phase. Ex. Lessons learned session.


OUTPUTs of close project or phase

     Final product or service or result transition -                                  the
     customer has already accepted the individual project deliverables. At this point we
     want to turn over ownership of the product(s) in total.


 EXAM TIP: The exam may ask multiple questions about closing the project.
We have to make sure:
              *      Completion of the project is measured against the project
            management plan. We must make sure we have completed the work of the
            project.
               *    Completing the work of the project is not enough. We must achieve
             acceptance from the customer.
               *     Records must be managed and lessons learned collected.
The final "event" is to release the final resources.
CLOSE PROJECT OR PHASE - Sample
Questions

1. The project has entered the close project or phase process. Along with the
organizational process assets updates another critical output is:
a. verified deliverables
b. final product, service, or result transition
c. accepted deliverables
d. procurement documents

2. Accepted deliverables come into the close project or phase process from:
a. validate scope
b. control quality
c. perform quality assurance
d. direct and manage project work

3. All of the following are considered elements of the close project or phase process
except:
a. finalizing all activities for the phase or the project
b. ensuring the project work is complete and project has met its objectives
c. finalizing open claims with our vendors
d. completing other administrative closure activities

4. The project has entered the close project or phase process. Along with the
project management plan and the organizational process assets another critical
input is:
a. verified deliverables
b. final product, service, or result transition
c. accepted deliverables
d. issue logs

5. Your project has finally reached the close project or phase process. There is a lot
to do and you and your few remaining team members are very busy. All of the
following are examples of close project or phase activities except:
a. customer acceptance of completed deliverables
b. satisfaction of exit criteria
c. collection of final project or phase records
d. audit of project success or failure

6. Your organization has been producing snack foods for over 50 years. Your current
project is an extension of a very successful product line of highly processed chips.
With the current interest in healthy food, your project has suddenly been
terminated. There is a lot to do when a project is terminated. What is most
important to focus on first?
a. archiving all phase/project records
b. releasing resources
c. reviewing work packages to understand current status
d. working with subcontractors to end all open contracts
CLOSE PROJECT OR PHASE - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.6.3.1
          b. At the close of a phase or a project, ownership of the deliverables is
Y
          transferred to the sponsor or the customer.
          a. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality. Verified means the
N
          deliverables are correct.
          c. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope and an input to close
N
          project/phase.
N         d. Procurement documents are not related to this process.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-13
Y         a. Accepted deliverables are an output of validate scope.
          b. Verified deliverables are an output of control quality. Verified deliverables are
N
          an input to validate scope, not close project or phase.
N         c. Deliverables are not inputs or outputs of perform quality assurance.
          d. Deliverables, not verified, not accepted, are an output of direct and manage
N
          project work.


3.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 4.6 and 12.4.2.2
          c. Finalizing open claims with our vendors is part of close procurements not
Y
          close project/phase.
          a., b., and d. All of these ideas are part of close project or phase. Completing
N         administrative elements during this process is sometimes called administrative
          closure.


4.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.6.1.2
          c. Accepted deliverables, as an output of validate scope, become an input to
Y
          close project/phase.
          a. Verified deliverables, meaning the deliverables are correct, are an output of
N
          control quality and an input of validate scope.
          b. The final product, service, or result transition is an output of close
N
          project/phase.
N         d. Issue logs are not an input or an output of close project/phase.
5.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.6 and 5.5
          a. Each of the deliverables should be accepted by the customer in the validate
Y
          scope process not the close project or phase process.
N         b., c., and d. These activities are all part of close project or phase.


6.   c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.6.1.2
          c. We need to understand the status of the work packages for multiple reasons. It
          is important to know if any of the work on the project to date is salvageable.
Y
          From a different standpoint we need to review the status of the work packages to
          collect lessons learned.
          b., c., and d. While we should do all of these activities, we first want to review
N         the status of the work packages. We may need resources, including subcontractor
          resources to do this.
CLOSING- Knowledge and Skills
The ideas discussed below are based on information provided by the PMP(R) Exam
Content Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) and may or may not be directly referenced in the
PMBOK(R) Guide.


     Performance measurement techniques (KPI and
     key success factors) - Organizations determine their key success
     factors (KSFs), based on business objectives. Many organizations will use the terms
     critical success factors (CSF) and key success factors (KSF) interchangeably. Key
     performance indicators (KPIs) are set up to track key success factors. In other
     words, KSFs are what we need to do to be successful while KPIs measure our
     success.

     Key performance indicators (KPIs) are the performance measures an organization
     uses to determine if a project (or the organization itself) is successful. Selecting
     KPIs requires a good understanding of what is important for the project to be
     successful. Some organizations use a balanced scorecard as a management
     framework to help them choose and measure KPIs. In general, we apply SMART
     technique to KPIs, which should be specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and
     time-based.

     A leading indicator versus a lagging indicator is an important KPI concept. A lagging
     indicator is a measure of output produced. Lagging indicators are often easier to
     measure but harder to influence. A leading indicator is a measure of inputs. Leading
     indicators are sometimes harder to measure but easier to influence.

     Example: A large part of my business is selling project management workshops to
     individuals. A lagging indicator would measure how many participants attend my
     workshops each month. A leading indicator would measure how many potential
     participants call or email me to ask questions about attending a future workshop.

     Examples of project KPIs:
                   *     Estimate to completion (ETC)
                   *     Planned delivery date versus actual delivery date
             *    Return on investment (ROI)
             *    Number of open issues
             *    Current scope backlog

The PMIS (project management information system) may be used to gather and
report on KPIs as well as other key success factors.
MINI-TEST after CLOSING- Questions

It is strongly recommended that you not circle the answers below so you may attempt
these questions again later.

1. A project manager has been working with the sponsor as well as other key
stakeholders on the project charter. The project charter has been approved and it is
time to inform the stakeholders of its approval. One of the primary reasons we want
to inform the stakeholders of charter approval is to:
a. formalize the authority of the project manager
b. validate project alignment with organizational strategy and expected business value
c. support the evaluation of the feasibility of new products or services
d. ensure a common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones and stakeholder
roles and responsibilities

2. While initiating a project a project manager may often perform a project
assessment based upon available information, lessons learned from previous
projects, and meetings with relevant stakeholders in order to:
a. validate project alignment with organizational strategy and expected business value
b. support the feasibility of new products or services within the given assumptions and
constraints
c. ensure a common understanding of the project's key deliverables, milestones and
stakeholder roles and responsibilities
d. ensure stakeholders are in agreement with the project charter

3. Most successful organizations today have a strategic plan. The strategic plan
must fit the organizations values. Organizational values are:
a. why the organization exists and what it plans to achieve
b. what the future state of the organization will look like
c. how the organization will evaluate necessary tradeoffs and balance decisions
d. what benefits the program is expected to deliver

4. Value is achieved when:
a. the beneficiaries receive the project deliverables
b. the beneficiaries utilize the project benefits
c. the beneficiaries accept the verified deliverables
d. the beneficiaries accept the project benefits
5. The estimating technique that most likely will result in a transparent and
structured estimate that can be tracked and managed is:
a. analogous estimating
b. top-down estimating
c. parametric estimating
d. bottom-up estimating

6. We are in the process of determining if the product deliverables are being built
correctly. Often we use our organization's quality standards to help with this
determination. These quality standards are included in the:
a. enterprise environmental factors
b. organizational process assets
c. work performance data
d. quality management plan

7. An important part of knowledge management is determining what knowledge is
valuable and what knowledge is relatively less valuable. All of the following are
ways organizations may determine the value of knowledge except:
a. project managers specifying critical knowledge
b. reviewing what knowledge is required for regulatory compliance
c. realizing that all knowledge is valuable
d. utilizing industry practices and benchmarks to determine critical knowledge

8. Organizations often struggle to get the information they expect from KPIs. A
typical mistake many organizations make when setting KPIs is:
a. the organization makes KPIs too simple and easy to understand
b. the organization relates KPIs to corporate and project goals
c. the organization creates too many KPIs
d. the organization includes leading indicators of performance

9. All of the following are elements of active listening except:
a. watching the body language of the speaker
b. paraphrasing what the speaker has stated
c. stating agreement or disagreement with the ideas of the speaker
d. making eye contact

10. It has been decided that individuals are to brainstorm ideas related to
requirements. Once these ideas have been generated, they will be consolidated in a
visual way to reflect commonality and differences in understanding and to generate
new ideas. What group creativity idea is being used:
a. multi-criteria decision analysis
b. affinity diagrams
c. idea/mind mapping
d. nominal group technique

11. An organization scoring high on Geert Hofstede's uncertainty avoidance index:
a. likes uncertainty and can deal with it easily
b. has a positive attitude toward change
c. prefers a competitive climate
d. has a low tolerance for unusual behavior


12. Emotional intelligence is the capacity to be aware of, control, and express one's
emotions, and to handle interpersonal relationships judiciously and empathetically.
The term gained prominence in 1995 when which prominent psychologist published a
book on the topic?
a. Goleman
b. Goldratt
c. McGregor
d. Maslow

13. Many unsuccessful projects are impacted by poor decision-making. Many
successful organizations improve decision making by all of the following except:
a. elevating most project decisions to the project sponsor
b. embedding a culture that enables an effective decision-making process and supporting
the people making the decisions
c. providing the right support and information to the people making project and program
decisions
d. establishing and following a transparent process to support decision making

14. In your providence one major road currently connects the east and west. There
are many problems with this road. The most pressing problem is that the road is
closed on multiple days each year because of weather. Designing and building a
tunnel has been proposed through a mountain pass that is the site of the road
closures. The government has approved the proposal, and you have been named the
project manager. An important step at this point is to get the project stakeholders
to accept and commit to the tunnel project. Most likely what phase of the decision
making model is the project in:
a. solution action planning
b. problem definition
c. ideas to action
d. problem solution generation

15. The project is at a critical go/no-decision point. Based on history you realize this
is a good time to collect lessons learned. Lessons learned should be:
a. followed as long as they support the strategic vision of the organization
b. published on the corporate website so that others may benefit from your knowledge
c. discussed with the current relevant parties but otherwise kept private
d. documented as part of the historical database for both the project and the performing
organization

16. Historically, your organization has struggled with stakeholder management. In
fact, the term "stakeholder management" is new to your organization and most
people do not understand what it really means. Your projects experience a
tremendous number of change requests and many of these requests occur late in the
project, causing schedule delays and cost overruns. You believe the root cause of
these requests is a lack of stakeholder engagement. Therefore, you have decided on
your current project to put a much stronger focus on stakeholder management. At
an early team meeting the members of the core team are arguing as to what is
really the first thing to do to address this issue. You tell them we must focus first on:
a. identifying and prioritizing our project stakeholders
b. developing a stakeholder management plan to help us engage our stakeholders
c. actively engaging with all stakeholders in the same way so that no stakeholder feels
left out
d. actively engaging with the most important stakeholders

17. Work performance information is an output of what process?
a. identify stakeholders
b. plan stakeholder management
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

18. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
a. identify stakeholders
b. plan stakeholder management
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

19. An information management system is a tool and technique of what process?
a. identify stakeholders
b. plan stakeholder management
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

20. What plans are inputs of the manage stakeholder engagement process?
a. stakeholder management plan and communications management plan
b. stakeholder management plan and human resource plan
c. human resource plan and communications management plan
d. human resource plan and configuration management plan

21. Issue logs are an output of what process?
a. identify stakeholders
b. plan stakeholder management
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

22. The five project management process groups include:
a. initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling
b. integration, scope, time, cost, and quality
c. initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and closing
d. concept, planning, execution, controlling, and closeout

23. Verified deliverables are an output of which process?
a. validate scope
b. control quality
c. close project or phase
d. direct and manage project work

24. Accepted deliverables are an output of:
a. validate scope
b. control quality
c. close project or phase
d. direct and manage project work
25. Large projects are often separated into distinct phases. The process groups are:
a. the same as these project phases
b. normally repeated in each of these phases
c. related to the product and, therefore, not related to the project phases
d. related to project management and, therefore, not related to the project phases

26. Some work of which process group are normally performed external to the
project's boundary?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. monitoring and controlling


27. In multi-phase projects, the initiating processes occur:
a. only during the concept phase
b. in every phase
c. only in the early phases
d. only when the sponsor requests them

28. The project becomes officially authorized through the:
a. approval of the concept phase gate
b. approval of the project charter
c. approval of the WBS
d. approval of the scope statement

29. The document that describes in detail the project's deliverables and the work
required to create those deliverables is the:
a. project charter
b. scope statement
c. scope management plan
d. WBS

30. The process group that must provide feedback to implement corrective or
preventive action is:
a. planning
b. executing
c. monitoring and controlling
d. implementation
31. The project scope statement is the primary output of :
a. define scope
b. collect requirements
c. develop project management plan
d. create WBS

32. The scope baseline is an output of:
a. create WBS
b. collect requirements
c. define scope
d. define activities


33. The schedule baseline is an output of:
a. define activities
b. develop project management plan
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity durations

34. The cost baseline is an output of:
a. estimate costs
b. determine budget
c. control costs
d. develop schedule

35. The procurement statement of work is an output of:
a. collect requirements
b. plan procurement management
c. develop project management plan
d. define scope

36. The cost management plan is an output of which process?
a. estimate costs
b. determine budget
c. plan cost management
d. estimate activity resources
MINI-TEST after CLOSING - Solutions
1.   d.   PMP(R) Exam Content Outline - June 2015
          d. We want to inform the stakeholders of charter approval in order to ensure a
Y         common understanding of the key deliverables, milestones and stakeholder roles
          and responsibilities.
          a. We want to obtain charter approval in order to formalize the authority of the
N
          project manager.
          b. We want to conduct benefit analysis in order to validate project alignment with
N
          organizational strategy and expected business value.
          c. We want to perform a project assessment in order to support the evaluation of
N
          the feasibility of new products or services.


2.   b.   PMP(R) Exam Content Outline Initiating-Task 1- June 2015
          b. We perform a project assessment based on available information, lessons
          learned from previous projects, and meetings with relevant stakeholders in order
Y
          to support the feasibility of new products or services within given assumptions
          and constraints.


3.   c.
          c. Organizations often look to their values to help evaluate necessary trade-offs
Y
          and make decisions.
N         a. The mission of an organization is why the organization exists.
N         b. The desired future state of an organization is the organization's vision.
          d. The benefits register should list the expected benefits from a project or
N
          program.


4.   b.
          Value is achieved when the beneficiaries (often called the customers or end
Y
          users) utilize the project benefits.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 6.4.2.4
          d. Bottom-up estimates provide a transparent means of tracking and managing an
Y
          estimate.
6.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 8.3.1.8
Y         b. Organizational standards are contained in the organizational process assets.


7.   c.
          c. This answer is the exception because of the word "all". The word "all" is
Y
          extreme.


8.   c.
          c. If we have too many KPIs we become lost in detail and managing KPIs
Y
          becomes a project in its own right.


9.   c.   Wikipedia on Active Listening
          c. Active listening is about listening. While stating agreement or disagreement
Y         with a speaker's ideas may be a good practice, at times it is not considered part
          of active listening.


10. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide Section 5.2.2.4
          c. Idea/mind maps are a way to plot ideas on a visual map to see commonality as
Y
          well as differences and to generate new ideas.


11. d.    Wikipedia on Hofstede's Cultural Dimensions Theory
          d. The Uncertainty Avoidance Index is defined as "a society's tolerance for
Y         ambiguity." An organization that scores high has a strong uncertainty avoidance
          index and therefore has a low tolerance for unusual behavior.
          a., b. and c. An organization that scores low on the uncertainty avoidance index
N         likes uncertainty, has a positive attitude toward change, and often prefers a
          competitive climate.


12. a.    Wikipedia - Emotional Intelligence
          a. The term emotional intelligence gained prominence in 1995 when Daniel
Y
          Goleman published a book by that title.


13. a.
          a. Elevating most project decisions to the project sponsor turns the sponsor into
Y         the project manager. Most projects sponsors do not have the time or interest in
         being the project manager.


14. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section X3.6
         a. During solution action planning, our goal is to involve key stakeholders so as to
Y
         gain acceptance and commitment to making the solution work.


15. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide Section 8.3.3.8
         d. Lessons learned should become part of the historical database for both the
Y
         project and the organization.


16. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-1
         a. Did you get tricked by this question? Many people will pick answer b. The best
Y        answer though is answer a. We must first identify the stakeholders before we can
         plan how to engage them.
         b., c., and d. We must first identify stakeholders before we can plan how to
         engage them. The stakeholder management plan will tell us how to engage with
N        stakeholders. Most likely we will not engage with each stakeholder in the same
         way. Some stakeholders are more interested in the project than others. Some
         stakeholders are more powerful than others.


17. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-1
         d. Work performance information is an output of the control stakeholder
Y
         engagement process.


EXAM TIP: Remember work performance information is only an output of control
processes.


18. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-1
         a. Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique of the identify stakeholders
Y
         process.


19. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-1
         d. Information management systems is a tool and technique of the control
Y
         stakeholder engagement process.
20. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-1
         a. The manage stakeholder engagement process has two plans as inputs: the
Y
         stakeholder management plan and the communications management plan.
         b., c., and d. The human resource plan is associated with the team and not the
N
         stakeholders. It would only be an input to processes related to the team.


21. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 13-1
Y        c. Issue logs are an output of the manage stakeholder engagement process.


22. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 3 - Introduction
         c. The five process groups are: initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and
Y
         controlling, and closing.


23. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.7.7
Y        b. Verified deliverables are an output of the control quality process.


24. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.7.2
Y        a. Accepted deliverables are an output of the validate scope process.


25. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.3
Y        b. The five process groups are repeated in each of the project phases.


26. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.4
         a. The develop project charter process of the initiating process group is
Y
         performed before the project begins (external to the project's boundary).


27. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.4
Y        b. In multi-phase projects, the initiating processes occur in every phase.


28. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.4
Y        b. The project charter is the document that officially authorizes the project.


29. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.4
Y        b. The scope statement describes the project deliverables and the work required
         to
         create those deliverables.


30. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.7
         c. The monitoring and controlling process group provides feedback to implement
Y
         corrective and preventative action.


31. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.4
Y        a. The scope statement is an output of the define scope process.


32. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.5
Y        a. The scope baseline is an output of the create WBS process.


33. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.11
Y        c. The schedule baseline is an output of the develop schedule process.


34. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.14
Y        b. The cost baseline is an output of the determine budget process.


35. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.23
         b. The procurement statement of work is an output of the plan procurement
Y
         management process.


36. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: A1.5.12
Y        c. The cost management plan is an output of the plan cost management process.
      Cross-Cutting Knowledge and Skills
The ideas discussed below are based on information provided by PMP(R) Exam Content
Outline (PMI(R), June 2015) and may or may not be directly referenced in the PMBOK(R)
Guide.


     Active Listening              - Active listening is a communication technique in
     which the listener communicates back to the speaker the meaning that the listener has
     gotten from the speaker's words, but in his own words. The goal of active listening
     is for the speaker to confirm what he has heard and, more importantly, to confirm an
     understanding between both parties. An understanding does not imply agreement
     however.


     Applicable laws and regulations - In order                           to sit for the
     PMP(R) Exam we need to have agreed to follow the Project Management Institute
     Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. It carries the obligation to comply with
     all laws, regulations, and organizational and professional policies that apply.
     Another place on the exam we might see a reference to laws and regulations regards
     the collect requirements process. As we collect requirements, we should also
     perform a document analysis. Laws may help us elicit requirements.


     Brainstorming techniques - Brainstorming is a group creativity
     technique used to generate multiple ideas on a single topic. Several guidelines (some
     people would say rules) govern brainstorming. In no particular order, these are:
                    *     We want lots of ideas. Quantity may lead to quality
                    *     Every idea is a good idea. Do not critique ideas during
                 brainstorming.
                    *     Welcome crazy ideas
                    *     Allow and encourage the combination or add-on effect of ideas

     There are many variations and/or other methods related to brainstorming:
                    *     Nominal group technique is a voting technique usually used
                 after brainstorming.
                    *     Group passing technique - People sit in a circle. Each person
                 writes down one idea and then passes the paper containing it to the next
             person. This continues until each person gets his or her original idea
             back. The original ideas most often will have been greatly elaborated
             on by this point.
                *    Team idea mapping method - each person brainstorms one
             separate idea. Ideas are then added to an idea map. As the map is
             developed, commonalities may become visible and new ideas emerge
             due to association.
                *    Question brainstorming, sometimes called "questorming" - the
             questions themselves are brainstormed. Therefore everyone should be
             able to participate. Often the questions are prioritized before
             determining solutions.
                *    Affinity diagrams - similar ideas are grouped together


Business acumen                    - keenness and quickness in understanding and
dealing with a business situation in a manner that is likely to lead to a good outcome.
The meaning of the term "business acumen" can be more deeply understood by
examining its two component words: SHRM's Business Literacy Glossary defines
business literacy as "the knowledge and understanding of the financial, accounting,
marketing and operational functions of an organization." The Oxford English
Dictionary defines acumen as "the ability to make good judgments and quick
decisions." Business acumen also includes using appropriate business terms when
communicating with others in the organization.
We need to understand how our project, the work we do, and the decisions we make
affect others in the organization and the organization itself.


Coaching, mentoring, training and motivational
techniques
Coaching: Example- we coach a team member on how to write better requirements
             *     A method to develop higher levels of project team competency
           and performance
             *     In contrast to mentoring, often a shorter term relationship with
           more specific and measurable outcomes
             *     Also used to address poor performance
             *     Not the same as counseling
                          Coaching- helps the person move from "can't do" to "can
                 do"
                          Counseling- helps the person move from "won't do" to
                 "will do"
Mentoring: Example- we mentor a team member on how to be a more inspiring
leader
               *    Often a relatively longer term relationship than coaching
               *    The mentor guides the mentee
Training: See the develop project team process for information on training.
Motivation: Creating a project environment where individuals can achieve
maximum satisfaction based on what they value. Examples of what they value may
include:
               *    a sense accomplishment related to performance
               *    a sense of belonging based on work relationships
               *    a sense of growth and learning
               *    rewards, recognition, etc.
See the manage project team process for information on motivation.


Configuration management (CM)                                    is made up of the
processes, activities, etc., used to manage certain items during the life of the project.
Items to be managed under configuration control often include physical items,
documents, forms, and records. CM provides visibility and control over an item's
performance as well as its functional and physical attributes.


Decision making - (Pulse of the Profession(R): Capturing the Value of
Project Management through Decision Making 6 August 2015 PMI (R) and
PMBOK(R) Guide)
Four basic decision styles are used by project managers:
         *      Command - the project manager makes the decision. This style may be
      appropriate provided the project manager has the required knowledge and
      experience to make a good decision. This style is used if the quality of the
      decision is more important than acceptance by the team members.
         *      Consultation - the project manager asks his team members for their
      opinions before making the decision alone. A project manager would often use
      this style when he is willing to admit, at least to himself, that he does not know
      everything. This style is used when the quality of the decision and acceptance
      by the team members are both important.
         *      Consensus - team members are involved in the decision-making and
      reach an agreement. This style is used when acceptance is more important than
      quality.
         *      Coin flip (random)
Four major factors may affect the decision style used:
        *     Time constraints
        *     Trust
        *     Quality
        *     Acceptance

There are multiple decision-making models or processes. One six-phase model is:
               1. Problem definition - fully explore, clarify, and define the
            problem
               2. Problem solution generation - brainstorming multiple solutions
            and discouraging premature decisions
               3. Ideas to action - define evaluation criteria, rate pros and cons of
            alternatives, select best solution
               4. Solution action planning - involve key participants to gain
            acceptance and commitment
               5. Solution evaluation planning - perform post-implementation
            analysis, evaluation and lessons learned
               6. Evaluation of the outcome and process - evaluate how well the
            problem was solved or project goals were attained (extension of
            previous phase)


Diversity and cultural sensitivity                         - Hofstede studied five
dimensions used to measure culture.
               *    Power distance index - measures the extent to which less
            powerful members of a group accept and expect that power is
            distributed unequally.
                            Cultures rated high on the power distance index view an
                   unequal distribution of power in society as a fact of life. In such
                   cultures, sources of power are often coercive or referent in
                   nature.
                            Cultures rated low on the power distance believe in a
                   more equal distribution of power throughout the society. In such
                   cultures, sources of power are often based on expert knowledge
                   or legitimacy.
              *     Individualism versus collectivism - Individualism is about
            your separateness as a person while collectivism is about your
            obligation to others.
               *    Masculinity versus feminism (stereotypes for each word) -
            Masculine traits are typically thought to include assertiveness, self-
            centeredness, power, and a focus on individual achievements and
            material success. Feminine traits are viewed as more modest and
            caring.
               *   Uncertainty avoidance index - This index measures the extent
            in which people experience discomfort with uncertainty.
                          Cultures having a high uncertainty avoidance use laws
                  and rules as well as safety and security measures to minimize the
                  occurrence of unstructured situations.
                           Cultures having low uncertainty avoidance try to make
                  their members feel comfortable in unstructured and varying
                  situations.
               *     Long term orientation versus short term orientation - Long
            term orientation fosters virtues oriented toward future rewards, in
            particular perseverance and thrift. Short term orientation focuses more
            on present rewards and less on future ones. An emphasis on quick
            results as well as the perception of leisure time as important would be
            traits of a short term orientation.


Emotional intelligence - Emotional intelligence is the capacity to
be aware of, control, and express one's emotions, and to handle interpersonal
relationships judiciously and empathetically. Many believe that emotional
intelligence may have a strong effect on both personal as well as professional
success.


Facilitation - The PMBOK(R) Guide lists four types of facilitation technique:
brainstorming , conflict resolution, problem solving and meeting management. Please
see previous sections for more discussion of these ideas.


Generational sensitivity and diversity - Each generation
has its own strengths and weaknesses. Understanding and respecting these
differences is important in building a successful multigenerational workforce.
Embracing the fact that young workers have knowledge to share can help to bridge
the generation gap.
Example: Reverse mentoring - having a younger worker mentor an older, more
experienced worker in a new technology can help build and strengthen relationships
between members of different generations. The long-term result is often that both
parties learn from each other.


Knowledge management - (Pulse of the Profession(R): Capturing
the Value of Project Management Through Knowledge Transfer by PMI(R) 6
March 2015)
Knowledge transfer is the methodical replication of the expertise, wisdom, insight,
and tacit knowledge of key professionals in coworkers.
Steps of the Knowledge Transfer Life Cycle:
1. Identifying - Determine what knowledge needs to be transferred
2. Capturing - Accumulate the essential knowledge that needs to be transferred
3. Sharing - Establish methods for transferring the knowledge
4. Applying - Use the knowledge that is transferred
5. Assessing - Evaluate the benefits of the knowledge that is transferred


Lessons learned                  - Lessons learned are the knowledge collected
throughout the project. We want to understand what we did, why we did it and what
we may want to do differently in the future so as to improve performance. It is
important to remember we should be collecting lessons learned throughout the
project and not just at the end of the project. Also we want to use the lessons learned
throughout during the current project and not just on the next project.


Influencing techniques                    - Many projects occur in a matrix
environment. Often the project manager has less authority than desired in this
structure. Therefore the project manager may need to rely heavily on his/her ability
to influence.


Organizational awareness                         - Organizational awareness is the
level of understanding and knowledge of our organization, including its culture,
structure, and governance. Understanding how things get done, through both official
and unofficial channels, is an element of organizational awareness.


Peer-review processes                     - A peer-review is the evaluation of
scientific, academic, or professional works by others in the same field. In project
management it often means having other project managers review your project in
order to identify:
                *    Things you are doing well
                *    Things you could be doing better
                *    Things you are not doing that you should be doing
                *    Things you are doing that you should not be doing.

A peer review process has many benefits. Often, a project manager is too close to
the project to recognize the items listed above. A peer with experience in project
management may be able to point out things we cannot see. We may later be asked to
provide a peer review of someone else's project.


Situational awareness - Situational awareness is being aware of
what is going on around you. It is understanding the environment in order to make
critical decisions.
Quick Review - Sample Questions

1. Communication methods is a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan human resource management
b. plan communication management
c. identify stakeholders
d. plan quality

2. Avoid is a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan risk responses
b. plan human resource management
c. plan communications management
d. identify stakeholders

3. The cost of quality is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. perform quality assurance and control quality
b. estimate costs and plan quality
c. plan quality and determine budget
d. perform quality assurance and determine budget

4. Cost-benefit analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
a. estimate costs
b. determine budgets
c. control costs
d. plan quality

5. The people famous for Plan-Do-Check-Act are:
a. Juran and Crosby
b. Isikawa and Pareto
c. Tuckman and Isikawa
d. Shewhart and Deming

6. The change management plan is an output of what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. integrated change control
c. monitor and control project work
d. plan communications
7. The configuration management plan is an output of what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. integrated change control
c. monitor and control project work
d. plan communications

8. Sensitivity analysis is a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan human resource management
b. plan communications
c. identify stakeholders
d. perform quantitative risk analysis


9. Fixed price contracts and cost-reimbursable contracts are inputs to:
a. plan procurements
b. plan risk responses
c. plan communications
d. plan human resource management

10. Funding limit reconciliation is a tool and technique of what process?
a. estimate costs
b. determine budget
c. develop project management plan
d. plan quality

11. Overlapping activities or running them in parallel when we would prefer to run
them in sequence is called:
a. crashing
b. resource leveling
c. fast tracking
d. critical chain

12. Benchmarking is a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan quality
b. plan communications
c. plan human resource management
d. plan procurements

13. Organizational theory is a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan quality
b. plan communications
c. plan human resource management
d. plan procurements

14. The document that describes how the project scope will be defined, documented,
validated, managed, and controlled is called?
a. scope baseline
b. scope statement
c. scope management plan
d. WBS dictionary


15. The document that sets the criteria for planning and controlling project costs is
called?
a. cost baseline
b. project budget
c. project funding
d. cost management plan

16. The document that describes the scheduling methodology, format, etc. is called?
a. project schedule
b. schedule baseline
c. network diagram
d. schedule management plan

17. Make or buy analysis is a general management technique used in?
a. plan procurements
b. plan communications
c. conduct procurements
d. control procurements

18. Roles and responsibilities and the project organization chart are subsets of what
plan?
a. staffing management plan
b. communications plan
c. human resource plan
d. communications plan
19. Looking at other organizations to set quality standards and learn best practices
is called?
a. cost-benefit analysis
b. benchmarking
c. flowcharting
d. affinity diagrams

20. The document that shows the planned start and finish dates for each project
activity is called?
a. the project plan
b. the work breakdown structure
c. the project schedule
d. the activity list

21. A bidder conference is a tool and technique of what process?
a. conduct procurements
b. plan procurements
c. control procurements
d. plan human resource management

22. Buying insurance is an example of what risk response technique?
a. sharing
b. transfer
c. mitigate
d. avoid

23. Ground rules are a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

24. Advertising is a tool and technique of what process?
a. conduct procurements
b. plan procurements
c. plan communications
d. plan human resource management
25. Teambuilding, used to build trust, is a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

26. Quality audits are a tool and technique of what process?
a. plan quality
b. perform quality assurance
c. control quality
d. integrated change control


27. Deliverables are an output of what process?
a. direct and manage project work
b. perform quality assurance
c. control quality
d. integrated change control

28. Work performance information is an output of what process?
a. direct and manage project work
b. perform quality assurance
c. control quality
d. integrated change control

29. Project performance appraisals are a tool and technique of what process?
a. manage stakeholder engagement
b. manage project team
c. develop project team
d. monitor and control project work

30. Pre-assignment, often as part of a competitive proposal process, is a tool and
technique of what process?
a. plan human resource management
b. acquire project team
c. develop project team
d. manage project team

31. The customer accepts the project deliverables during what process?
a. control quality
b. close project
c. validate scope
d. direct and manage project work

32. The deliverables are tested for correctness during what process?
a. control quality
b. close project
c. validate scope
d. direct and manage project work


33. Ensuring that the processes we are using are working is part of what process?
a. control quality
b. perform quality assurance
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

34. Setting priority for future risk work is the objective of what process?
a. plan risk management
b. risk identification
c. qualitative risk analysis
d. plan risk responses

35. Risk reassessment is a tool and technique of what process?
a. control risks
b. identify risks
c. qualitative risk analysis
d. plan risk responses

36. Change requests are an input to what process?
a. monitor and control project work
b. validate scope
c. control quality
d. perform integrated change control

37. Approved change requests are an output of what process?
a. monitor and control project work
b. validate scope
c. control quality
d. perform integrated change control

38. The project management information system is a tool of what process(es)?
a. develop project management plan and direct and manage project work
b. direct and manage project work and perform integrated change control
c. monitor and control project work and perform integrated change control
d. direct and manage project work and monitor and control project work

39. Change control tools are a tool and technique of what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. direct and manage project work
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

40. The document that describes explicitly what is out of scope is called?
a. project charter
b. scope statement
c. scope management plan
d. cost baseline

41. The WBS is:
a. task oriented
b. deliverable oriented
c. both task and deliverable oriented
d. neither task or deliverable oriented

42. The relationship between the scope management plan and the project
management plan is described by which of the following?
a. the scope management plan is a subset of the project management plan
b. the project management plan is a subset of the scope management plan
c. the plans are not related
d. the plans are exactly the same

43. Critical path method is a tool and technique of what process?
a. define activities
b. sequence activities
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity durations

44. All of the following are strategies to deal with risks with potentially positive
impacts on project objectives except:
a. mitigate
b. exploit
c. share
d. enhance

45. Pre-assignment, negotiation, acquisition, and virtual teams are tools and
techniques of:
a. plan human resource management
b. develop project team
c. acquire project team
d. manage project team

46. One tool and technique to help manage the project team is:
a. recommended corrective actions
b. recommended preventive actions
c. conflict management
d. team building

47. Alternative generation is a tool and technique of what process(es)?
a. collect requirements
b. define scope
c. collect requirements and define scope
d. define activities

48. Ad hoc conversations with our peers are examples of what type of
communication?
a. vertical
b. horizontal
c. formal verbal
d. informal written

49. Which statement represents the relationship between precision and accuracy?
a. precise measurements are accurate
b. accurate measurements are precise
c. precision and accuracy are not equivalent
d. a high level of precision and accuracy are always required

50. Virtual teams support all the following except:
a. people on different shifts
b. people who need to co-locate
c. people with mobility handicaps
d. people who must live in widespread areas

51. The risks placed on a watch list for continued monitoring usually include:
a. risks requiring a near-term response
b. risks assessed as important, based on qualitative risk analysis
c. risks assessed as not important, based on qualitative risk analysis
d. risk requiring additional analysis and response

52. The configuration management plan is an output of what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. integrated change control
c. monitor and control project work
d. plan communications

53. The leadership style that has the most risk of "perceived lip service" is:
a. consultative in a group
b. consensus
c. autocratic
d. directing

54. The upper and lower control limits are usually set at:
a. +/- 1 sigma
b. +/- 2 sigma
c. +/- 3 sigma
d. +/- 6 sigma

55. The 50-50 rule of progress reporting states that:
a. an activity gets credit when it is 50% complete and when it is 100% complete
b. an activity gets 50% credit for starting and the other 50% for completing
c. the contractor gets paid when the project is 50% complete and then again when the
project is 100% complete
d. the contractor gets paid 50% when the project starts and the other 50% when the
project completes

56. Your map-making project has been going very well. With great resistance from
upper management you have been using the technique of rolling wave planning. You
are at the point of planning the closing of the project. The last thing we often do on
projects is:
a. deliver the product to the customer
b. conduct lessons learned
c. hold a celebration
d. release resources


57. Project scope creep is another name for:
a. uncontrolled changes
b. influencing the factors that create project scope changes
c. controlling the impact of those changes
d. use of the integrated change control system

58. Your management is going through their quarterly process of project selection.
In the past the organization has always used benefit measurement methods to select
projects. It seems now they want to use constrained optimization methods. Which
method below is your organization most likely to use now?
a. comparative approaches
b. scoring model
c. linear programming algorithm
d. murder board

59. As a project manager in the electronics field, it is clear that your projects are
not top priority. After speaking with your management it is clear that the real issue
is that your projects are not aligned with the corporate objectives. You convince
your organization that one approach to help with alignment is to adopt the
Management by Objectives (MBO) concept developed by Peter Drucker. All of the
following are ideas associated with the objectives except:
a. focused on activities
b. specific
c. related to time
d. attainable
60. After several months of negotiations your organization is almost ready to sign a
contract. The contract will span multiple years and allow for final price adjustments
based on changing conditions. The ideal contract type is:
a. firm fixed price
b. fixed price incentive fee
c. fixed price with economic price adjustment
d. time and materials

61. Your organization is in the process of identifying risks for your project. You
explain that there are really two types of risks called:
a. pure and insurable
b. pure and business
c. legal liability and personnel-related
d. direct property damage and indirect consequential loss

62. All of the following statements are true about communication blockers except:
a. the phrase "this will never work" is an example
b. they can get in the way of communication
c. they should be addressed proactively by the project manager
d. they should be ignored at all costs

63. Maslow's highest level, self-actualization needs, can be met in the workplace
through:
a. rest periods, adequate compensation
b. safe working conditions
c. creative work
d. friendly co-workers

64. During control quality it has been determined that several of the deliverables
due today do not meet the technical specifications. A change request has been
generated and will be approved or rejected in which process?
a. monitor and control project work
b. perform integrated change control
c. validate scope
d. direct and manage project work

65. Colocation is most often associated with the:
a. strong matrix
b. projectized structure
c. weak matrix
d. composite structure

66. A system upgrade project is 60% complete. There are over 250 stakeholders
located at hospitals throughout the region. The project is running on budget and
slightly ahead of schedule. Risk management has been provided throughout the
project. During control project risks several large risks have been closed out since
the project is past the point when these threats would occur. Large cost
contingencies had been set-up for these threats. The unused contingency should be:
a. moved to other risks on the project but stay as contingency reserve
b. moved to management reserve on this project
c. not moved, in case we need the money later
d. moved off the project and back to the organization
Quick Review - Solutions
1.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 10-1
          b. Communication methods is a tool and technique of the plan communications
Y         management process, the manage communications process, and the manage
          stakeholder engagement process.


2.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
Y         a. Avoid is a tool and technique of the plan risk responses process.


3.   b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-1 and 8-1
          b. The cost of quality is a tool and technique of the estimate costs process and the
Y
          plan quality management process.


4.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 8-1
          d. Cost-benefit analysis is a tool and technique of the plan quality management
Y
          process.


5.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 8 - Introduction
Y         d. Shewhart and Deming are well known for the plan-do-check-act cycle.


6.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.3.1
          a. The change management plan is a subset of the project management plan.
Y
          Therefore, it is an output of the develop project management plan process.


7.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.3.1
          a. The configuration management plan is a subset of the project management plan.
Y
          Therefore, it is an output of the develop project management plan process.


8.   d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
          d. Sensitivity analysis helps us understand what risks the project is most sensitive
Y
          to. It is a tool and technique of the perform quantitative risk analysis process.
9.   a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
          a. Fixed price contracts and cost reimbursable contracts are inputs of the plan
Y
          procurements process.


10. b.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-1
          b. Funding limit reconciliation is a tool and technique of the determine budget
Y         process. We use this tool and technique to make sure our planned expenditures are
          in line with project funding.


11. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.7
          c. Fast tracking is a tool and technique of the develop schedule process. We use it
Y
          to compress the schedule by overlapping project phases or activities.


12. a.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.4
          a. Benchmarking is a tool and technique of the plan quality management process
Y
          and the collect requirements process.


13. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.3
          c. Organizational theory is a tool and technique of the plan human resource
Y
          management process.


14. c.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.1
          c. The scope management plan describes the processes in which the scope will be
Y
          defined, controlled, and validated.


15. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1
          d. The cost management plan describes how costs will be estimated, budgeted,
Y
          and controlled.


16. d.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.1
          d. The schedule management plan describes the scheduling methodology, format
Y
          etc., as well as the processes for developing and controlling the project schedule.


17. a.    PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 12-1
Y        a. Make or buy analysis is a general management technique used in the plan
         procurements process.


18. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.3.1
         c. The human resource plan contains the project organizational chart, the roles
Y        and responsibilities of different positions, as well as the staffing management
         plan.


19. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.4
         b. Benchmarking is a tool and technique in which we look at another organization
Y
         to help set quality standards or develop ideas on how to meet those standards.


20. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.3.2
         c. The project schedule shows the planned start and finish dates for project
Y
         activities.


21. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 12-1
         a. A bidder conference is a tool and technique of the conduct procurements
Y
         process.


22. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
         b. Buying insurance is an example of a transfer technique as part of the plan risk
Y
         responses processes.


23. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.4
Y        c. Ground rules are a tool and technique of the develop project team process.


24. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.2.2.5
Y        a. Advertising is a tool and technique of the conduct procurements process.


25. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.3
Y        c. Teambuilding is a tool and technique of the develop project team process.
26. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2.2.2
         b. Quality audits are a tool and technique of the perform quality assurance
Y
         process.


27. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.3.3.1
Y        a. Deliverables are an output of the direct and manage project work process.


28. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.3.3.4
Y        c. Work performance information is an output of the control quality process.


29. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.2
         b. Project performance appraisals are a tool and technique of the manage project
Y
         team process.


30. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.1
Y        b. Pre-assignment is a tool and technique of the acquire project team process.


31. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5
         c. The customer accepts the project's deliverables as part of the validate scope
Y
         process.


32. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.3.3.3
         a. The deliverables are tested for correctness as part of the control quality
Y
         process.


33. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.2
Y        b. During the quality assurance process we ensure that the processes are working.


34. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3
         c. During the qualitative risk analysis process we set priority for future risk
Y
         processes.


35. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.1
Y        a. Risk reassessment is a tool and technique of the control risks process.


36. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.1.3
         d. All change requests are approved or rejected as part of the perform integrated
Y
         change control process. Therefore, change requests are an input of this process.


37. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.3.1
         d. All change requests are approved or rejected as part of the perform integrated
Y        change control process. Therefore, approved changes are an output of this
         process.


38. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
         d. The project management information system (PMIS) is a tool and technique of
Y        both the direct and manage project work process and the monitor and control
         project work process.


39. d.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5.2.3
         d. Change control tools are a tool and technique of the perform integrated change
Y
         control process.


40. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.3.1
         b. The scope statement describes the product and the project scope. It also lists
Y
         explicitly what is out of scope.


41. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
Y        b. The WBS is deliverable oriented.
N        a., c., and d. The WBS is deliverable oriented only.


42. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.1.3.1
Y        a. The scope management plan is a component of the project management plan.
N        b. The statement is backwards.
         c. The plans are related. The scope management plan is a subset of the project
N
         management plan.
         d. The plans are not exactly the same. The scope management plan is a subset of
N
         the project management plan and only addresses scope.


43. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.2
         c. The critical path method is a tool and technique of the develop schedule
Y
         process.


44. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.2
         a. Mitigate is a tool to lower the probability and/or lower the negative impact on
Y
         project objectives, not positive impact. Be careful of the word except.
         b. Exploit is a tool for risks with a potentially positive impact. Be careful of the
N
         word except.
         c. Share is a tool for risks with a potentially positive impact. Be careful of the
N
         word except.
         d. Enhance is a tool for risks with a potentially positive impact. Be careful of the
N
         word except.


45. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 9-1
         c. The list represents all the tools and techniques of the acquire project team
Y
         process.
         a. Examples of tools and techniques of the plan human resource management
N
         process are organizational charts and position description.
         b. An example of a tool and technique of the develop project team process is
N
         teambuilding.
         d. An example of a tool and technique of the manage project team process is
N
         observation and conversation.


46. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 9-1
         c. Conflict management is a tool and technique of the manage project team
Y
         process.
         a and b. Recommended corrective actions and recommended preventive actions
N        are examples of change requests that are outputs not tools of the manage project
         team process.
N        d. Team building is a tool and technique of the develop project team process.


47. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.2.3
Y        b. Alternative generation is a tool and technique of the define scope process.
48. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y        b. Horizontal communication is communication with your peers.
         a. Vertical communication is either up or down in the organization. An example of
N
         vertical up would be communication with your management.
         c. A formal verbal example would be a project presentation. The example in the
N
         question is verbal, but not formal.
         d. An informal written would be an e-mail. The example in the question is
N
         informal, but not written.


49. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 8- Quality Introduction
         c. Precision is consistency that the value of repeated measurements are clustered
         and have little scatter. Accuracy is correctness that the measured value is very
         close to the true value. They are not equivalent.
N        a. Precise measurements are consistent.
N        b. Accurate measurements are correct.
         d. The project management team must determine the level of precision and
         accuracy required. Be careful of answers that contain the word always.


50. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.2.2.4
         b. Colocation involves placing all of the most active team members in the same
Y
         physical location. Virtual team members spend little or no time face-to-face.
N        a., c., and d. All of these ideas can be supported by the virtual team format.


51. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.3.3.1
         c. A watchlist is used for risks assessed as not important based on qualitative risk
Y
         analysis.
         a. Risks requiring a near-term response are usually viewed as important and thus
N
         would not be placed on a watchlist.
         b. Risks assessed as important will often be run through quantitative analysis, not
N
         placed on a watchlist.
         d. Risks requiring additional analysis will often be run through quantitative
N
         analysis, not placed on a watchlist.


52. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.3.1
         a. The configuration management plan is a subset of the project plan. Therefore, it
Y
         is an output of the develop project management plan process.
53. a.   Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, page 218
         a. Consultative in a group refers to group decision-making where the project
         manager invites ideas and suggestions of team members in a meeting. If the
Y        project manager does not take these ideas into account when making the
         decisions, though, the PM runs the risk of being perceived as doing "lip service"
         and not really using the team members input.
         b. Consensus refers to sharing problems with team members in a group and then
N
         reaching a decision by consensus.
         c. Autocratic style refers to the project manager making a decision without input
N
         from others.
N        d. Directing style refers to the project manager telling others what to do.


54. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y        c. Control limits are normally set at +/-3 sigma (standard deviation).
         a., b., and d. Control limits are normally set at +/-3 sigma (standard deviation).


55. b.   Earned Value Management, Fleming and Koppelaman
         b. The 50-50 rule states that an activity will receive 50% of its PV (planned
Y        value) as earned value (EV) when it starts and 50% of its PV as earned value
         when it completes.
         a. With the 50-50 rule an activity gets credit for starting, not being 50% complete.
N
         It gets the rest of the credit when it finishes.
N        c. and d. The 50-50 rule is used at the activity level not the project level.


56. d.   General Knowledge
         d. The last thing to do on a project is to release resources. All of the other
Y
         answers take resources and thus must come before we release those resources.
         a. It takes resources to deliver the product to the customer, so this would not be
N
         the last thing to do.
         b. It takes resources to conduct lessons learned, so this would not be the last thing
N
         to do.
         c. It takes resources to hold a celebration, so this would not be the last thing to
N
         do.


57. a.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.6
Y        a. Uncontrolled changes are often called project scope creep.
N        b. Influencing the factors that create project scope changes is a concern of control
         scope.
N        c. Controlling the impact of scope changes is a concern of control scope.
         d. All requested changes should be processed through the integrated change
N        control system. Good documentation and use of a change control system
         decreases the amount of scope creep.


58. c.   Search online- mathematical models for project selection
         c. The linear programming algorithm is an example of a constrained optimization
Y
         method, often called a mathematical model.
         a., b., and d. Comparative approaches, scoring model, and murder board are all
N
         examples of benefit measurement methods.


59. a.   Web Search on Management by Objectives - Peter Drucker
Y        a. Objectives should be focused on results, not on activities.
         b., c., and d. Objectives should be SMART (specific, measurable, attainable,
N
         relevant, time bounded).


60. c.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
         c. A fixed price with economic price adjustment contract is often used when the
Y        seller's performance period spans a long period of time and special provisions
         may be needed for changing conditions (such as the price of commodities).
         a. A firm fixed price contract will not address fluctuations in the price of
N
         commodities.
         b. A fixed price incentive fee contract will not address fluctuations in the price of
N
         commodities.
         d. A time and materials contract is often used when a precise statement of work
N
         cannot be developed quickly.


61. b.   Project Risk - Wideman
         b. Pure risks carry only the chance for a loss. Business risks carry a chance for
Y
         either gain or loss.
         a. Pure and insurable as they relate to risk mean the same thing. A pure
N        (insurable) risk carries only the chance for a loss. An example would be property
         damage.
         c. Legal liability and personnel are both types of insurable risk. Most
N
         organizations would buy insurance to deal with these risks.
         d. Direct property damage and indirect consequential loss are examples of
N
         insurable risks. Most organizations would buy insurance to deal with these risks.


62. d.   Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, pages 24-25
         d. Communication blockers must be dealt with so that they do not interrupt the
Y
         project.
         a., b., and c. These statements are all true. The question is asking for the
N
         exception.


63. c.   Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, page 61
         c. Creative work is how the workplace can help meet the Maslow's hierarchy of
Y
         needs for self-actualization.
         a. Rest periods and adequate compensation can help meet Maslow's
N
         physiological needs.
N        b. Safe working conditions can help meet Maslow's safety/security needs.


64. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
         b. The perform integrated change control process has change requests as an input
Y
         and change requests status updates as an output.
N        a. Change requests are an output of the monitor and control project work process.
         c. During the process validate scope the customer inspects the deliverables for
N
         acceptance.
         d. During the process direct and manage project work change requests are
N
         implemented (not approved or rejected).


65. b.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.1.3
         b. Colocation is a strategy to place team members physically close together to
         improve communication and productivity. In a projectized organization, the PM
         often has a lot of independence and authority. Placing the team members in one
Y
         place makes it easier for the team to work together. One objective of projectizing
         is to move the loyalty from the functional groups to the project team, which is one
         benefit of collocation.
         a. and c. In a matrix the workers are borrowed from the functional groups and
N        support one or more projects. In general the workers are still physically located
         within their functional groups.
         d. A composite is made up of all structures, which may allow for some
N
         collocation.
66.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide Section 7.4.2.6
      d. If a risk does not occur, the unused contingency should be removed from the
Y
      project budget.
      a., b., and c. This money no longer belongs to the project. The project would need
N     to request the money and show additional risk analysis to justify the money being
      approved again for the project budget.
Before you take this full sample test we strongly suggest that you review the
sample questions at the end of initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and
controlling, and closing one last time. See if you score higher than your first
attempt.




                       FULL SAMPLE
                          TEST



                              Questions
A001. A customer has come to you requesting a major change to the project
objectives. You realize that changing the objectives means changing the project
charter. History tells you that when the objectives in the project charter change, the
projects in your organization are much more likely to fail. You and your sponsor
have seen this over and over again, and therefore your sponsor is not likely to
approve this change even though he strongly agrees that the change to the charter
would benefit the project. To increase the chances of project success, the most
important consideration is:
a. update the charter as quickly as possible
b. ensure that the project remains aligned with the organization's strategic objectives
c. always reject changes to the project objectives and charter as you know this raises the
risk of failure
d. update the project management plan, including baselines to reflect the new objectives
but don't bother to update the charter

A002. You have just become the project manager of a project that involves designing and
building a factory. The project has numerous stakeholders, including several government
agencies. The project is already behind schedule and over budget. Providing for risk
management is critical to the project's success because the factory will contain rooms
that will house hazardous chemicals and gases. Since these rooms will be considered
high risk areas when the factory is operational alarm systems are being identified for
installation in case of a leak or spill of hazardous materials. Alarm #1 will sound if there
is a gas leak, and its activation requires personnel to put on gas masks but continue to
work in the factory without evacuating. Alarm #2's activation will notify factory
personnel to shut down operations and then evacuate the building. The activation of
Alarm #2 signals that which of the following has been reached?
a. risk appetite
b. risk tolerance
c. risk threshold
d. risk workaround

A003. You have been working as an engineer for many years in your organization.
Just over a year ago, you were promoted to a project management role and
assigned a very large project. Your team has over 400 team members from around
the world. Your technical background did not prepare you for the work you are
doing today. Most of your team members are virtual. Your current focus is on
negotiating for the team members you need and facilitating team building activities
for the team members you already have working. In what project management
process group are you currently engaged in?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. monitoring and controlling

A004. Your organization has just been awarded the largest contract in its 40-year
history. Because of your 10-year history with the organization, you have been
selected to lead the project. Based on rumors you have heard, you expect the
project to last over 5 years and to have at least 300 stakeholders from dozens of
countries. Performing on schedule is critical. Even though no sponsor has been
assigned, you begin work on the project charter. However, your manager tells you
there isn't time to worry about a charter and directs you to begin working on the
project plan instead. What should you do now?
a. be happy to be named the project manager and begin working on the project plan
b. develop a project charter on your own but don't worry that you have no sponsor to
sign it
c. work on developing the project charter and the project plan concurrently
d. explain to your manager the risk of proceeding without a project charter

A005. The construction of a new soccer stadium in your country is finally complete.
The first large sporting event to be held there, a tournament is about to begin. Over
the next few days, athletes will begin to arrive from several different countries. The
tournament will run for five consecutive evenings. There seems to be confusion on
basic issues related to transportation and housing for the athletes. What should you
do first?
a. inform your sponsor of the issues.
b. develop a better plan to collect all transportation and housing requirements for future
events.
 c. not worry too much about this. There certainly are enough hotels locally to support
   the athletes.
d. determine the impacts of these issues on the current project and resolve.

A006. Variations inside the control limits on a control chart provides us information
related to ?
a. special causes
b. common causes
c. assignable causes
d. unnatural patterns
Use the following table to answer questions: A007-A009.




A007. What is the duration of the critical path?
a. 15 days
b. 24 days
c. 26 days
d. 19 days

A008. What is the float of Task D?
a. 0 days
b. 1 days
c. 2 days
d. 5 days

A009. What activities are on the critical path?
a. a-b-e
b. a-b-d-e
c. a-b-c
d. a-b-c-e

A010. Your project is to oversee the design and implementation of a new patient
information system for a large chain of hospitals. You have the technical background
to accomplish the project, and your team is highly qualified. The project seems to be
running smoothly except for an issue of the wrong stakeholders getting the wrong
information at the wrong time and in the wrong format. Some stakeholders are
receiving information that does not interest them but are not receiving information
they need to perform their roles on the project. The process that could have
prevented this problem from occurring is:
a. control communications
b. control risks
c. manage communications
d. plan communications
A011. You are managing the equipment installation of a new factory. Over 30
different suppliers will be working for you over a three-year period. Each supplier's
work is contingent on the other suppliers meeting their timelines. To meet the
scheduled end date provided by management, one critical supplier, Kirkpatrick and
Associates, must begin work now, and thereby incurring costs immediately. Contract
negotiations with Kirkpatrick have been ongoing for months, and you expect several
more weeks will be required for all details to be worked out and the contract to be
signed. However, this delay will make meeting your project end date impossible.
While negotiations continue, you will most likely send Kirkpatrick a:
a. purchase order
b. request for proposal
c. purchase agreement
d. letter of intent

A012. The Olympics are coming to your hometown. Excitement builds as
transportation systems are upgraded, venues are built, and the world watches. It has
been decided that meeting the schedule is more important than minimizing cost at
this point. Because a delay is unacceptable, , we decide to use Monte Carlo
simulation to simulate the schedule. We most likely will run Monte Carlo simulations
on a weekly basis to help us account for uncertainty. Which of the following is used
as a model in a schedule risk analysis?
a. work breakdown schedule
b. schedule network diagram and duration estimates
c. project management plan
d. schedule management plan


A013. You have been assigned the project manager of a project to replace an
existing bridge on a major road through Colorado Springs. You have managed
several similar projects in the past and are excited about having another highly
visible project to manage. The project will include working with many organizations,
including the city, the county, the police department, and several suppliers.
Your sponsor, who is very involved, has already issued a project charter. He has also
helped you navigate the political environment. You have a complete project plan
including baselines for scope, time, and cost. As the work progresses you issue
status reports and hold progress meetings for all interested stakeholders.
After twelve months, the bridge is constructed within budget and on schedule. All
requirements have been met. During your final lessons learned meeting, you present
that the project experienced 25% more change requests than other comparable
projects. The most likely reason for this was:
a. your sponsor did not fully engage all stakeholders
b. the project plan did not provide enough detail on how to execute the project
c. one or more key stakeholders was not involved in the project early on
d. too many organizations were identified as stakeholders early on

A014. For the first 24 months, your project progressed well and team members
worked together successfully. Now, however, the project schedule has been pulled in
dramatically to address a changing market window. Meetings are tense, and conflict
is rising with the biggest issue concerning accountability. You want to use a tool to
make it clear who is the one person accountable for each activity. Most likely you
will use a(n):
a. organizational breakdown structure
b. project organization chart
c. responsibility assignment matrix
d. resource calendar

A015. Severe weather has hit your community. Bridges and roads have been washed
away by the flooding. Your project is to oversee the re-construction of a major
highway. Many stakeholders are involved in the project, including your friends and
neighbors. Everyone has an opinion as to what is necessary to ensure quality
construction. Due to time constraints, you need a tool that will help you focus on the
most critical issues related to quality. Most likely you will use a:
a. cause and effect diagram
b. flowchart
c. check sheet
d. Pareto diagram

A016. Nick is a project manager with 30 years of experience managing his
organization's most successful projects. He now works in the PMO developing
business cases and performing feasibility studies for future projects. The head of the
PMO just rushed into Nick's office and requested that Nick develop a cost estimate
for a potential customer's project in the next 15 minutes. The organization
completed a project similar to the one being described just this past year.
Therefore, Nick will most likely use what type of cost estimating technique?
a. vendor bid analysis
b. parametric estimating
c. bottom-up estimating
d. analogous estimating
A017. A project manager for a large construction company is responsible for the
construction of a new football stadium. Over 100 different vendors are involved.
The lead scheduler provided the project manager with an integrated schedule. The
schedule had taken weeks to develop and would require close management. The
project has four critical paths. One critical activity on the schedule is pouring the
concrete. Once poured, the concrete will require five to seven days to cure. During
this timem many team members will take a short vacation, since they have been
working around the clock. Curing of the concrete is an example of:
a. float
b. free float
c. lead
d. lag

A018. Several of your team members hope to move into project management
positions. All will be taking the CAPM(R) exam shortly and are currently studying the
PMBOK(R) Guide. They come to you and ask for help understanding the difference
between the plan human resource management process and the estimate activity
resources process. Their view is that both processes relate to planning for people,
and therefore there is duplication in the PMBOK(R) Guide. You explain that:
a. these are two different names for the same process step
b. plan human resource management is related to defining roles, responsibilities, and
relationships whereas estimate activity resources is related to determining the type,
quantity, and timing of needed resources
c. plan human resources leads to estimate costs, whereas estimate activity resources
leads to acquire project team
d. an output of plan human resources is the resource breakdown structure; an output of
estimate activity resources is the project organization chart

A019. The project SPI is 1.12, and its CPI is 1.2. The schedule shows an end date
four months from today. At your monthly status meeting, your customer expresses
pleasure with the project's progress. Two days later this customer requests that
additional scope be added since there is "extra" time in the schedule and "extra"
money in the budget. This behavior is not new; this customer regularly requests
additional work once he sees the project is ahead of schedule and/or under budget.
Requested changes are an output of what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. monitor and control project work
c. perform integrated change control
d. close project or phase
A020. You oversee drug trials for a global pharmaceutical company. In the
pharmaceutical industry, project management is key to addressing the unique
regulatory-, compliance-, and quality-related needs of the industry. Change control
is a critical component of successful project management for all projects but even
more so in your industry. Which of the following is not one of the elements of the
perform integrated change control process?
a. immediately implementing all government mandated changes
b. controlling factors that create changes to make sure those changes are beneficial
c. determining when a change has occurred
d. managing the approved changes

A021. Your organization's PMO has just rolled out a project management
methodology that has been tested and proven on a very large successful project. You
manage multiple small projects and have been instructed to apply this detailed
methodology to each of these. The best thing to do is:
a. ask the PMO to review its mandate to use the methodology on all projects as project
management effort should be reflective of the project's size, complexity, and priority
b. follow the methodology explicitly since it has already been tested and proven on a
successful project
c. ignore the methodology because you believe it does not make sense for your projects
d. follow the parts of the methodology that make sense for your projects

A022. As a program manager, you have seventeen project managers reporting to
you. Some are members of PMI(R) and some are not. All the junior project managers
are CAPM(R) certified, while all the senior project managers are PMP(R) certified. A
few new project managers have joined your group in the last few months and have
submitted their application for PMP(R) certification. Based on the fact that all of your
staff are either certified through PMI(R) or have submitted applications to be
certified, which document must all of your staff adhere to?
a. PMBOK(R) Guide
b. All PMI(R) published materials
c. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
d. All PMI(R) standards

A023. One of your team members asks you who should receive a copy of the
performance report just completed. You respond:
a. all stakeholders
b. all key stakeholders
c. all project team members
d. follow the communications management plan

A024. You have taken over a project from another project manager. The project
seems to be running very smoothly. As the project nears completion, several team
members feel they are ready to move on to other projects. Based on past
experience, you know that a lot more work is involved in project close-out than
people often realize. From your perspective, much work remains to be done, and
conflict is starting to arise concerning release criteria. Release criteria should have
been addressed in what document?
a. the project management plan
b. the staffing management plan
c. the project organizational chart
d. the communication management plan

A025. In your lumber company, three standard deviations has been your standard
for decades. Your new quality manager wants to adopt a six sigma approach. Which
of the following statements is true?
a. six sigma is twice as stringent as three sigma
b. control limits are usually set at plus or minus six sigma
c. with three sigma, defects occur only about 3 times in 1,000 and with six sigma defects
occur only about 3.3 times in 1 million
d. the six sigma approach means plus or minus three standard deviations on each side of
the mean

A026. Your project is running so far over budget that you can no longer provide a
realistic basis for performance measurement. Your next step is to:
a. update your cost management plan
b. create a revised project schedule
c. create a revised cost baseline
d. update your WBS

A027. As a project scheduler you are trying to use statistics as part of project
scheduling. If Activity A has a pessimistic estimate of 24 days and an optimistic
estimate of 12 days, what is the variance of Activity A?
a. 12 days
b. 6 days
c. 4 days
d. 2 days


A028. You have just received your PMP(R) and are now serving as a mentor for new
project managers. All are arguing that a WBS is really a long list of items to be
completed. You explain that a WBS is all of the following except:
a. a deliverable oriented hierarchy of the work to be done
b. a document that shows the sequence of work
c. a team building tool
d. an input to many other planning processes

A029. As a project manager for a large international organization, you often run
projects in many parts of the world. Business practices often differ, depending on
your location. As a Project Management Professional (PMP(R)), the PMI(R) Code of
Ethics and Professional Conduct guides your actions. Which of the following is not
one of the four core values described in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct?
a. loyalty
b. honesty
c. respect
d. responsibility

A30. It seems that your team does a great job of planning projects but somehow
loses insight into the project during executing. Therefore, you have decided to put
more effort into monitoring and controlling the project. You recognize that
monitoring and controlling involves all of the following except:
a. validate scope
b. control risk
c. manage stakeholder engagement
d. control stakeholder engagement

A031. As the project manager for the equipment installations of a new factory, you
expect to deal repeatedly with Lewis and Associates, a plumbing firm. You don't
know the exact quantity or exact products you will be buying from this firm, but you
expect to buy from them frequently over the next 18 months. You are most likely to
want to sign a:
a. purchase order
b. request for proposal
c. purchase agreement
d. letter of intent

A032. You have been working all week in Baltimore and plan to fly home to New
York late tonight. New York experiences an unexpected snow storm and
consequently the airport may have to close. You cancel your flight and rent a car in
order to get home. As you are driving, you hear on the radio that the highway is
closing 50 miles north of you. The closing of the highway is an example of a:
a. fallback plan
b. contingency plan
c. secondary risk
d. workaround


A033. A project manager developing a global website recognizes that stakeholder
involvement is key to project success. On past projects, he has delivered on all the
requirements but some stakeholders were not satisfied. He wants a table that shows
not only the current levels of stakeholder involvement but also the desired levels.
From this, he can develop his stakeholder strategy. The project manager most likely
will utilize a:
a. communication management plan
b. stakeholder register
c. stakeholder engagement matrix
d. requirements documentation

A034. On your software development project, accurately estimating the durations
of activities is important. You suggest to management that PERT estimates be
completed for each activity. You give them the following example. Your programmer
estimates that 100 hours will most likely be required to complete the work.
However, an optimistic estimate is 80 hours, whereas a pessimistic estimate is 150
hours. The PERT estimate is:
a. 100 hours
b. 105 hours
c. 110 hours
d. 150 hours

A035. The project is to design a "future car" that emphasizes not only safety but
also comfort and cost. An important part of the design of this future car is
determining which combination of suspension and tires will produce the most
pleasurable ride characteristics at a reasonable price. To determine the best
combination, the engineers will most likely use a(n):
a. Pareto chart
b. control chart
c. design of experiment
d. inspection

A036. Once again you are estimating the cost for your new project. Your team
members have expressed frustration in the past that you are unclear about the
rounding you want in their estimates. For example, should they round up or down? In
actuality, they are asking you about the required:
a. precision levels
b. control thresholds
c. earned value rules
d. report formats

A037. After reviewing the project schedule, management asks why all of the work
packages are different sizes. They suggest that you consider the 80 hour rule. The
80 hour rule is an example of:
a. a heuristic
b. a PMI (R) regulation
c. a constraint
d. ground rules

A038. A project to build a semiconductor factory is drawing to a close. The factory's
operations group has begun manufacturing the wafers that, after processing will be
the chips we use in our phones and computers. As the wafers pass through each
piece of equipment on the factory floor, tracking performance over time of these
processes is necessary to ensure these processes are stable. Which of the seven
basic quality tools are we likely to use in the tracking process?
a. cause and effect diagrams
b. histograms
c. scatter diagrams
d. control charts

A039. Based on lessons learned you realize that maintaining the integrity of project
baselines has been a real challenge. It seems that some non-approved changes were
released for incorporation into the project products and that some approved
changes never made it into the project products. To better manage this in the future
tighter control will need to occur in what process?
a. develop project management plan
b. direct and manage project work
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

A040. You have been working as a project manager for six years but have never
really had to manage a project budget before. This is changing now that money has
become tighter. Based on your experience and your outside reading, which of the
following statements is false?
a. a majority of the project's budget will be spent during the executing process group
b. cost and price always mean the same thing
c. cost estimates should be developed before cost budgets
d. the ability to influence costs is highest early in the project

A041. The project is to upgrade the organization's entire customer engagement
system. The upgrade will occur in thirty (30) hospitals around the country. The
project team will utilize fifty (50) different suppliers over a three year time period.
With each procurement, it is important that there is a clear understanding of the
requirement and that no one receive preferential treatment. To ensure this during
the conduct procurement process we will most likely utilize:
a. a bidder conference
b. proposal evaluation techniques
c. analytical techniques
d. procurement negotiations

A042. Examples of mitigate include all of the following except:
a. establishing a contingency reserve
b. adopting less complex processes
c. conducting more tests
d. choosing a more stable supplier

A043. A project report is an example of what type of communication?
a. formal written
b. informal written
c. formal verbal
d. informal verbal
A044. Zero sum rewards are rewards that:
a. cost no money
b. only a limited number of project team members can receive
c. everyone can receive
d. everyone or no one must receive


A045. You have been studying for the PMP(R) Exam for the last several months. For
you, the best study method is to review many sample questions and learn from each
one. To guide and focus your studies you would like to be able to see the frequency
that you are missing questions by knowledge area. To do so, you will most likely use
a:
a. Pareto diagram
b. cause and effect diagram
c. flow chart
d. scatter diagram

A046. On what contract type does the buyer typically have the lowest risk?
a. Time and materials
b. Cost plus percentage of cost
c. Cost plus fixed fee
d. Fixed price

A047. When you first planned the development of your organization's new medical
device, it seemed that most of the activities contained float. You met with your team
to develop the schedule and explained float to all team members. Now you are
running with several critical paths with more paths becoming critical each month.
The likely cause of this is:
a. Parkinson Theory
b. lazy team members
c. critical chain
d. critical path method

A048. After years of frustration, the project is finally over. In the end, the customer
made payment but it is clear they will never use the product delivered to them. The
most important lesson learned from this project was that the project team's
interpretation of the project's deliverables must match the customer's
interpretation of the project's deliverables. While the product met the technical
requirements, it was clear throughout the project that the customer was often
surprised by our deliverables. The documented lesson learned is: Different
individuals may have different interpretations of a project's work packages. To
decrease the probability of this in the future each project should now include:
a. a WBS dictionary
b. a detailed WBS
c. a work authorization system
d. control accounts

A049. Examples of constrained optimization methods used for project selection
include:
a. benefit contribution
b. linear programming algorithms
c. comparative approaches
d. economic models

A050. You have spent months with your team planning your project, and it is now
time to begin the executing work. Executing involves all of the following processes
except:
a. perform integrated change control
b. perform quality assurance
c. acquire project team
d. manage stakeholder engagement

A051. You are the manager of the design/build of a large manufacturing facility.
With your customer, you have signed a Fixed Price Incentive Contract. You
recognize that in this type of contract the risk is shared between the buyer and the
seller. The time at which your organization picks up all of the financial risk is called
the:
a. contract award
b. contract breach
c. contract termination
d. point of total assumption

A052. In your product development group, risk management has always been a low
priority. Management does not want to talk about risk until the risk event has
occurred. You are trying to explain the importance of timing to management. One
idea you share is:
a. as we move further into a project, the amount at stake increases
b. as we move further into a project, the level of uncertainty increases
c. as we move further into a project, the amount at stake decreases
d. as we move further into a project, the risk of failing increases

A053. You are the project manager for a logging company. During the current
month, you are committed to deliver 10,000 units that are 60 centimeters each. The
upper control limits on your process is 63 centimeters. The lower control limits on
your process is 57 centimeters. The mean is 60 centimeters. What percentage of
your units should fall between 58 and 62 centimeters?
a. 68.3%
b. 75.5 %
c. 95.5%
d. 99.7%

A054. Under McGregor's Theory Y, the management view is that most people:
a. dislike their work and will try to avoid it
b. lack ambition
c. are self-centered
d. are creative, imaginative, and ambitious

A055. The project is to design and build a new website for all 30 schools in the local
school district. Many stakeholders want to be included as we collect requirements.
Collecting early feedback on requirements is important. It has been strongly
suggested that we employ storyboards to do so. These storyboards will use mock-
ups to show navigation paths through pages, screens, etc. Storyboarding in an
example of:
a. prototyping
b. benchmarking
c. facilitated workshops
d. brainstorming

A056. Your project has over 200 stakeholders. The stakeholders are located in 20
different countries and speak too many languages for you to name. In fact, your
manager lives in another country and speaks a different language than you. Your
SPI is running at .85. The CPI is running at 1.2. Based on this scenario, what should
you be most concerned about?
a. schedule
b. cost
c. stakeholder management
d. your management

A057. You are managing a large ship-building project for a government customer.
The project has been progressing well from both schedule and cost standpoints. Due
to global events, the customer has requested that you pull in the schedule by several
months. No additional resources will be made available. To complete the project
under these new constraints you will:
a. crash
b. fast-track
c. resource level
d. implement the use of project management software


A058. After months of planning, you are at the point of having your baselines
approved. All of the following documents are part of the scope baseline except the:
a. scope management plan
b. scope statement
c. WBS
d. WBS dictionary

A059. The system that identifies and documents the functional and physical
characteristics of a product or component is called:
a. the change control system
b. the configuration management system
c. change control meetings
d. expert judgment

A60. Project planning has begun with your core team, and there is conflict on the
sequence of the planning activities. From the list below which sequence is least likely
to occur?
a. determine budget before estimate costs
b. qualitative risk analysis before quantitative risk analysis
c. plan procurements before conduct procurements
d. collect requirements before define scope

A061. A contract change control system is normally part of what process?
a. plan procurements
b. conduct procurements
c. control procurements
d. close procurements

A062. Your organization has become very good at assessing and evaluating
characteristics of individual project risks. Management is now asking you to provide
an estimate of the overall effect of risk on the project objectives. Management is
really asking you to:
a. perform qualitative risk analysis
b. monitor and control risks
c. plan risk responses
d. perform quantitative risk analysis


A063. When using rolling wave planning:
a. all work is planned in detail
b. near term work is planned in detail and future work is planned at a higher level
c. near term work is planned at a higher level and long term work is planned in detail
d. all work is planned at a high level

A064. The type of power anyone can earn, regardless of his position is:
a. formal power
b. reward power
c. penalty power
d. expert power

A065. Your medical component business is growing at an exponential rate. With
respect to product testing, you are moving to testing samples instead of entire
populations. In general, the main reasons to test samples instead of populations
include all of the following except:
a. the testing may be destructive
b. the testing is expensive
c. the testing takes a long time
d. the testing is variable related not attribute related

A066. The performance measurement baseline is made up of what categories:
a. distributed and undistributed
b. contingency reserve and management reserve
c. cost and profit
d. planning packages and work packages
A067. Your program manager has just returned from a class on program/project
management and is filled with ideas. He seems to be using the terms fast tracking
and concurrent engineering interchangeably. You try to explain the primary
difference by stating:
a. fast tracking is about overlapping activities while concurrent engineering is moving
implementers to an earlier phase of the project
b. fast tracking is overlapping activities while concurrent engineering is adding resources
to the critical path
c. fast tracking is about moving implementers to an earlier phase of the project while
concurrent engineering is about adding resources to the critical path
d. fast tracking is overlapping phases while concurrent engineering is overlapping
activities

A068. If a project is performed through a legal relationship, the constraints are
defined:
a. by the customer
b. in the contract provisions
c. by the performing organization
d. by the project manager

A069. It is hard to imagine a project without change requests. Change requests on
projects may be either rejected or approved. Approved changes are processed
through which process for implementation?
a. develop project management plan
b. direct and manage project work
c. monitor and control project work
d. perform integrated change control

A70. You are managing an internal Information Technology (IT) project for your
organization. During planning, the WBS, schedule, and cost estimates developed by
your team were approved and set as the project baselines. You should be able to
meet all of your baselines but your critical resources keep getting pulled away from
the project to support other projects and programs. Setting priorities across
projects and programs is often the responsibility of:
a. the customer
b. the project sponsor
c. senior management
d. the project managers
A071. You are managing the design/build of a small office building. With your
customer, you have signed a Cost Plus Incentive Contract. The negotiated pricing
for the contract is:

target cost:                              $100,000
target fee:                               $ 8,000
max fee:                                  $ 12,000
min fee:                                  $ 4,000
share ratio:                              60/40 (buyer/seller)

You complete the work for $105,000. What fee will you receive?
a. $8, 000
b. $10,000
c. $4,000
d. $6, 000

A072. While working on a construction project, you submitted the required
paperwork for an environmental permit on time. You are concerned that the
permitting agency may take longer than planned to issue the permit. If this occurs,
the project will be at least three weeks late, and may run over budget by at least
$20,000. Quality may also suffer, but you do not know how to quantify the quality
degradation. The risk event in the above scenario is:
a. the project will finish at least three weeks late
b. the uncertainty that the project may run over budget
c. the degradation in quality
d. the permitting agency possibly taking longer than planned to issue the permit

A073. In the communication model, who is responsible for encoding the initial
message?
a. the sender
b. the sender and the receiver
c. the receiver
d. the sender or the receiver

A074. The technique to manage conflict that emphasizes areas of agreement while
avoiding points of disagreement is:
a. smoothing
b. collaborating
c. withdrawing
d. forcing

A075. Common causes of variation are also called:
a. special causes
b. unusual events
c. control limits
d. random causes

A076. Which classification model describes classes of stakeholders based on the
power, urgency, and legitimacy?
a. power/interest grid
b. power/influence grid
c. influence/impact grid
d. salience model

A077. Along with your project management team you have spent a great deal of
time developing the WBS, schedule, and cost estimates for a project. Your work has
finally been approved, and you now have baselines for the triple constraint. What do
you do next?
a. celebrate as a team
b. begin recommending preventive action
c. begin recommending corrective action
d. hold a kick-off meeting

A078. Your technology transfer project is wrapping up and you are determining the
current status of the project's scope. Completion of project scope is measured
against all of the following except the:
a. project management plan
b. scope statement
c. WBS
d. product requirements

A079. You are managing a technology transfer project moving technology from a
development line into a manufacturing line. The manufacturing manager has
requested yet another change. As you evaluate this change, you note that it would
have a major effect on high-level project objectives. If a decision is made to accept
this change, what document must be changed first?
a. project management plan
b. WBS
c. scope statement
d. project charter

A80. The type of organizational structure in which each employee has one clearly
defined superior is?
a. strong matrix structure
b. composite structure
c. weak matrix structure
d. functional structure


A081. You have been assigned as the project manager for a large technology
transfer project. The technology will be developed in Sweden and then transferred
to manufacturing facilities in several countries including China. You have
approximately 200 people working on your team, including engineers from each of
the manufacturing locations. Most team meetings are held through electronic
means, and there is frequently much healthy debate.
Your sponsor has been fully engaged throughout the life of the project. You have a
signed charter and, a full project plan including baselines for scope, cost, and time.
Your identified stakeholders have been fully involved throughout the life of the
project. Each transfer is occurring on schedule and within budget. All requirements
are being met. As you wrap up the final transfer efforts, the operations manager at
one of the manufacturing facilities in Ireland informs you that he will not be using
the technology being transferred. He states that the technology is already outdated.
You do not know this person and are surprised by his comment. One likely cause for
this customer not using the product of your project is:
a. your sponsor did not fully engage all stakeholders
b. the project plan did not provide enough detail on how to execute the project
c. your team was too large to manage, especially since it included people from several
countries
d. At least one key stakeholder was overlooked when identifying stakeholders

A082. The project manager has been brought in long before initiating the project is
complete. Often the first task performed while initiating a project is:
a. develop the project charter
b. identify key deliverables based on business requirements
c. perform a project assessment in order to evaluate the feasibility of the project
d. conduct benefits analysis to validate project alignment
A083. Projects may produce benefits as well as deliverables. For a benefit to have
value, the benefit must be realized:
a. as early as possible in the project
b. in a timely manner even if this is after project closeout
c. before the end of the project
d. anytime over the life of the project

A084. Benefits analysis should ensure that the project aligns with the organizational
strategy. Organizational strategy is the result of:
a. reviewing the organization's portfolios and determining strategy based on the
anticipated outcomes of these portfolios
b. the strategic planning cycle where the organization's vision and mission are translated
into a strategic plan
c. a yearly review of the ongoing operations that produce value and the programs and
projects that increase value production capability
d. customer-focused programs that determine the organizations strategic plan

A085. You have just been moved onto a project that is well into the project
implementation phase. You want to be clear on the priority you should use for
stakeholder requests so you search for the stakeholder register. You then realize
that no stakeholder register exists for the project. Since you are new to the
organization, you want to ensure that you use its templates for documents.
Therefore you search for a template for a stakeholder register in the:
a. enterprise environmental factors
b. stakeholder management plan
c. organizational process assets
d. current project files

A086. On your project, deliverables frequently occur at the wrong time. Sometimes
customers receive deliverables early, sometime late. Whether too early or too late,
your customers never seem to receive the deliverables when they would derive the
most value from them. Therefore, it was suggested that you consider implementing
just-in-time thinking. Just-in-time is related to what type of system?
a. push system
b. pull system
c. forecast demand system
d. bottleneck system
A087. During the implementation phase of your project, many deliverables have
been produced on time and within budget. At this point, it is important that the
deliverables are tested to determine if we are building the product correctly. We
most likely determine this during which process?
a. collect requirements
b. perform quality assurance
c. control quality
d. validate scope

A088. As part of your role as a project manager you are responsible for capturing
critical knowledge. You are likely to use all of the following methods for capturing
knowledge except:
a. memory of senior team members
b. lessons learned debriefing reports
c. mentoring
d. company intranet

A089. As part of your knowledge transfer life cycle, applying the knowledge that
has been transferred is important. A technology often used to apply transferred
knowledge is:
a. searchable database of lessons learned and success stories
b. project success rates
c. quality of deliverables
d. project efficiency

A090. You have been named the project manager of a project to design, build and
set up a customer call center. This call center has been deemed to be vital to driving
the organization's strategy forward. After the project is complete, your
organization will track the number of new customers based on the success of the call
center. The number of new customers is considered a(n):
a. key performance indicator(KPI)
b. key success factor (KSF)
c. critical success factor (CSF)
d. cost performance index (CPI)

A091. Nicholas is managing a project to integrate multiple customer relationship
management systems into one enterprise-wide system. The work is very technical in
nature, and Nicholas was chosen as the project manager due to his strong technical
education and experience. As part of managing the project, Nicholas must interact
with multiple business unit leaders throughout the organization to understand how
his actions and decisions affect their business units. While Nicholas has strong
technical skills, he is struggling with respect to the appropriate terminology to use
when interacting with these other leaders. At this point, Nicholas may want to focus
more on:
a. the technical work of the project
b. project management skills
c. business acumen
d. benefits realization

A092. An organization scoring low on Geert Hofstede's dimension for individualism
believes in:
a. social mobility
b. direct communication
c. "I" as more important than "we"
d. keeping opinions to oneself

A093. Most of your project team is struggling with Rich, the team's senior designer.
Rich has trouble controlling and redirecting his disruptive behaviors and impulses as
well as adapting to changing situations. Based on Daniel Goleman's mixed model for
emotional intelligence, Rich needs to work more on:
a. self-awareness
b. self-regulation
c. social skills
d. empathy

A094. All of the following are examples of items normally placed under
configuration control except:
a. physical items
b. documents
c. forms and records
d. tools and techniques

A095. The project decision-making processes are typically included in the:
a. project management plan
b. project documents
c. project governance framework
d. project charter

A096. Your project is approaching a critical milestone. At this milestone, you will
need to decide if the project should maintain its current course or drastically change
how the work is being performed. Making a good decision is crucial, but you are
concerned that you do not have all the detailed knowledge required to adequately
weigh all the options available. Therefore you need input from several of your key
team members. At this point, what decision-making style are you most likely to use?
a. command
b. consultation
c. consensus
d. coin flip


A097. You are nearing the end of the project and have begun compiling all of your
lessons learned. Collecting lessons learned is important in order to:
a. identify who was accountable for all project errors
b. provide documentation on any perceived late deliveries or cost overruns
c. update your enterprise environmental factors for future projects
d. compare plan to actual so as to improve project estimating on future projects

A098. You project is running with a CPI of 1.2. The EAC is $100,000. What is the
BAC?
a. $ 83,333
b. $100,000
c. $120,000
d. $150,000

A099. You are working on a medical device development project. Your organization
embraced project management about a year ago and many of your team members
now have their PMP(R). At this point, you are developing your network diagrams.
There is a heated discussion about whether to use the critical path method or the
critical chain method. You explain the difference by stating:
a. critical path and critical chain are different names for the same method
b. a critical path is time constrained while a critical chain is resource constrained
c. the critical path method assumes limited resources while the critical chain method
assumes unlimited resources
d. the critical path method is a newer idea while the critical chain idea has been around
for many decades
A100. The document that states explicitly what the project excludes is the:
a. WBS
b. project scope statement
c. scope management plan
d. project management plan

A101. It has been determined that several deliverables due today do not meet the
technical specifications. A change request has been generated and approved. The
defect is repaired, or so it seems. During what process are changes validated?
a. validate scope
b. control quality
c. direct and manage project work
d. monitor and control project work

A102. Termination may occur for all of the following reasons except:
a. completion
b. cause
c. mutual agreement
d. convenience

A103. We are presently trying to identify potential risks on our project. In our
organization, the senior people often dominate meetings and everyone else simply
goes along with their ideas. One technique to identify risk that keeps one person
from unduly influencing the outcome is:
a. brainstorming
b. SWOT analysis
c. root cause analysis
d. Delphi technique

A104. The CPI= .8 and the SPI=1.1. How is your project doing?
a. ahead of schedule, under budget
b. ahead of schedule, over budget
c. behind schedule, under budget
d. behind schedule, over budget

A105. Rank ordering of defects is done through:
a. control charts
b. process flowcharts
c. cause and effect diagrams
d. Pareto charts

A106. Parametric estimates are most likely to be accurate when all the following
statements are true except:
a. the historical information is accurate
b. the project manager creates the model without inputs from other stakeholders
c. the parameters used in the model are readily quantifiable
d. the model is scalable

A107. Notification from the customer that the terms of the contract have been met
is done during which process?
a. close project
b. plan procurements
c. validate scope
d. control quality

A108. An organizational culture is often reflected in all of the following except?
a. regulations
b. shared values, norms, and beliefs
c. policies and procedures
d. work ethics and work hours

A109. An example of horizontal communication is communication:
a. with your peers
b. with your team
c. with your management
d. with your suppliers

A110. The stages of team development in proper order are:
a. storming, forming, performing, norming
b. forming, storming, performing, norming
c. forming, storming, norming, performing
d. storming, norming, forming, performing

A111. You want to be able to systematically change all of the important factors for a
product or process, rather than one factor at a time, to provide the optimal
conditions for the product or process. Based on this need, you are most likely to use:
a. benchmarking
b. control chart
c. design of experiment (DOE)
d. run chart

A112. The BAC (budget at completion) for your project is $100,000. Your EAC is
$120,000. What is the CPI?
a. .83
b. 1.0
c. 1.2
d. 1.5


A113. The vast majority of the project budget is spent during which process group?
a. initiating
b. planning
c. executing
d. monitoring and controlling

A114. You work in a large mapmaking organization. Your project is a new product
development. At your first team meeting, you are trying to help your team
understand the difference between product scope and project scope. All of the
following statements are true except:
a. product scope is defined first, and then project scope is defined
b. all project deliverables should be related to the product scope
c. the project life cycle is a subset of the product life cycle
d. the configuration management system manages and controls changes to the product
scope

A115. After your last status meeting, your customer has come to you with a change
request. What should you do first?
a. meet with your management
b. meet with the project sponsor
c. evaluate the change request
d. make the change since it is the customer making the request

A116. As the new business manager for a large construction company, it is important
for you to be able to quantify new opportunities. You are currently looking at a new
venture and have determined that there is a 20% probability of income in year one
of $40,000. There is a 30% probability of income in year one of $10,000 and there is
a 50% probability of a loss of $20,000 in the first year. What is the expected
monetary value of this venture for year one?
a. $30,000
b. $10,000
c. $ 1,000
d. $ 0

A117. If earned value is higher than planned value:
a. the project is ahead of schedule
b. the project is behind schedule
c. the project is over budget
d. the project is under budget

A118. Examining project performance over time to determine if performance is
improving or deteriorating is called:
a. variance analysis
b. earned value technique
c. trend analysis
d. cost-benefit analysis

A119. When a project terminates early, what process should be followed to
document the level and extent of completion?
a. control quality
b. validate scope
c. close procurement
d. control scope

A120. Reserve analysis during the control risks process looks at:
a. planned versus actual with respect to cost performance
b. planned versus actual with respect to schedule performance
c. the amount of contingency reserve remaining versus the amount of risk remaining
d. the amount of money remaining versus the amount of work remaining

A121. If actual cost is higher than earned value:
a. the project is ahead of schedule
b. the project is behind schedule
c. the project is over budget
d. the project is under budget

A122. Your quality manager comes to you with a list of tools typically used to plan
quality. This list is likely to include all the following except:
a. cause and effect diagrams
b. flowcharts
c. Pareto diagrams
d. quality audits

A123. You have been assigned to a project which has major cost and schedule
overruns, as well as a long list of uncontrolled changes. Uncontrolled changes are
also known as:
a. cost growth
b. schedule growth
c. scope creep
d. scope changes

A124. If your project is running on budget, the CPI is:
a. 0
b. 1
c. greater than 1
d. less than 1

A125. You have been managing a large mapmaking project for the government. Your
customer is asking for multiple scope changes. As you review these changes, you are
trying to determine the true magnitude of these changes. You are most likely to
review what document?
a. scope management plan
b. WBS
c. project charter
d. cost management plan

A126. The schedule baseline is an output of which process:
a. define activities
b. develop project management plan
c. develop schedule
d. estimate activity durations
A127. Your business is building and maintaining the country's railroad systems.
Projects have always been managed using a functional structure but you, as a new
project manager, are advocating to move to a projectized structure. What
disadvantage of a projectized structure might a functional manager use to support
remaining with a functional structure:
a. higher potential for conflict
b. more complex to manage
c. extra administration required
d. less efficient use of resources

A128. EAC= (BAC/CPI) is the equation used for calculating an estimate at
completion when:
a. past performance shows that the original estimating assumptions were fundamentally
flawed
b. current variances are seen as atypical
c. conditions have changed
d. current variances are seen as typical of future variances

A129. Based on your success on previous projects, you have been asked to manage
a project for a different department in your organization. This department has
documented processes for most of their work. You realize that you will need to tailor
many of their standard processes so that they will make sense for your new project.
Which organizational process asset will probably help you the most:
a. personnel administration
b. infrastructure
c. project management information system (PMIS)
d. project plan templates

A130. As a project manager in a global company, you realize that you need not only
project management skills but also interpersonal skills. Decision-making is an
example of an interpersonal skill. Which of the following is not an element of
decision-making?
a. risk management
b. problem definition
c. problem solution generation
d. ideas to action

A131. An emergency has occurred and you urgently need a safety contractor to do
some consulting work for you. In this circumstance, you are most likely to use a:
a. fixed price
b. fixed price incentive
c. cost plus incentive
d. time and materials

A132. The forecasted estimate at completion is also called the:
a. EV
b. EAC
c. BAC
d. PV


A133. You are a project manager who manages equipment installations in an
automobile manufacturing facility. Early in the planning process, you are asked to
generate ideas for improvement and to provide a basis by which to measure
performance. You are most likely to use:
a. control charts
b. Pareto charts
c. scatter diagrams
d. benchmarking

A134. Cost forecasts are an output of what process?
a. plan cost management
b. estimate costs
c. determine budget
d. control costs

A135. It is early in a software development project, and the core team is in the
process of collecting requirements. Key inputs the team should review are?
a. the WBS and the project plan
b. the schedule and the risk management plan
c. the project charter and the stakeholder register
d. the requirements management plan and the requirements traceability matrix

A136. You have moved into the project management role for a project to develop
the marketing collateral for a major ad campaign. The collateral will be both hard
copy and electronic. Thousands of project stakeholders will receive the benefits of
your work. At this point, more than 80 percent of the work is complete. The project
has 147 team members. Most of the team members have limited experience with the
new technology being used to design the collateral. There seems to have been little
work done so far related to risk. You should begin with which process:
a. identify risks
b. plan risk responses
c. perform qualitative risk analysis
d. perform quantitative risk analysis

A137. If your project is over budget, your cost variance (CV) is:
a. negative
b. positive
c. 0
d. 1

A138. As you are walking through your project's construction site a fire breaks out
and you realize chaos will likely ensue. The site safety manager is most likely to use
which conflict resolution technique in this situation to evacuate people from the site
quickly?
a. problem solving
b. compromising
c. withdrawal
d. forcing

A139. Your work on the project is expected to be constant for the six-month length
of the project. During each month, your budget is $200. At the end of month four,
you have 40% of the total work completed and you have spent 70% of your total
budget. The project's budget at completion for the project is:
a. $ 80
b. $ 140
c. $ 840
d. $1,200

A140. Projects within a given organization have all the following in common except:
a. similar project life cycles
b. similar project deliverables
c. the same products
d. the same WBS templates
A141. As a project manager in the software industry, you find your projects are
overridden with requested changes. You try to explain to your customers the effect
changes have on the competing project constraints. One simple way to explain the
idea is that, if one constraint changes:
a. the project cost will increase
b. the project schedule will be extended
c. at least one other factor will likely to be affected
d. all of the other factors will be affected

A142. A procurement audit:
a. identifies any weaknesses in the seller's work processes or deliverables
b. determines whether project activities comply with organizational and project policies,
processes, and procedures
c. documents the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified risks and their
root causes, as well as the effectiveness of risk management processes
d. reviews processes from the plan procurement process through the control procurement
process

A143. Several of your key engineers are constantly showing up late for work. When
they do finally arrive they are dressed very well, much better in fact than is
standard practice in your firm. You wonder if what you are noticing is really a
warning sign that they have been interviewing with other companies. Another name
for a warning sign is a:
a. risk event
b. risk impact
c. risk score
d. risk trigger

A144. Cost estimates based on project team members' recollections are generally:
a. useless
b. less reliable than documented performance
c. more reliable than documented performance
d. the most reliable form of estimating

A145. You are struggling to get your team members focused on your project. It
seems that priorities across the projects in the program are unclear. Setting
priorities across projects inside a program is most often handled by:
a. the project manager
b. the project stakeholders
c. senior management
d. the program manager

A146. Due to your great success on your last project, you have been assigned to a
new project with a very difficult customer. Based on lessons learned from others,
you recognize that your project having well-defined acceptance criteria is critically
important. Which of the following statements is false in regards to acceptance
criteria?
a. the criteria include performance requirements that must be achieved before acceptance
of project deliverables
b. the criteria are defined in the project scope statement
c. the fact that the deliverables meet the acceptance criteria signifies that customer needs
have been satisfied
d. control quality validates that the customer's acceptance criteria have been met

A147. The work of your project is expected to be at a constant level over the life of
the project. The project schedule is for six months. Each month's budget is $200. At
the end of month four, you have 40% of the total work completed and you have
spent 70% of your total budget. The planned value for the project is:
a. $ 80
b. $ 140
c. $ 800
d. $1,200

A148. You are involved in the design/build of a large manufacturing facility. The
project life cycle is expected to span several years. You are able to do a detailed
WBS for the early phases but not for the later phases. However, your management
believes that all sections of the WBS should be decomposed to the same level at the
same time. You need to explain what concept to them?
a. rolling wave planning
b. the use of templates
c. define activities
d. product analysis

A149. The project is to provide clean safe drinking water to an isolated community
that has been hit by massive droughts. The CPI is .90. The project is two weeks
behind schedule and the project has over 30 stakeholders. Where should you
increase your emphasis?
a. schedule
b. cost
c. stakeholder management
d. conflict management

A150. In your organization, the terms "projects", "programs", and "portfolios" are
often used interchangeably. You explain to management the differences between
these words. Which of the following is a true statement?
a. projects and portfolios are often a subset of programs
b. senior management or senior management teams often manage portfolios
c. programs are a group of projects that may or may not be related
d. projects are usually larger than programs

A151. You are working on your first large-scale project. The project's CPI is .97.
The project is running five weeks behind schedule and has over 300 stakeholders.
Where should you, the project manager, increase your emphasis?
a. schedule
b. cost
c. stakeholder engagement
d. conflict management

A152. At the start, Project A has an initial investment of $80,000. At the end of year
one, the project has a benefit of $50,000 and at the end of year two, it has another
benefit of $30,000. The project has no other benefits. Use a discount rate (interest
rate) of 8%. What is the net present value of Project A?
a. -$ 7,983.55
b. $ 0.00
c. +$72,016.45
d. +$80,000.00

A153. Your project is to build the first green roof in your island community. Green
roofs serve many purposes including absorbing rainfall, providing insulation, and
creating a habitat for wildlife. The government has created a new regulation related
to collecting rain water that may affect your project. Based on this government
mandate, what should you do first?
a. meet with your management
b. meet with the project sponsor
c. evaluate the change request
d. make the change since it is government mandated

A154. In the past, your organization has done a poor job of "killing" projects. To be
more proactive, a portfolio steering committee has been formed. The committee is
holding its first quarterly meeting. One of the committee's primary responsibilities is
to review the list of current and future projects and perform project selection. You
have been assigned the responsibility of ensuring that the committee members have
all the information they need to make good decisions. When selecting projects the
committee should take into account all of the following except:
a. sunk costs
b. opportunity costs
c. net present values
d. payback periods

A155. As a member of the quality control department it is your responsibility to
teach an entry-level course to all technical personnel. One idea this course must
address is the difference between tolerances and control limits. Which statement
below is true?
a. tolerances should be tighter than control limits
b. a data point may be outside the control limits but within the tolerances
c. your customer usually sets the control limits
d. your process or equipment usually sets the tolerances

A156. As part of the plan procurements process you are trying to decide if you
should rent or buy a piece of equipment. To rent the equipment will cost $100/week.
The purchase price of the equipment will be $900 plus a usage cost of $10/week.
When will the cost-to-rent equal the cost-to-buy?
a. 8 weeks
b. 10 weeks
c. 15 weeks
d. 20 weeks

A157. Your project is expected to run for three consecutive years. Your organization
is introducing earned value management as part of the planning and managing of
this project. Your project assistant does all the earned value calculations for you but
has a hard time interpreting the results. The project budget $100,000. The budget is
consistent across the three years. You are exactly 18 months into the project. 30
percent of the total budget has been spent and 40% of the work is complete. Your
project is:
a. ahead of schedule and over budget
b. ahead of schedule and under budget
c. behind schedule and over budget
d. behind schedule and under budget

A158. The portfolio steering committee is holding its quarterly project selection
meeting. At this point, the committee is considering four new projects. The projects
are similar in nature. The primary difference is their payment period. Project A has
a payback period of 8 months. Project B has a payback period of 10 months. Project
C has a payback period of 12 months. Project D has a payback period of 22 months.
Based on this limited information, the project most likely to be selected is:
a. project A
b. project B
c. project C
d. project D

A159. You were selected to lead the project that will move the organization into a
leadership role in social media. Many stakeholders from both inside and outside the
organization have been involved. Your sponsor issued the charter, and the
stakeholders have been kept informed throughout the life of the project. Your
monthly status meetings have goon well and everyone involved seems pleased. Your
project has been running on schedule, and within budget, and the requirements are
being achieved according to plan. As you prepare for your last deliverable, you hear
that the solution developed has been rejected and the project cancelled. The most
likely reason for this is:
a. your sponsor was not at a high enough level in the organization to support your project
b. your timeline was not aggressive enough for the market
c. you did not control your budget to the level required for such a large project
d. a critical stakeholder was not involved or not involved early enough

A160. Your risk manager likes to use expected monetary value to quantify risk.
However, some of your stakeholders seem to ignore expected monetary value and
instead base their risk decisions on the satisfaction they derive from each option.
This theory is called:
a. hierarchy of needs
b. hygiene theory
c. utility theory
d. expectancy theory

A161. A new technician has joined your team. He and your sponsor worked together
in a previous organization. Whenever you direct the work of the team, he brings up
what he apparently thinks the sponsor would like the team to do. As a result, the
members of your team are confused as to from whom they should receive direction.
The power being exercised by your new technician is an example of:
a. expert power
b. referent power
c. penalty power
d. formal power


A162. You are conducting lessons learned on your project. The final SPI is 1.00. The
final CPI is 1.12. There were 150 geographically dispersed team members. Although
the customer accepted the final product, the customer has decided to shelve it.
Where might you have put more focus than you did?
a. managing the schedule
b. managing the budget
c. managing your team members
d. managing the relationships with the project stakeholders

A163. You have taken over a project in a matrix environment that has not been
performing well. Many of the stakeholders are resistant and cannot agree on the
path to move forward. The best approach you can take to resolve this issue is to:
a. suggest each stakeholder write a detailed description of his or her ideas and use your
authority to decide on which method is best
b. request each stakeholder write a detailed description of his or her ideas and then
merge all the ideas together in one document
c. bring in a facilitator and have a face to face meeting with the critical stakeholders to
develop a strategy to move forward
d. utilize your past experience to develop a strategy. Once the stakeholders see small
wins they will be onboard with your ideas.

A164. The conflict resolution technique that will, without fail, resolve a conflict
quickly but should only be used as a last resort is:
a. compromising
b. forcing
c. confronting
d. withdrawing

A165. Your quality control group has recommended statistical sampling, which is
often conducted for all the following reasons except:
a. sampling can often reduce costs
b. sampling is often a quicker process
c. testing may be destructive so we need to sample or we would have no products to sell
d. attribute sampling measures the degree of conformance

A166. A project manager should be rewarded on cost elements he can actually
influence. Which of the following is hardest for the project manager to influence?
a. direct costs
b. indirect costs
c. variable costs
d. fixed costs

A167. As a project manager in the pharmaceutical industry, your projects include
performing many drug trials. To accurately represent these required activities on
your network diagrams, you need to include conditional statements. Most likely,
what type of network diagramming technique is your project using?
a. arrow diagramming technique
b. precedence diagramming technique
c. graphical evaluation review technique
d. fast tracking technique

A168. The WBS dictionary is developed during which process:
a. define scope
b. create WBS
c. define activities
d. develop project management plan

A169. Your contractor is reporting cost performance to you on a monthly basis using
CPI. History has shown that the project's CPI often becomes stable when what
percent of the work is complete?
a. 15%-20%
b. 25%-30%
c. 30%-45%
d. 30% -50%
A170. You have been managing a large mapmaking project for the government. Your
customer is asking for multiple scope changes. You are considering these requested
changes and trying to determine their true magnitudes. You are most likely to
review what document?
a. scope management plan
b. WBS
c. project charter
d. cost management plan

A171. You have spent months planning your project and you and your team are
ready to begin execution. The direct and manage project work process includes
implementing the project management plan and any approved changes made to the
plan. Which of the following is not an input to direct and manage project work?
a. approved corrective action
b. approved preventive action
c. approved defect repair
d. approved contract changes

A172. A major fire occurred in your community six months ago. A final report was
developed that included many recommendations going forward. Your project is to
ensure that all the approved recommendations occur in a timely fashion. Now
another recommendation has been suggested. You realize that if approved this
change will increase the project cost by $80,000. At this point you should:
a. reject the change
b. make the change as soon as possible since it related to human and environmental safety
c. get the change approved internally first
d. see how the change effects the other project constraints

A173. The procurement professionals in your organization work in a centralized
organization. A consultant has recommended that you move to decentralized
contracting. All of the following are positives of decentralized contracting except:
a. more loyalty to the project
b. easier access to contracting expertise
c. more in depth understanding of the needs of the project
d. clearly defined career paths for contracting professionals

A174. Deviations from the project management plan may indicate:
a. apathy on the part of the team with respect to the project
b. poor teamwork
c. potential impacts of threats and opportunities
d. the need for more quality inspectors

A175. Your organization has just won a large contract. Management has ordered
work to begin immediately. For you, this means getting the project charter
approved. Management tells you that there is no time for this. What should you do
first?
a. explain the risks of proceeding without a charter
b. begin work on planning, and at the same time continue to push until you get the charter
defined and approved
c. say you will skip the charter but demand that management allows you time to create a
WBS
d. assume the contract is the charter and begin work

A176. When an organization identifies an opportunity to which it would like to
respond, it often initiates a:
a. project scope statement
b. feasibility study
c. work breakdown structure
d. project management plan

A177. The cost of proposal preparation is normally billed as:
a. not a direct cost to the buyer
b. a direct cost to the buyer only if the buyer does not buy from the seller
c. a direct cost to the buyer only if the buyer does buy from the seller
d. a direct cost to the buyer regardless of whether the buyer buys from the seller

A178. Based on the diagram below, the project is currently:
a. ahead of schedule and under budget
b. ahead of schedule and over budget
c. behind schedule and under budget
d. behind schedule and over budget
A179. The theory that high levels of management trust in, confidence in, and
commitment to workers leads to high levels of worker motivation and productivity
is:
a. Vroom's expectancy theory
b. Ouchi's Theory Z
c. McGregor's Theory X
d. Herzberg's hygiene theory

A180. Your quality manager and operations manager are arguing about how much
money should be spent on quality. The real question is how to define optimal quality.
Marginal analysis states that optimal quality is reached when:
a. the incremental revenue from improvement equals the incremental cost to obtain it
b. quality has the same priority as cost and schedule
c. more money is spent proactively on quality than reactively on quality
d. nothing more can be done to improve quality

A181. The performance measurements associated with your project are acceptable
and remaining at a constant level, but your project seems completely out of control.
The project CPI is 1.04 and the project SPI is 1.03. You have 405 team members in
30 different countries. You know that your focus should be on communications yet all
of your time is spent managing changes. All of the changes are catching you by
surprise. Your team is closing out phase four of an eight-phase project. One likely
lesson learned will be that additional effort should have been placed on:
a. identifying a project manager for every country
b. planning for delays related to the number of countries involved
c. planning for cost overruns related to the number of countries involved
d. identifying stakeholders early

A182. As a house builder, you often take on more work than you can handle. For
years you have consistently completed homes behind schedule, but you continue to
be profitable. Your current project is running 90 days late and the homebuyer states
that she intends to pursue punitive damages. Punitive damages represent:
a. the exact amount due to the injured party for his loss
b. the amount agreed to in advance
c. the specific performance stated in the contract
d. the amount above what would barely compensate the injured party for his loss

A183. Herzberg's hygiene theory stresses:
a. some job factors lead to satisfaction whereas others can only prevent dissatisfaction
b. some job factors lead to satisfaction and to dissatisfaction
c. some job factors lead to satisfaction in some people and dissatisfaction in other people
d. job satisfaction and dissatisfaction exist on the same continuum.


A184. On your factory floor work in progress occupies a large amount of space.
Management has decided to try a pull system. In this system, workers do not
automatically receive work in progress from a previous station but pull it when they
need inventory. Another name for this system is:
a. Kanban
b. kaizen
c. utility theory
d. marginal analysis

A185. Your manager has limited knowledge of project management but understands
the basic idea that managing the critical path is important. You have one critical path
on your project and seven near critical paths. Your manager has only had a basic
course on project management and has never heard of the idea of a near critical
path. You explain that, as the number of more near critical paths increases, which of
the following also increases?
a. float on the project activities
b. cost for the overall project
c. risk for the overall project
d. people working on the project

A186. Your management is heavily involved in selecting where your project
resources are to be concentrated and in, anticipating potential project issues and
dealing with these issues before they can become critical. You remind your manager
that, on a project, these type of roles are handled by:
a. the sponsor
b. the project manager
c. the team
d. the functional managers

A187. A project manager has been managing a long term training project. The
training is over, and she is trying to close out her project. The situation is not good.
Although all requirements have been met, the customer is not satisfied. The
customer states that the results of the training were not what they expected. One
likely cause of this was:
a. the instructors were not qualified
b. the customer's expectations were not turned into requirements
c. the customer is trying to exploit the contract
d. the training did not go into enough detail

A188. A project manager has submitted several contested changes to the customer.
These contested changes, often called claims or disputes, are impeding progress.
The preferred method to settle claims and disputes is:
a. mediation
b. arbitration
c. litigation
d. negotiation

A189. Your company, Hausmann Associates, is in the final stages of the design/build
of a semiconductor factory for a major customer. At the last customer meeting, the
company finance manager mentioned the possibility of building another factory in
the near future. This is an opportunity your company wants. The most likely
strategy you are to use to get this project is:
a. exploit
b. mitigate
c. transfer
d. avoid

A190. The theory that people choose behaviors that they believe will lead to desired
rewards or outcomes is:
a. Maslow's hierarchy
b. McGregor's Theory Y
c. Vroom's expectancy theory
d. Ouchi's Theory Z
A191. As the project manager of a small start-up company it is always important to
carefully track your working capital. Working capital is defined as:
a. current assets minus current liabilities
b. present value of inflows minus present value of outflows
c. price minus cost
d. price minus profit

A192. One of your project's key resources is being pulled away to a higher priority
project. This resource is working on activity A on your project. Activity A has an
early finish of 12 days and a late finish of 10 days. This means:
a. Activity A has -2 days of total float
b. Activity A has a lag of 2 days
c. Activity A has a duration of 2 days
d. Activity A has a +2 days of float

A193. You are heavily involved in the sale of construction services to a large
manufacturing firm. During the negotiation, your organization's contracts manager
takes over the negotiation and pushes for the contract type to be cost plus
percentage of cost (CPPC) instead of the originally planned cost plus fixed fee
(CPFF). You realize that your contract's manager may be assuming:
a. the contract will overrun the estimated costs
b. the contract will underrun the estimated costs
c. the buyer is assuming too much risk
d. the buyer needs us (the seller) to take more risk before they will sign the contract

A194. You are the project manager for a large construction company. Risk
management is a large part of what you manage. Your management instructs you to
focus on the business risks and informs you they will focus on the pure risks. How is
your organization most likely to deal with pure risks?
a. hire more staff
b. build contingency into the schedule
c. build contingency into the budget
d. buy insurance

A195. The control limits on a control chart provide us information on:
a. what the process is capable of producing
b. how the product should perform to meet the customer's expectations
c. the tolerances set by the customer
d. the specifications set by the customer

A196. You have been placed in charge of a team comprised of very experienced
members. The team has been very successful in the past. The leadership style you
are least likely to adopt in this situation is:
a. consensus
b. consultative
c. autocratic
d. facilitating

A197. The project is to transfer technology developed in your factory in Scotland to
an operations facility in China. There are approximately 3,000 stakeholders
involved in the project living in 12 different countries. Your sponsor is very involved
and communicates regularly with you, the project management team, and the key
stakeholders. Your CPI is .95 and the project is running 14 weeks behind schedule.
Based on this scenario what should you be most concerned about?
a. schedule
b. cost
c. stakeholder management
d. sponsor management

A198. You are reviewing the latest data collected, in the form of a control chart,
from a piece of equipment that cuts pipe. The process mean is a length of 42.35
meters. The upper control limit is 42.83 meters. The lower control limit is 41.87. The
latest data in sequence is: 41.92, 42.38, 42.75, 42.32, 42.01, 41.97, 41.88, 42.30,
42.09, 41.95. From this data we can state:
a. the process is out of control
b. the process is in control
c. the tolerance limits should be tighter
d. the tolerance limits should be wider

A199. The pessimistic time to complete Activity A is 22 days. The optimistic time is
10 days. The standard deviation for Activity A is:
a. 1 day
b. 2 days
c. 6 days
d. 12 days
A200. You are managing multiple projects for your customer, the British
Government. These contracts differ in type. Types include time and
materials(T&M) and cost reimbursable (CR) contracts, as well as fixed price(FP)
contracts. The corporate accountant calls you to state that you are about to hit your
PTA (point of total assumption) on one of the contracts. The accountant is talking
about which contract type?
a. time and materials
b. cost plus fixed fee
c. cost plus incentive
d. fixed price incentive
SAMPLE TEST


  Solutions
A001.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.5.2
        b. Projects often fail when the project's objectives are not aligned with the
Y       organization's strategic plan. Therefore, we need to ensure that the project
        stays aligned with the organization's strategic plan.
        a. Be careful of the term "quickly". We need to ensure that the new project
N
        objectives are aligned with the organization's strategic plan.
        c We cannot and should not always reject changes to the project objectives. At
N
        times these changes may make sense.
        d. We cannot update the project plan based on the new project objectives
N       unless the charter is updated first. The project objectives are found in the
        project charter.


A002.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
        b. A tolerance represents the point at which the organization will stand no
Y
        more risk. In this question, this is represented by the ringing Alarm #2.
        a. A risk appetite is the degree of uncertainly one is willing to accept in
N
        anticipation of a reward.
        c. The ringing of Alarm #1 tells us we have reached a threshold in which we
N       have a specific interest. When this threshold is reached, we will modify our
        behavior.
        d. A workaround is an unplanned response to a risk event. The alarm ringing is
N
        a planned, not an unplanned response.


A003.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.4
        c. During the acquire project team process (a part of the executing process
        group) we negotiate for the team members we need. During the develop project
Y
        team process (also part of the executing process group) we provide training
        and team building.
        a. During initiating most of the work is being accomplished by the project
N
        manager, the sponsor, and a very limited number of team members.
        b. During planning we may have a planning team (a limited team). Nothing in
N
        the question leads us to believe that the question concerns a planning team.
        d. We negotiate for team members and provide team building as part of the
N
        executing, not monitoring and controlling processes.


A004.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1
Y          d. At a minimum the project charter defines the project objectives. We cannot
           proceed with planning until we have agreed on the project objectives.
           a., b., and c. It is important to have the charter developed and approved before
           we begin planning. How can we plan if we are unsure of the project
N
           objectives? Also, a sponsor is needed to provide financial resources for the
           project. The sponsor should sign the charter.


A005.      d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 8 - Quality Introduction
           d. The question asks for the first thing to be done. We may want to do
Y          everything on the list, but the question asks what we should do first? We
           address the immediate problem first.
N          a and b. These are both great ideas, but we do not do them first.
N          c. As the project manager, we are responsible for addressing these issues.


A006.      b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
           b. Variations within the control chart's control limits provide information
Y
           related to common causes.
           a., c. and d. Variation outside the control limits may be called special cause
N          variation or assignable cause variation and may be associated with unnatural
           patterns.


Figure for A007-009




A007. b. PMBOK(R) Guide Sections 5.4.2.1 and 6.3.2.1
Lets do a forward pass to calculate the project duration. Remember that the project and the
critical path duration are the same. The project duration is 24 days. answer b.


A008. d. PMBOK(R) Guide Sections 5.4.2.1 and 6.3.2.1
Now lets do a backward pass to calculate the float of Activity D.

Now let's calculate the float of D. The float (also called total float, or slack, or total slack)
of D= late finish of D-early finish of D= 15-10=5. D has 5 days of float.

Let's calculate the other floats.
Float of A= late finish of A - early finish of A= 0
Float of B= late finish of B - early finish of B= 0
Float of C= late finish of C - early finish of C= 0
Float of E= late finish of E - early finish of E= 0


A009. d. PMBOK(R) Guide Sections 5.4.2.1 and 6.3.2.1
The activities on the critical path are A-B-C-E since they each have zero float.


A010.       d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1
            d. When you see a question that asks what process might have prevented an
            issue from occurring, we are generally looking for a planning process, not a
Y
            controlling process. Often the issues we see during executing and monitoring
            and controlling were caused, or at least not prevented, during planning.
            a. and b. Controlling processes do not prevent issues. Instead, they help us
N
            determine corrective or preventative actions.
            c. Initially, the manage communications process sounds like a good answer.
N           However, this process consists of following the communication plan. If the
            plan has errors, this process will just follow the errors.


A011.       d. Gregory A Garrett's World Class Contracting, page 128
            d. A letter of intent is a pre-contract agreement that often unofficially
Y
            encourages sellers to begin work at risk.
            a. A purchase order is the simplest form of a fixed price contract. The
N           statement in the question is asking about what you would use before a contract
            can be awarded.
            b. A request for proposal is a document used to request proposals from sellers.
N
            This document will not allow the seller to begin work.
        c. A purchase agreement sets the terms and conditions that apply to transactions
N       between parties. A seller generally will not begin work until there is a contract
        in place.


A012.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
        b. The network diagram is the part of the model used for schedule risk
        analysis. One reason this diagram is used as part of the model is that the
Y       network diagram shows path convergences. Duration estimates are also
        required since the output displays the probabilities of achieving time
        objectives.
        a. There is no such thing as a work breakdown schedule. There is a work
N
        breakdown structure, but it is not used for schedule risk analysis.
        c. Duration estimates alone are not enough for schedule risk analysis. We need
N
        a diagram that shows the entire schedule including path convergences.
        d. The schedule management plan describes how we will manage changes to
N
        the project schedule. It is a plan, not a model.


A013.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
        c. A higher than expected number of change orders often indicates that one or
Y
        more key stakeholders were not involved early on is.
N       a. The question states that your sponsor is very involved.
N       b. The question states that you have a project plan including baselines.
        d. The question states the project will involve working with the city, the
N       county, the police department, and several suppliers. All of these stakeholders
        should be identified early in the project.


A014.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.2.1
        c. RAMs (responsibility assignment matrices) show who is responsible for
Y       what activity. It is critical that only one person be accountable for each
        activity.
        a. An organizational breakdown structure shows the organization's departments
N
        and which work packages are assigned to which departments.
N       b. An organizational chart shows reporting relationships.
N       d. A resource calender shows when specific resources will become available.


A015.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y       d. Pareto diagrams help us set priorities.
N       a. Cause and effect diagrams help us find the root cause of certain negative
        effects.
        b. Flowcharts help us visualize the steps to transform an input(s) into a
N
        desirable output.
N       c. Checksheets are used to visibly collect data.


A016.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.2.2.2
        d. Analogous estimating is often employed when little information is available
        about the project. In this method, we use a past similar project as the basis for
Y
        our estimate. This method is often quicker and, less costly but also less
        accurate.
N       a. Vendor bid analysis involves using vendor bids as the basis of our estimates.
        b. Parametric estimating involves using statistical relationships between
N
        variables to create cost estimates.
        c. Bottom-up estimating involves estimating the cost of work packages (or
N       activities) and rolling these estimates up to create a cost estimate for the
        project.


A017.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.3.2.3
Y       d. Lag time is delay time; this is the time needed for the concrete to cure.
        a. Total float is the total amount of time that a scheduled activity may be
N       delayed from its early start without delaying the project finish date. This
        question has nothing to do with float.
        b. Free float is the amount of time that a schedule activity can be delayed
N       without delaying the early start of any immediately following schedule activity.
        The question has nothing to do with free float.
        c. Lead is a modification of a logical relationship that allows a sucessor
N
        activity to be accelerated. The question is the exact opposite of a lead.


A018.   PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 6.4 and 9.2
        b. This statement describes the plan human resource management and the
Y
        estimate activity resources processes very well.
        a. The plan human resource management and the estimate activity resources
        processes are very different processes. Plan human resource management is
N
        related solely to people; estimate activity resources is related to all resources
        including people, equipment, and materials.
        c. The human resource management plan is an input of both the acquire project
        team process and the estimate costs process. The activity resources
N       requirements are indirectly an input of the estimate costs process as these
        requirements help build the project schedule which is an input to the estimate
        costs process.
        d. This statement is reversed. The project organization chart is an output of the
N       plan human resource management process and the resource breakdown
        structure is an output of the estimate activity resources process.


A019.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
        b. Change requests are an output of the monitor and control project work
Y
        process.
        a. The project management plan is an output of the develop project
N
        management plan process.
        c. Approved change requests are an output of the perform integrated change
N
        control process.
        d. All requested changes should be approved or rejected and approved
N
        changes should be implemented before the close project process.


A020.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
        a. Every change request should go through the change control process. In this
Y       example we may decide to cancel the project instead of implementing the
        change request.
        b., c., and d. Elements of the perform integrated change control process
        include: controlling factors that create changes to make sure those changes are
N
        beneficial, determining when a change has occurred, and managing the
        approved changes.


A021.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.1
        a. The effort expended on project management should be appropriate based on
Y
        the size, risk, and importance of the project.
        b. As project managers, we should not follow this methodology explicitly. We
N       need to work with the PMO to tailor the methodology for our particular
        project.
N       c. The methodology should not be ignored. It should be tailored for our project.
        d. This answer is valid but we need to work with the PMO since we have been
N
        instructed to follow the methodology.


A022.   c. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
        c. The PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct is applicable to both
Y       PMI(R) members and individuals who have applied for or received certification
        through PMI(R) regardless of their membership in PMI(R).
        a. The PMBOK(R) Guide is a standard, not a regulation. It does not have to be
N       followed. It is suggested that a project management team tailor the information
        in the PMBOK(R) Guide to their specific project.
        b. PMI(R) publishes a tremendous amount of information. It is the responsibility
N       of the project management team to determine what is appropriate for any given
        project.
N       d. PMI(R) standards are standards, not regulations. They do not have to be
        followed.


A023.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.2.3.1
        d. The communications management plan describes many things, including the
Y
        person or group who will receive information.
        a. Be careful with any answer that contains the word "all". It is unlikely that
        any report would go to "all" stakeholders. Remember that stakeholders can
N
        include many groups of people, both internal and external. It is highly unlikely
        that "all" of these groups would be receiving a performance report.
        b. "Key stakeholders" is certainly a better answer than all stakeholders, but
N
        nonetheless, we communicate based on the communications plan.
        c. "Team members" may be valid answer, but we won't be able to know until
N
        we look at the communications plan.


A024.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.1.3.1
        b. The staffing management plan should include items such as staff acquisition,
Y       timetables, release criteria, training needs, recognitions and rewards,
        compliance, and safety.
        a. The project management plan is a valid answer but look for an answer that
N
        is more specific.
        c. The project organization chart visually depicts of the project team members
N
        and their reporting relationships.
        d. The communication management plan documents project communication
N
        needs and how those needs are to be addressed.


A025.   c. Any text book on Quality or Six Sigma
        c. Control limits are often set at a distance of plus or minus 3 standard
        deviations (sigma) of the plotted statistic from the statistic's mean. In this case
Y       defects occur about 3 times in a thousand. Six sigma is a set of tools for
        process improvement. In a six sigma process, defects occur about 3.4 times per
        million opportunities. Six sigma for many organizations is a measure of quality
        that strives for near perfection.
        a. Employing six sigma is much more than twice as stringent as setting control
N
        limits at plus or minus three sigma. See answer a.
        b. Control limits are often set at plus or minus three sigma not six sigma
N
        (PMBOK(R) Guide Section 8.1.2.3).
        d. When people refer to three sigma they really mean plus or minus three
N
        standard deviations on each side of the mean.


A026.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.3.4
        c. A revised cost baseline may need to be created to provide a realistic basis
Y
        for performance measurement.
        a. Your cost management plan is updated if approved changes impact the
        management of costs. The scenario described in the question statement does
N
        not affect the management of costs, and therefore the cost management plan is
        not updated.
        b. A revised project schedule is created when we can no longer measure
N       schedule performance. The question relates to cost performance, not schedule
        performance.
        d. The WBS is updated when approved changes affect the project scope. This
N       scenario described in the question does not imply a change in scope and
        therefore the WBS is not updated.


A027.   c. Any statistics book
        c. The variance is defined as the square of the standard deviation. One
Y       standard deviation = (P-O)/6. = (24-12)/6= 2 days. The variance therefore is
        (2 days) 2 = 4 days.
N       a and b. These are distractor answers.
N       d. 2 days is the standard deviation, not the variance.


A028.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3
        b. A WBS shows the hierarchy of deliverables. It does not show sequence. A
Y
        network diagram or schedule shows sequence.
        a. The WBS is deliverable oriented. Each level shows the progressive level of
N
        detail.
N         c. The output of the create WBS process is the WBS. As a secondary effect, the
          work needed to build the WBS also builds the team.
          d. With more investigation you will find that the WBS is an input of many of
N
          the planning processes that follow it.


A029.     a. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
          a. The four core values described in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional
          Conduct are: responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty. A conflict of
Y         interest occurs when we are in a position to influence an outcome when such
          outcomes could affect one or more parties with whom we have competing
          loyalties.
N         b., c., and d. The four core values described in the PMI(R) Code of Ethics and
          Professional Conduct are: responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty.


          c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 3-1 c. Manage stakeholder engagement is a process
A030. Y   of the executing process group, not the monitoring and controlling process
          group.
N         a. Validate scope is a process of the monitoring and controlling process group.
N         b. Control risk is a process of the monitoring and controlling process group.
          d. Control stakeholder engagement is a process of the monitoring and
N
          controlling process group.


A031.     c. Gregory A. Garrett's World Class Contracting, page 123
          c. A purchase agreement sets the terms and conditions that apply to transactions
          between parties. It is often used when the parties do not know the exact
Y
          quantity or exact products that will be exchanged. This agreement reduces the
          time to form a contract since its terms and conditions are already in place.
          a. A purchase order is the simplest form of a firm fixed price contract. You
N         will not want to use a firm fixed price contract since you do not know the exact
          quantity or exact products you are buying.
N         b. A request for proposal is a document used to request proposals from sellers.
          d. A letter of intent is a pre-contract agreement that often unofficially
N
          encourages sellers to begin work.


          c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.3.2 c. A secondary risk is a risk that
A032. Y
          emerges as the direct result of implementing a risk response.
N         a. A fallback plan is a plan that is activated if the contingency plan does not
        work.
N       b. A contingency plan is developed in advance as part of active acceptance.
N       d. A workaround is an unplanned response to a risk event.


A033.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.2.2.3
        c. The stakeholder engagement matrix shows both the current level and the
Y
        desired level of engagement.
        a. The communications management plan describes who gets what
N
        communication, when, how often, and in what form.
        b. The stakeholder register lists stakeholders as well as associated assessment
N
        and classification information.
        d. Requirements documentation shows the requirements for the project. In the
N       question, it is clear that the issue is not with requirements but with the lack of
        involvement of the stakeholders.


A034.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.5.2.4
        b. PERT = (optimistic + 4* most likely + pessimistic)/6 =(80+(4*100)+150)/6
Y
        = 105 hours.
        a., c., and d. Use the formula: PERT = (optimistic + 4* most likely +
N
        pessimistic)/6 to find the correct answer.


A035.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.5
        c. Design of experiments is a statistical method that helps identify which
Y       factors may influence specific variables of a product or process under
        development or in production.
N       a. Pareto charts display items ranked in order to guide corrective action.
N       b. Control charts help determine whether or not a process is stable.
        d. An inspection is the examination of a work product to determine whether it
N
        conforms to standards.


A036.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.1.3.1
        a. Cost estimates should be provided to a prescribed precision (e.g. $100,
Y
        $1000) based on the activities and magnitude of the project.
        b. Control thresholds set the agreed amount of variance allowed over time on a
N
        project.
        c. Earned value rules define several items, including the level of the work
N
        breakdown structure at which EV analysis will be performed.
N       d. Report formats define the format of various cost reports.


A037.   a. See Wikipedia "-Work Breakdown Structure"
        a. The 80-hour rule is a heuristic or a rule of thumb that states that each work
Y
        package should require 80 hours of effort or less.
N       b. PMI (R) has no requirements on the number of effort hours that should be
        required to complete a work package.
        c. A constraint limits the project team's options. Management made a
N
        suggestion. Suggestions are not constraints.
        d. Ground rules are often developed by teams to list acceptable and
N
        unacceptable behaviors so as to improve relationships.


A038.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
        d. Control charts help us see over time if a process is stable and/or exhibits
Y
        predictable performance.
        a. Cause and effect diagrams help us determine the root causes of certain
N       effects. b. Histograms show the shape of a distribution. They do not display a
        temporal dimension.
        c. A scatter diagram can suggest various kinds of correlations between
N
        variables with certain confidence level.


A039.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
        d. Perform integrated change control is the process that maintains baseline
Y       integrity. Here we address the approved changes and ensure that all the
        approved changes are incorporated into the baseline.
        a. Develop project management plan is the process of documenting the actions
N       required to plan and manage the project. This answer is valid but is not the
        best answer. Look for a more specific answer.
        b. Direct and manage project work is the process of implementing the work of
N
        the project plan.
        c. Monitor and control project work is the process of measuring the work
N       against the project plan and initiating corrective action if needed. Requested
        changes, not approved or rejected changes, are an output of this process.


A040.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 7 and Chapter 12
        b. Cost is the amount spent to deliver a product or service. Price is the amount
        charged to a customer. Price may or may not be related to cost. Price is often
Y       market driven. This idea is not in the PMBOK(R) Guide . Hopefully, you were
        able to eliminate the other answers so as to be left with just this one. Of
        course, practical experience may have helped in your answer also.
N       a., c., and d. These statements are all true.


A041.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.2.2.1
        a. Often prior to the bidder conference, we allow bidders to submit questions
Y       regarding requirements. During the conference, we ensure that every bidder
        hears every question and every answer.
        b. Weighted criteria are often used as a proposal evaluation technique. This
N
        does not ensure that all the bidders understood the requirement.
        c. Analytical techniques are used to ensure that the bidder can meet the
N
        requirement, etc.
        d. Procurement negotiations are used to clarify requirements, etc. In general,
N
        negotiations won't ensure that every bidder receives fair treatment.


A042.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.1
        a. A contingency reserve is not a change in how we are going to perform the
Y       project's work and thus is associated with acceptance, not mitigation. Be
        careful if the word "except" is present.
        b., c., and d. Mitigation is the lowering of the probability or impact of an
N       adverse risk event. The examples listed are all examples of mitigation. Be
        careful if the word "except" is present.


A043.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
        a. Examples of formal written communications are project reports, project
Y
        plans, etc.
N       b. An example of an informal written communication is an e-mail.
N       c. An example of a formal verbal communication is a project presentation.
N       d. An example of an informal communication is an ad hoc discussion.


A044.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.6
        b. Zero sum rewards are win-lose rewards that only a limited number of
Y
        project team members can achieve. An example is team member of the month.
N       a. Zero sum rewards may or may not cost money.
        c. Not everyone or, at least not everyone at the same time, can win a zero sum
N
        reward. They are for a limited number of team members.
N       d. This statement describes the opposite of a zero sum reward.


A045.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
        a. Pareto charts show how many defects (or missed questions) were generated
Y       by type or category of identified cause and so help rank order to guide
        corrective action.
        b. Cause and effect diagrams help us understand how various factors may be
N
        linked to potential problems.
N       c. Flow charts show how items in a system relate to one another.
        d. A scatter diagram can suggest various kinds of correlations between
N
        variables with certain confidence level.


A046.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
        d. Fixed price is the contract type in which the buyer has the lowest financial
Y       risk because the buyer knows exactly what the price of the contract will be
        provided there are no approved change orders.
        a. Time and materials contracts in general represent a higher risk for the buyer
N       since this contract type is open ended. The full value of the agreement and the
        exact quantity of items to be delivered are not defined.
        b. and c. Cost plus percentage of cost and cost plus fixed fee contracts
        generally represent a higher risk for the buyer because these contract types
N       obligate the buyer to reimburse the seller for all allowable costs plus a fee.
        The buyer does not know the total price of the contract at the time the contract
        is awarded.


        a. Northcote Parkinson, Parkinson's Law: Or the Pursuit of Progress
A047.
        (London, England: John Murray, 1958)
        a. Parkinson's theory states that "work expands so as to fill the time available
Y       for its completion". In the question, more paths are becoming critical because
        people are expanding the work to fill the time and thus using up the float.
        b. This correct answer could be "lazy team members" but "lazy team
N
        members" is not likely to be a correct answer on the exam.
        c. Critical chain is a network analysis technique that adjusts the project
N       schedule to account for limited resources. There is nothing in the question to
        lead us to critical chain as the correct answer.
        d. The critical path method calculates theoretical early and late start and finish
N       dates for activities. This is a network analysis technique. This answer does not
        address the question's issue regarding additional critical paths.


A048.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
        a. The WBS dictionary describes the details of each work package. This
Y       detailed explanation should help lower the probability of the work packages
        being interpreted differently.
        b. A detailed WBS means that you have decomposed the WBS with an extreme
N       amount of detail. This could help, but look for a better answer. The WBS
        includes the work packages but does not define them.
        c. A work authorization system authorizes when and in what sequence
N       activities should occur. This system is very useful on large construction
        projects as well as other types of projects.
        d. The control accounts are part of every WBS. Having control accounts will
N       not help define the work packages because the control accounts are provide
        less detail than the work packages.


A049.   b. Web search on "constrained optimization techniques project selection"
        b. Constrained optimization techniques that use linear, nonlinear, dynamic,
Y       integer, or multi-objective programming algorithms are used in project
        selection.
        a., c., and d. Benefit contribution, comparative approaches, and economic
N       models are all examples of benefit measurement methods used in project
        selection.


A050.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 3-1
        a. Integrated change control is part of the monitoring and controlling process
Y
        group, not the executing process group.
N       b., c., and d. These processes are all part of the executing process group.


A051.   d. Gregory A. Garrett's World Class Contracting, page 114
        d. The point of total assumption is the point where the sharing relationship
Y       changes to a share ratio of 0/100. At this point the seller assumes 100 % of the
        cost risk.
        a. Contract award is the point at which the buyer and the seller sign the
N
        contract.
        b. Contract breach is a failure lacking legal excuse to perform a promise of the
N
        contract.
N       c. Contract termination is the end of the contract with at least one of the parties
        still having open obligations.


A052.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 2-9
        a. Early in the project, we have not invested a lot and thus the amount at stake
        is low. However, the further we proceed into a project, more has been
Y       invested, and thus more is at stake. This is not explained clearly in the
        PMBOK(R) Guide.
        b. The level of uncertainty is highest at the beginning of the project. The
N       certainty of completion generally increases as the project progresses and thus
        the level of uncertainty decreases.
        c. Early in the project, we have not invested a lot and thus the amount at stake
N       is low. The further we proceed into a project, more has been invested, and thus
        more is at stake.
        d. The risk of failing to achieve objectives is highest at the start and decreases
N
        as the project progresses.


A053.   c. Statistical process control textbooks or web search
        c. One standard deviation is equal to the absolute value of ((upper control
        limit minus lower control limit)/6). Therefore, one standard deviation = (63
        minus 57)/6= 6/6= 1 centimeter. The mean is 60 centimeters. 58 centimeters is
Y       minus 2 standard deviations from the mean, and 62 centimeters is plus 2
        standard deviations from the mean. We are looking for the answer that
        represents +/- 2 standard deviations from the mean. 95.5 % of the data will fall
        within +/- 2 standard deviations.
        a. 68.3% of the data represents +/- 1 standard deviation. That range would be
N       the mean of 60 centimeters plus 1 centimeter and the mean minus 1 centimeter
        (61 through 59 centimeters).
N       b. This is a distractor answer.
        d. 99.7 % of the data will fall in the range of +/- 3 standard deviations, which
N
        is 63 through 57 centimeters.


A054.   d. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, page 70
Y       d. Theory Y represents a positive view of workers by management.
        a., b., and c. These statements all represent a negative view of workers from
N       management. Therefore, these statements represent the McGregor's Theory X
        and not Theory Y.
A055.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.2.3
Y       a. Storyboarding is an example of a prototyping technique.
        b. Benchmarking is used to identify best practices by comparing our practices
N
        to those of others.
N       c. Examples of facilitated workshops include JAD sessions and QFD sessions.
        d. Brainstorming is used to collect ideas, often from a large and diverse group
N
        of people.


A056.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1, right hand column
        a. A SPI of less than one means the project is running behind schedule. You
Y
        should put your focus on the schedule.
        b. A CPI of 1.2 means the project is running under budget. Simplistically, this
N
        is a good thing.
        c. and d. We should always be concerned about our stakeholders and our
        management. However, there is nothing in the question indicating a we need to
N
        focus more on our stakeholders or our manager. The question does state that
        we have an SPI that is less than one. The SPI is measurable.


A057.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.7
        b. Fast-tracking is a technique in which activities that we would ordinarily
Y       prefer to be performed in series are allowed to overlap or be completed in
        parallel instead.
        a. Crashing is a schedule compression technique that involves adding
N       resources to activities on the critical path. This is not the right answer since it
        involves adding resources.
        c. Resource leveling is not a schedule compression technique. In fact, the
N
        schedule often gets longer when resource leveling is done.
        d. Project management software can certainly help with developing schedule
N
        but it is not a schedule compression technique.


A058.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
        a. The scope management plan describes how we will define and manage
Y
        scope. The scope itself is not defined in the scope management plan.
        b., c. and d. The three documents that make-up the scope baseline are the scope
N
        statement, the WBS and the WBS dictionary.


A059.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
        b. The configuration management system is a subsystem of the overall project
        management system. It is a collection of formal documented procedures used to
        apply technical and administrative direction and surveillance to: identify and
Y       document the functional and physical characteristics of a product, result,
        service, or component; control any changes to such characteristics; record and
        report each change and its implementation status; and support the audit of the
        products, results, or components to verify conformance to requirements.
        a. The change control system is a collection of formal documented procedures
        that define how project deliverables and documentation will be controlled,
N
        changed, and approved. In most application areas the change control system is
        a subset of the configuration management system.
        c. A change control board is responsible for meeting and reviewing the change
N
        requests and approving or rejecting those changes.
        d. The project team uses stakeholders with expert judgment on the change
N       control board to control and approve all requested changes to any aspect of the
        project.


A060.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 3-1
        a. Cost estimates are an output of the estimate costs process and an input of the
Y       determine budget process. Therefore, the estimate costs process is likely to
        occur before the determine budget process.
        b. Qualitative risk analysis is the process of prioritizing risk for quantitative
N       analysis. It makes sense that qualitative risk analysis would come before
        quantitative risk analysis.
N       c. We must plan our procurements before we can conduct our procurements.
        d. Requirements documentation, which is an output of the collect requirements
N       process is an input into the define scope process. Therefore, we collect
        requirements before defining scope.


A061.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 12-1
        c. Control procurements is the process of managing procurement relationships,
Y       monitoring contract performance, and making changes and corrections as
        needed.
        a. Plan procurements is the process of documenting project purchasing
N       decisions, specifying the approach, and identifying potential sellers. This is
        too early for the contract change control system.
        b. Conduct procurements is the process of obtaining seller responses, selecting
N       a seller, and awarding a contract. This is too early for the contract change
        control system.
        d. Close procurements is the process of completing each project procurement.
N
        This is too early for the contract change control system.


A062.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 11 - Introduction
Y       d. The perform quantitative risk analysis process looks at overall project risk.
        a. The perform qualitative risk analysis process looks at individual risks from
N
        a subjective standpoint.
        b. The monitor and control project risks process audits the risk processes and
N
        reassesses risks.
        c. The plan risk responses process develops options to enhance opportunities
N
        and reduce threats.


A063.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2.2.2
        b. Rolling wave planning is a tool and technique of the define activities
Y       process. With this tool and technique, we plan near-term work in detail and
        long term work at a higher level.


A064.   d. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, Figure 7-9
Y       d. Expert power is derived from one's knowledge, not one's position.
        a., b., and c. Formal, reward, and penalty power may all be associated with or
N
        derived from one's position in the organization.


A065.   d. Any text book on statistics
        d. We may decide to test samples instead of populations for either attribute
Y
        sampling or for variable sampling. This is not the reason to test samples.
        a., b., and c. The three main reasons that organizations test samples instead of
N       populations are: the testing is destructive, the testing is expensive, and the
        testing takes a long time.


A066.   a. Fleming and Koppelaman. Earned Value Management,
        a. The performance measurement baseline is split into the distributed budget
Y
        and the undistributed budget.
        b. The contract budget is split into the performance measurement baseline and
N       the management reserve. The contingency reserve is part of the performance
        measurement baseline.
N       c. The contract price is split into the cost and profit.
N       d. The cost accounts are decomposed into planning packages and work
        packages.


A067.   a. Wikipedia on "Concurrent Engineering"
        a. Fast tracking involves overlapping activities while concurrent engineering is
Y
        moving implementers to an earlier phase of the project.
        b. Fast tracking involves overlapping activities. Crashing, not concurrent
N
        engineering, is adding resources to the critical path.
        c. Concurrent engineering, not fast tracking, involves moving implementers to
N       an earlier phase of the project. Crashing, not concurrent engineering, involves
        adding resources to the critical path.
N       d. Fast tracking involves overlapping phases as well as overlapping activities.


A068.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2.3.1 (constraints)
        b. The contract provisions are generally the constraints when a project is done
Y
        under contract.
        a. and c. The customer and the performing organization may request
N
        constraints.
        d. The project manager must manage within the constraints but probably does
N
        not issue constraints.


A069.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 4-1
        b. Direct and manage project work is the process of performing the work
Y
        defined in the project management plan including all approved changes.
        a. Change requests are not an input or output of the develop project
N
        management plan process.
        c. Change requests are an output of the monitor and control project work
N
        process.
        d. Perform integrated change control has change requests as an input and
N
        change requests status updates as an output.


A070.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4.2
        c. Senior management is responsible for setting priorities across projects and
Y
        programs. Senior management manages portfolios.
        a. The customer may not be the best choice since each project or program may
N
        have a different customer.
N       b. The project sponsor may not be the best choice since each project or
           program may have a different sponsor.
           d. Project managers have authority to manage to the objectives set for their
N
           own projects but not the authority to set priorities across projects.


A071. d. Gregory A. Garrett's World Class Contracting
Contract type                                   Cost Plus Incentive
Overrun or under run? How much?                 Overrun of $5,000
Will the seller's fee be increased or decreased Decreased by the seller's % of the
for an overrun?                                 overrun. (go to share ratio-take 2nd %)
Decreased by how much?                          40% of $5,000= $2,000
                                                Seller fee= $8,000-$2,000
Seller fee=target fee-adjustment
                                                Seller fee= $6,000
Is fee between max and min fee?                 Yes, so Seller fee=$6,000


A072.      d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter - 11 Introduction
Y          d. The risk event is what might occur, not its impact.
           a. That the project will finish three weeks late is the impact, not the event
N
           itself.
           b. The uncertainty that the project may now run over budget is the impact, not
N
           the event itself.
N          c. The degradation in quality is the impact, not the risk event itself.


A073.      a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 10.1.2.3
           a. Encode means to translate thoughts or ideas into a language understandable
Y
           by others. The sender does this.
           b., c., and d. The sender encodes the initial message, and the receiver decodes
N
           the initial message.


A074.      a. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, Table 4-1
           a. Smoothing involves emphasizing areas of agreement and avoiding points of
Y
           disagreement.
           b. Collaborating is a technique to manage conflict in which multiple ideas and
N
           viewpoints are incorporated in a solution.
N          c. Withdrawing involves pulling away from a conflict.
N          d. Forcing involves making the other party do it your way.
A075.   d. Any text book on quality management
        d. Common causes are also called random causes and they represent normal
Y
        process variation.
N       a. and b. Special causes are also known as unusual events.
N       c. Control limits represent the level of control we have over our processes.


A076.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1.2.1
        d. The salience model classifies stakeholders based on power, urgency, and
Y
        legitimacy.


A077.   d. Standard practice of projects
        d. After we finish the planning processes and before we move to the executing
Y
        processes we want to hold a kick-off meeting.
N       a. Celebration as a team should occur at the end of the project.
        b. Recommended preventive action is an output of the monitor and control
N       project work process. We are still in planning, not yet monitoring and
        controlling.
        c. Recommended corrective action is an output of the monitor and control
N       project work process. We are still in planning, not yet in monitoring and
        controlling.


A078.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 5 - Introduction
        d. Completion of the product scope, not the project scope, is measured against
Y
        the product requirements.
        a., b., and c. Completion of the project scope is measured against the project
N
        management plan, the scope statement, and the WBS.


A079.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1.3.1
        d. In this question we need to first look closely at the list given. Next, we
        determine which documents on this list will be updated based on a change in
Y       objectives and then put those documents in sequence. In reality all of these
        documents, most likely, will need to be updated. The project charter is the first
        document in sequence that will be updated based on a change in objectives.
        a. The project management plan may be updated, but it will not be updated
N
        first. What document comes before it in sequence?
N       b. The WBS most likely will be updated but it will not be updated first.
N       c. The scope statement most likely will be updated but it will not be updated
        first.


A080.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.1.3
        d. In a functional organization, the worker has one and only one supervisor.
        Every person in a functional organization works in their function. As an
Y
        example, engineers work in an engineering group and sales people work in a
        sales group.
        b. A composite organization involves multiple structures at various levels. In
N       the functional part of the composite, the worker has only one supervisor; in the
        matrix part, the worker may have more than one supervisor.
        a. and c. In a matrix (weak, balanced, or strong) the worker has a functional
N
        manager and at least one project manager.


A081.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.1 (implied)
        d. The manufacturing manager at the facility in Ireland is a key stakeholder.
Y       The statement that you do not know this person implies that he was overlooked
        during stakeholder identification.
N       a. The question states that your sponsor is fully engaged.
N       b. The question states that you have a full project plan including baselines.
        c. There is nothing in the question to tell us that our team is too large and that
N
        we are having issues managing the team.


A082.   c. PMP(R) Exam Content Outline- June 2015
        c. A project assessment in order to evaluate the feasibility of the project is
Y
        often performed before the other tasks listed.


A083.   b.
        b. For a benefit to have value, it must be realized in a timely manner even if
Y
        this is after the project closeout.


A084.   b.
        b. Organizational strategy is the result of the strategic planning cycle where the
Y
        vision and the mission of the organization are translated into a strategic plan.
        a., c., and d. All three of these answers are reactive, not proactive.
N       Organizational strategy should drive these three ideas, not the other way
        around.


A085.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide Section 2.1.4
Y       c. Templates are considered part of the organizational process assets.


A086.   b.
        b. Just-in-time means to produce, deliver, or purchase only the materials
        required, in only the amounts required, only when required. To successfully
        adopt JIT, you must know what you need, how many, and when. The best way
Y
        to monitor these three elements of JIT is to ensure that each "next-process"
        takes only the necessary items, in the necessary quantity and only when
        required, from the "previous-process". This is called a "pull" system.


A087.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide Section 8.3
        c. During the control quality process we test to determine if we built the
Y
        product correctly.
        d. During the validate scope process the customer tests the product to
N
        determine if we have built the correct product.


A088.   a.
        a. Relying on human memory is often the riskiest ways to capture knowledge.
Y
        People forget, change positions, or leave the organization.


A089.   a.
        a. Searchable databases are a technology used to apply the transfer of
Y
        knowledge.
        b., c., and d. These are methods for assessing the value or benefits of
N
        knowledge transfer and not technologies for applying transferred knowledge.


A090.   a.
        a. A KPI measures the success of the project or elements of the project. If the
Y       call center's success will be measured by tracking the number of new
        customers, then this is a KPI.
        b. and c. The terms key success factors and critical success factors (CSF)
N       mean exactly the same thing. They are factors that must go right for an
        organization to achieve its mission.
N       d. Cost performance index (CPI) is the earned value divided by the actual cost.
        The CPI is not related to this question.


A091.   c. Wikipedia - "Business acumen"
        c. Nicholas needs to understand the business and how his behavior and actions
Y
        may
        affect other business units. This is called business acumen.


A092.   d. Wikipedia - "Hofstede's cultural dimensions theory"
        d. A society scoring low on Hofstede's dimension of individualism believes in
Y       collectivism. An example would be the belief in keeping opinions to oneself so
        as to maintain harmony.
        a., b., and c. A society scoring high on Hofstede's dimension of individualism
        believes in individualism over collectivism. Examples would be a belief in
N
        social mobility, direct communication, and the "I" being more important than
        the "we".


A093.   b. Wikipedia - "Emotional Intelligence"
        b. A person who struggles with self-regulation often has trouble controlling
Y       and redirecting one's disruptive emotions and impulses and adapting to
        changing circumstances.


A094.   d. PMI(R) Practice Standard for Configuration Management 2007
Y       d. Tools and techniques are not kept under configuration management control.
        a. b., and c. Often we keep such physical items as, documents, forms, and
N
        records under configuration control.


A095.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide Section 2.2.2
Y       c. The project governance framework should provide the project manager with
        structure, processes, and decision-making models for the project.


A096.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide Section X3.6
        b. In the consultation decision making style, the manager asks team members
Y       for input but makes it clear up front that the manager alone will make the
        decision after he hears input from his team.
A097.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide Section 8.3.3.8
        d. The primary reason we collect lessons learned is to improve project
Y
        estimating and performance on current and future projects.
N       a. I would eliminate answer (a) since the answer has a tone of "blame" to it.

A098.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.2.2
Y       c. EAC=BAC/CPI. Therefore, BAC=EAC*CPI= $100,000*1.2= $120,000.
N       a., b., and d. These are distractor answers.

A099.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 6.6.2.2 and 6.6.2.3
        b. The critical path is time constrained. The critical chain is resource
Y
        constrained.
        a. The critical path is time constrained. The critical chain is resource
N
        constrained. They are very different.
        c. The critical path assumes unlimited resources while the critical chain
N
        assumes limited resources.
        d. The critical path method has been around for decades while the term critical
N
        chain was created in the 1990's.

A100.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.3.3.1
        b. The project scope statement describes the project boundaries and states
Y
        explicitly what is excluded from the project.
        a. The WBS defines the total scope of the project, but does not state what is
N
        excluded.
        c. The scope management plan provides guidance on how the project scope
N
        will be defined, documented, verified, managed, and controlled.
        d. The project management plan describes how the project will be executed,
N
        monitored and controlled, and closed.

A101.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.3.3.2
        b. Control quality is the process in which changed or repaired items are
Y
        inspected.
        a. Validate scope is the process in which the customer accepts or rejects the
N
        project deliverables. Validate scope is about acceptance, not correctness.
        c. Approved change requests, including those related to defect repair, are an
N       input of the direct and manage project work process.
N       d. The monitor and control project work process has change requests,
        including those related to defect repair as an output.
A102.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4
        a. Completion is the normal end of a contract after all the work is completed.
Y       Termination is the early end of the contract before some aspect of the contract
        is complete.
        b. Termination for cause means the contract terminates because one of the
N
        parties is not meeting at least one of its obligations.
        c. Termination by mutual agreement means the contract ends because both
N       parties feel it is in their best interests to end the contract even though there are
        still open obligations.
        d. Termination for convenience means that one of the parties, usually the buyer,
N       has the right granted to them in the contract to end the contract because it is
        convenient for them to do so.


A103.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.2.2.2
        d. The Delphi technique is an information-gathering technique in which experts
Y       participate anonymously. The Delphi technique helps reduce bias in data and
        prevents anyone from unduly influencing on the outcome.
        a. During brainstorming some people may exert an undue influence. Sometimes
N
        the loudest person in the room influences the outcome.
        b. SWOT analysis ensures a look at a project from perspectives based on its
N
        strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
        c. Root cause analysis is an analytical technique. It is not related to preventing
N
        people from dominating meetings and having an undue influence.


A104.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        b. An index less than 1 is not good. An index greater than 1 is good. A CPI of
Y       .8 means the project over budget. An SPI of 1.1 means the project is ahead of
        schedule.
        a. The project is ahead of schedule. For the project to be under budget, the CPI
N
        would need to be greater than 1.
        c. If the project were behind schedule, the SPI would be less than 1. If the
N
        project were under budget, the CPI would be greater than 1.
        d. If the project were behind schedule, the SPI would be less than 1. The
N
        project is over budget since the CPI is less than 1.


A105.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y       d. Pareto charts show how many defects were generated by type or category of
        identified cause and help rank order them so as to guide corrective action.
N       a. Control charts help us understand the limits of our process.
N       b. Process flowcharts help show how various elements of a system interrelate.
        c. Cause and effect diagrams illustrate how various factors might be linked to
N
        potential problems.


A106.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.2.2.3
        b. The project manager should create the model with inputs from other
Y
        stakeholders. The question is asking for the exception.
        a. The historical information going into the estimate should be accurate. We
N
        want this to be true.
        c. The parameters used in the model are readily quantifiable. We want this to
N
        be true.
N       d. The model is scalable. We want this to be true.


A107.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.6
        a. Formal acceptance and handover of the final product or service to the
Y       customer should include receipt of a formal statement that the terms of the
        contract have been met and be part of the close project or phase process.
        b. During the process plan procurements we determine whether to acquire
N
        outside support for specific work or to complete the work in house..
        c. Formal acceptance of the project scope and deliverables is achieved through
N
        the validate scope process. Validate scope would occur before close project.
        d. The control quality process involves monitoring specific project results to
N       determine whether they comply with relevant quality standards, and identifying
        ways to eliminate causes of unsatisfactory results.


A108.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.1.1
        a. A regulation is a government imposed requirement and thus no reflection of
Y
        the organizational culture.
        b., c., and d. Shared values, policies, procedures, views of authority
N       relationships, work ethics, and work hours are all representative of
        organizational cultures and styles.


A109.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 10 - Introduction
Y       a. Horizontal communication is with your peers.
N       b., c., and d. These are all examples of vertical communication.


A110.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.3.2.3
Y       c. Forming, storming, norming, performing is the correct order.
        a., b., and d. See solution c. during forming, team members are polite. During
        storming, team members confront each other. During norming, people confront
N
        issues, not people. During performing, the team members settle down and are
        productive as a team.


A111.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.5
        c. Design of experiments (DOEs) plays a role in optimization of products and
Y       processes. DOEs allow you to systematically change all the important factors
        for a product or process to provide optimal conditions.
        a. Benchmarking involves comparing actual or planned project performance
N       practices to those of other projects to generate ideas for improvement and to
        provide a basis to measure performance.
N       b. Control charts help us understand the limits of our process.
N       d. Run charts show history and the pattern of variation.


A112.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
Y       a. EAC=BAC/CPI. CPI =BAC/EAC= $100,000/$120,000= .83CPI= .83
N       b., c., and d. These are distractor answers.


A113.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide A1.6
        c. A large part of the project budget is spent during the executing process
Y
        group.


A114.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 5 - Introduction
        b. Some project deliverables will be related to product scope and some will
Y       be related to project scope. An example of a deliverable related to project
        management is the project management plan.
        a. Product scope is defined first. This is a driver or input into defining the
N
        project scope.
        c. The project life cycle is a subset of the product life cycle. Think of the
        product as a book and consider the project as writing the book. Writing the
N       book is the subset. After we write the book, we need to manufacture it,
           distribute it, revise it (more projects), and maybe eventually pull the book off
           the market.
           d. The configuration management system helps us define, manage, and control
N          changes to the product. The change control system helps us do the same thing
           with respect to the project.


A115.      c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5 (not clearly expressed in PMBOK(R) Guide)
           c. Evaluate the change request is the first thing we do when a change request
Y
           comes to us, regardless of where the change request originated.
           a. and b. We don't want to meet with our management or sponsor until we have
N          information about the impact of the requested change and we are able to
           recommend alternatives.
           d. Every change request must be evaluated, even if it comes from the customer.
N
           We do not make any changes unless an evaluation has been completed.


A116. c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.4.2.2
Formula EMV= amount at stake * risk probability




A117.      a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
           a. SV= EV-PV. If this answer is a positive number, meaning that EV > PV, then
Y
           your project is running ahead of schedule.
N          b. The EV would be less than PV if the project were behind schedule.
           c. and d. AC is required information to determine cost variances since
N
           CV=EV-AC.


A118.      c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.2.4
Y       c. Trend analysis examines project performance over time to determine if
        performance is improving or deteriorating
        a. Variance analysis compares actual project performance to planned
N
        performance.
        b. Earned value analysis compares actual cost and schedule performance to
N
        planned performance.
        d. Cost-benefit analysis compares a project's costs to a its benefits. In general
N
        we only work on projects with benefits that outweigh costs.


A119.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.5
        b. Validate scope is the process that would be performed after a project is
        terminated. During the validate scope process we establish and document the
Y
        level and extent of completion. When a project is terminated we want to
        determine if there are any deliverables we can turn over to the customer.
N       a. Control quality is about correctness, not acceptance.
        c. Close contracts is about acceptance of the work of our suppliers, not about
N       our customer accepting the work of the project (PMBOK(R) Guide: Section
        12.4).
        d. Control scope is the process concerned with scope changes, not project
N
        terminations.


A120.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.5
        c. Reserve analysis during the monitor and control project risk process
Y       compares the amount of contingency reserve remaining to the amount of risk
        remaining.
        a. Earned value analysis compares planned to actual on cost performance as
N
        measured through the CPI.
        b. Earned value analysis compares planned to actual on schedule performance
N
        as measured through the SPI.
        d. Earned value analysis compares the amount of money remaining to the
N       amount of work remaining as measured through the TCPI (to complete
        performance index).


A121.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        c. CV=EV-AC. If the answer is a negative number, meaning that your AC is
Y
        higher than your EV, then your project is running over budget.
        a. and b. PV is required information to determine schedule variance since
N
        SV=EV-PV.
N       d. The AC would be less than the EV if your project were under budget.


A122.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
        d. Quality audits are tools of the perform control quality process, not the plan
Y
        quality process.
N       a., b., and c. These are all examples of tools of the plan quality process.


A123.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.6
Y       c. Scope creep is another name for uncontrolled changes.
        a. Cost growth is a change to the cost of a project/contract because of an
N
        approved change in scope.
        b. Schedule growth is a change to the schedule of a project/contract because of
N
        an approved change in scope.
N       d. Scope changes are approved changes to the project scope.


A124.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        b. CPI=EV/AC. If the project is running on budget, EV=AC , meaning that
Y
        CPI=1.
        a. CPI= 0. We do not think of indexes as being zero. If the "cost variance"
N
        were zero, the project would be operating right on budget.
N       c. CPI>1 when the project is running under budget.
N       d. CPI<1 when the project is running over budget.


A125.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
        b. The WBS is a deliverable-oriented document. If something is in scope it is
Y
        in the WBS. If something is out of scope, it is not in the WBS.
        a. The scope management plan describes the processes used to determine,
N       verify, and control scope. There is nothing in the plan that describes what is in
        or not in scope.
        c. The project charter is a document that states we have an approved project. It
N       is not specific about the scope of the project. The true scope of the project has
        not yet been defined.
        d. The integrated change control system contains the procedures for making
N
        changes. It does not contain the scope of the project.


A126.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section A1.5.11
Y       c. The schedule baseline is an output of the develop schedule process.


A127.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.1.3
        d. In a projectized structure, use of resources is often less efficient. For
Y       example, the project may require an accounting person only for half time, but if
        team is projectized, the accounting person will be full-time on the project.
        a. A higher potential for conflict is a negative of the matrix structure and not of
N
        the projectized structure.
        b. In contrast to a projectized structure, a matrix structure is more complex to
N
        manage.
        c. In contrast to a projectized structure A matrix structure requires more
N
        administration.


A128.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        d. EAC= (BAC/CPI) is the formula when current variances are seen as typical
Y
        of future variances, and the present CPI should be used to predict the future.
N       a. and c. In these situations, use the formula: EAC=AC+ETC.
N       b. In this situation, use the formula: EAC=AC+(BAC-EV).


A129.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.2.1.4
        d. Project plan templates may include guidelines for tailoring an organizations
Y
        standard processes.
        a., b., and c. These examples are all enterprise environmental factors and not
N
        organizational process assets.


A130.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section X3.6
Y       a. Risk management is not an element of decision-making.


A131.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.1.9
        d. Time and materials contracts are often used when the buyer is purchasing
        services. When the buyer needs a contractor quickly, time and materials are
Y
        often used since they can be set-up quickly without a definite quantity being
        specified.
        a. and b. Fixed price contracts are used when the product is well defined.
N       Often in an emergency we do not have time to define the product well before
        the seller must start working.
N       c. A cost plus incentive contract is a complex contract to set up and thus is not
        often used in an emergency.


A132.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        b. EAC is the forecast of the most likely total cost of the work based on project
Y
        performance and risk quantification.
N       a. EV is the earned value; it is a measure of work actually completed.
        c. BAC is the budget at completion and equals the total cumulative PV at
N
        completion.
        d. PV is the planned value; it is the budgeted cost for the work scheduled to be
N
        completed at a given time.


A133.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.4
        d. Benchmarking is a tool for the plan quality process as well as the perform
Y       quality assurance process. Benchmarking involves determining best practices
        and providing a basis for measuring performance.
N       a. Control charts are used to determine whether or not a process is stable.
        b. Pareto charts show how many defects were generated by type or category of
N
        identified cause and help rank order them so as to guide corrective action.
        c. Scatter diagrams can suggest various kinds of correlations between
N
        variables with certain confidence level


A134.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 7-1
Y       d. Cost forecasts are an output of the control costs process.


A135.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 5-1
        c. The project charter and the stakeholder register are the two key inputs of the
Y
        collect requirements process.


A136.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Figure 11-1
Y       a. From the list, risk identification is first.
        b. We cannot plan risk responses until we have identified and analyzed the
N
        risks.
N       c. Risk qualification occurs after risk identification.
        d. Risk quantification occurs after risk qualification, which follows after risk
N
        identification.
A137.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        a. CV= EV-AC. If your project is running over budget, your AC will be greater
Y
        than your EV and your CV will be negative.
N       b. Your CV will be positive if your project is running under budget.
N       c. Your CV will be 0 if your project is running right on budget.
N       d. Your CV will be 1 if your project is running $1 under budget.


A138.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.3
        d. Forcing involves pushing one viewpoint at the expense of another. This
Y       technique is often used in an emergency situation. In response to forcing, hard
        feelings may manifest themselves in other forms as some future time.
        a. Problem solving treats conflict as a problem to be solved. This technique
N
        provides an ultimate resolution but takes time.
        b. Compromising is giving something in order to receive something. Both
N
        parties therefore receive some degree of satisfaction.
        c. Withdrawal involves giving up, pulling out, or retreating. This technique
N
        does not solve the problem.


A139.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        d. The BAC for your project is the total project budget. The question states that
Y       you have a budget of $200/month for six months. The total project budget is
        therefore $1,200.
Y       a., b., and c. These are distractor answers.


A140.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.3 (not explicitly stated)
        c. A project creates unique products, services, or results. This is one of the
Y       characteristics that distinguishes projects from operations. Be careful of the
        word "except" in questions.
        a. Most projects within a given organization will have similar project life
N
        cycles.
        b. Most projects within a given organization will have similar project
N
        deliverables by phase.
        d. Most projects within a given organization will have standard WBS
N
        templates.


A141.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.3
Y       c. As one element of competing constraints changes, at least one other element
        is likely to change.
        a. A change does not always represent growth. If we de-scope the project, the
N
        cost may go up or down, based on the de-scoping.
        b. A change does not always represent growth. If we de-scope the project, the
N
        schedule may shorten or lengthen, depending on the de-scoping.
N       d. If we change one constraint, at least one other element is likely to change.


A142.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4.2.1
Y       d. A procurement audit is a structured review of the procurement process.
        a. Inspections and audits identify any weaknesses in the seller's work
N       processes or deliverables. Inspections and audits are tools and techniques of
        the conduct procurements process.
        b. A quality audit, not a procurement audit, is used to identify inefficient and
N
        ineffective policies, processes, and procedures.
        c. A risk audit, not a procurement audit, examines and documents the
N
        effectiveness of risk responses.


A143.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2.3
        d. A risk trigger is a warning sign that a risk event is about to occur or has just
Y
        occurred.
N       a. A risk event is what might happen.
N       b. The risk impact is the severity of the consequences.
        c. The risk score is the risk probability multiplied by the risk impact. The
N
        higher the risk score, the higher is its priority.


A144.   b. Not explained explicitly in PMBOK(R) Guide
        b. Team member knowledge is useful but generally less reliable than
Y       documented performance. The idea here is to base your cost estimates on
        documented performance, not on someone's memory.
N       a. and d. The information is useful, but is not the most reliable.
N       c. This statement is reversed.


A145.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4.1
        d. The program manager, not the project manager, handles priorities across a
Y
        program.
A146.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.3.3.4
        d. Formal acceptance, not control quality, validates that the customer's
Y       acceptance criteria have been met. Control quality is about correctness, not
        acceptance.
        a., b., and c. These statements are all true. The question is looking for the false
N
        statement.


A147.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        c. The planned value (PV) is the budgeted cost of work scheduled. You have
Y       $200/month budget and you are at the end of month four. Therefore, your PV= $
        800.
N       a., b., and d. These are distractor answers.


A148.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.2.2.2
        a. Rolling wave planning is a technique in which the project team waits for
        clarification before completely decomposing deliverables. If a deliverable
Y
        won't be produced for a long time, it may not make sense to perform a
        complete decomposition early in the project.
        b. Templates contain a defined structure for collecting, organizing, and
N
        presenting information.
        c. The define activities process decomposes work packages into the activity
N
        list.
        d. Product analysis allows development of the project scope statement based
N
        on the scope of the product.


A149.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        b. The CPI is less than 1. The project is running over budget and you need to
Y
        focus on cost first.
        a. The question states that the project is two weeks behind schedule. This is
N       noise. You do not know if it is a two-week or ten-year project. You need to
        know the SPI before deciding whether to focus on schedule.
        c. Manage stakeholder engagement is the process in which we manage
        communication, satisfy needs, and resolve issues of stakeholders. Nothing in
N
        the question states we need to focus more on stakeholder engagement. "30
        stakeholders" is noise.
        d. No information provided in the question's statement suggests that we need to
N
        increase focus on conflict management. "30 stakeholders" is noise .
A150.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 1.4
        b. Portfolios are groups of projects or programs that may or may not be
Y       related. It is the responsibility of senior management to oversee the
        management of portfolios.
        a. Projects are a subset of programs. Projects and programs are a subset of
N
        portfolios.
        c. Portfolios are a group of projects or programs that may or may not be
N
        related. All projects in a program are related.
N       d. Projects are a subset of programs and are usually smaller than programs.


A151.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.2.1
        b. The project's CPI is less than 1. The project is over budget and you need to
        focus on cost first. (This question should look very familiar. You just
Y
        completed a similar questions. The numbers in this question have changed.
        Does it matter? No).
        a. The question says the project is five weeks behind schedule. This data is
N       noise. You do not know if it is a five-week or ten-year project. You need to
        know the SPI before deciding to put your focus on schedule.
        c. Manage stakeholder engagement is the process in which we manage
        communication, satisfy needs, and resolve issues of stakeholders. Nothing in
N
        the question states we need to focus more on stakeholder engagement. "300
        stakeholders" is noise.
        d. No information provided in the question's statement suggests that we need to
N
        increase focus on conflict management. "300 stakeholders" is noise .


A152.   a. Meredith et al., Project Management: A Managerial Approach
        a. The investment was made at the start of the project. Therefore, the present
        value (PV) of the investment is a negative $80,000
        . The present value of $50,000 received at the end of year 1:
        PV= FV/(1+i)t
        PV= $50,000/(1..08)1
        PV= $46,296.29

        The present value of $30,000 received at the end of year 2:
Y
        PV= FV/(1+i)t
        PV= $30,000/(1.08)2
        PV= $25,720.16
        Therefore, the NPV for Project A= $46,296.29+$25,720.16-$80,000
        NPV for Project A= -$7,983.55
        The answer is negative because the benefits are of less value than the
        investment.



A153.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
        c. Evaluating the change request is the first thing we do when a change request
Y
        is submitted, regardless of the source of the request.
        a. and b. We don't want to meet with our management or sponsor until we have
N       information about the impact of the requested change and are able to
        recommend alternatives.
        d. Every change request must be evaluated, even if it is government mandated.
        We may decide to cancel the project instead of making the change on the
N
        project. We do not make any changes unless an evaluation has been completed
        first.


A154.   a. Any accounting textbook or web search
        a. Sunk costs are costs that have already been expended and cannot be
Y
        recouped. We should not take these into account during project selection.
        b. Opportunity costs represent the opportunity we pass up when selecting one
N       project instead of another. We should take these into account during project
        selection.
        c. In general, we want the present value of inflows to be greater than the
N       present value of outflows (a positive net present value) when selecting
        projects. Thus, we should take into account net present value.
        d. In general, we want the payback period (the time required for the project to
N       repay its initial investments) to be as short as possible. Thus, we should take
        into account the payback period.


A155.   b. Any statistical quality control text
        b. A data point may fall outside the control limits but still be inside the
Y
        tolerance limits.
        a. In general, tolerance limits should be wider than control limits. We want our
N
        control to be tighter than the customer or market requires.
        c. The customer or market sets the tolerance limits based on - what is
N
        acceptable.
        d. Our process or equipment usually sets the control limits. The control limits
N       show how well we are controlling the process.


A156.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.1.2.1
        b. $100*W= $900+$10*W. ($100-$10)*W= $900. $90* W = $900. W= 10
Y
        weeks. At 10 weeks, the cost to rent equals the cost to purchase.
N       a., c., and d. These are distractor answers.


A157.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Table 7-1
        d. We need to determine our four critical terms: BAC, PV, AC, and EV. The
        BAC is given. It is the project budget of $100,000. The PV is a measure of
        how much work should be complete. The question says that we are exactly 18
        months into a 3-year project. This means that we should have half of the work
        complete. The PV= 1/2 * (total budget)= 1/2 * ($100,000)= $50,000.
        The AC is a measure of how much money has been spent to date. The question
        states that 30% of the budget has been spent. Therefore, AC= 30% *
Y
        ($100,000)= $30,000. The EV is a measure of how much work has been
        completed. The question states that 40% of the work is now complete.
        Therefore, EV= 40% * ($100,000)= $40,000.
        The schedule variance= SV= EV-PV = $40,000-$50,000= -$10,000.
        Therefore, the project is behind schedule since the SV is negative.
        The cost variance= CV= EV-AC= $40,000-$30,000= $10,000. Since the CV is
        positive the project is running under budget.


A158.   a. Meredith et al., Project Management: A Managerial Approach
        a. Project A with a payback period of 8 months has the shortest payback
Y
        period. Everything else being equal, this is the best project.
        b., c., and d. Project A has a shorter payback period than the others. Payback
        period for a project is the amount of time it takes a project to pay back its
N
        initial investment. Everything else being equal, a shorter payback period is
        preferable to a longer payback period.


A159.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.3 (not stated explicitly)
        d. If the question tells you that you are experiencing more changes than normal,
        that the changes are costing more money than expected or that the product may
Y       be rejected even though requirements are being met, look for an answer that
        relates to not engaging a key stakeholder or not engaging a key stakeholder
        early enough in the project.
        c. Wideman, Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
A160.
        Managing Project Risks and Opportunities
        c. Utility theory assumes that any decision is made on the basis of the utility
Y       maximization principle, according to which the best choice is the one that
        provides the highest utility (satisfaction) to the decision maker.
        a. Maslow's hierarchy of needs is related to motivation, not to a person's view
N
        of risk.
        b. Herzberg's hygiene theory is related to motivation, not to a person's view of
N
        risk.
        d. Vroom's expectancy theory is related to motivation, not to a person's view
N
        of risk.


A161.   b. Verma, Human Resource Skills for Project Manager, page 233
Y       b. Referent power is derived from the strengths of one's relationships.
N       a. Expert power is derived from one's knowledge.
        c. Penalty power refers to the negative things a project manager might do in
N
        retaliation.
        d. Formal power, often called legitimate power, is derived from one's position
N
        in an organization.


A162.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 13.3
        d. If the project's product is being shelved at this point, we should probably
Y       have expended more effort into managing our relationships with our
        stakeholders and understanding their requirements.
N       a. Since the SPI is above 1.0 we did not need to focus more on the schedule.
        b. Since the CPI is above 1.0 we did not need to focus more on managing the
N
        budget.
        c. The issue in the question is that the product is being shelved. Nothing in the
N
        question suggests that we had issues with our team members.


A163.   c.
        c. Holding a meeting with our stakeholders to determine a solution is often a
Y
        better solution when are stakeholders cannot agree on the path forward.
        a., b. and d. It is not likely we will receive stakeholder buy-in with these
N       ideas. Therefore, it is less likely that these ideas will lead to a successful
        outcome.
A164.   b. Verma, Human Resource Skills for Project Managers: Table 4-1 and
        PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 9.4.2.3
        b. Forcing involves pushing one viewpoint at the expense of another. This
Y       technique is often used in an emergency situation. In response to forcing, hard
        feelings may manifest themselves in other forms as some future time.
        a. Compromising is giving something up to receive something in return. Both
N
        parties gain some degree of satisfaction.
        c. Confronting, also called problem solving, treats conflict as a problem to be
N
        solved. This technique provides ultimate resolution.
        d. Withdrawal involves giving up, pulling out, or retreating. This technique
N
        does not solve the problem.


A165.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.6
        d. This statement is a definition of attribute sampling but not a reason to do
Y
        sampling.
        a., b., and c. All of the statements are reasons to perform sampling rather than
N       perform testing on the entire population. Notice the question is asking for the
        exception.


A166.   b. Any accounting text book
        b. Indirect costs such as overhead and general and administrative are hard, if
Y
        not impossible, for the project manager to influence.
        a. Direct costs are incurred for the exclusive benefit of the project. The project
N
        manager should be controlling direct costs.
        c. and d. Variable costs change based on the size of certain elements of the
        project. Fixed costs do not change based on the size of certain elements of the
N
        project. Project managers control direct costs, regardless of whether they are
        variable or fixed.


A167.   c. Wikipedia search on "graphical evaluation review technique"
Y       c. Graphical evaluation review technique allows for conditional statements.
        a. The arrow diagramming technique does not allow for conditional statements,
N
        such as "if-then" statements.
        b. The precedence diagramming technique does not allow for conditional
N
        statements, such as "if-then" statements.
N       d. Fast tracking is a technique of overlapping activities or phases.
A168.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4.3.1
Y       b. The process create WBS has the WBS dictionary as an output.
        a. The process define scope has the scope statement as an output not the WBS
N
        dictionary.
        c. The process define activities has the activity list as an output not the WBS
N
        dictionary.
        d. The process develop project management plan has the project management
N
        plan as an output.


A169.   a. Fleming and Koppelaman, Earned Value Management,
        a. The cumulative CPI has been proved to stabilize once the project is
Y
        approximately 20% complete.
N       b., c., and d. The cumulative CPI would stabilize before this.


A170.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.4
        b. The WBS is a deliverable oriented document. If something is in scope, it is
Y
        in the WBS. If something is out of scope, it is not in the WBS.
        a. The scope management plan describes the processes to determine, validate,
N       and control scope. There is nothing in the plan that describes what is in or not
        in scope.
        c. The project charter is a document that states we have an approved document.
N       It does not specify the scope of the project. The scope of the project has not
        been defined at this point.
        d. The integrated change control system contains the procedures for making
N
        changes. It does not contain the scope of the project.


A171.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Sections 4.3 and 12.3.2.1
        d. Contract changes are handled in the control procurements process, not the
Y
        direct and manage project work process.
        a., b. and c. Approved corrective actions, approved preventative actions, and
N       approved defect repairs, are implemented during the direct and manage project
        work process.


A172.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.5
        d. Evaluate the change request is usually the first thing we do in these
Y
        situations.
A173.   d. Web search on centralized versus decentralized contracting
        d. Clearly defined career paths for contracting professionals is a positive of
Y
        centralized, not decentralized, contracting.
N       a. More loyalty to the project is a positive of decentralized contracting.
        b. Easier access to contracting expertise is a positive of decentralized
N
        contracting.
        c. If procurement people are part of the project team, they are likely to have a
N
        more in depth understanding of the needs of the project.


A174.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.6.2.3
        c. Deviations from the baseline plan may indicate the potential impact of
Y       threats or opportunities. If the deviations are positive, it may be the result of
        opportunities. If the deviations are negative, it may be the result of threats.
N       a. Apathy is often demonstrated through a total lack of conflict.
N       b. Unproductive meetings are a sign of poor teamwork.
        d. In general, the people performing the work should own the quality of the
N
        work.


A175.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 4.1
        a. The charter is the document that states we have an approved project and
Y       assigns the project manager. We do not want to proceed without this document
        as the probability of project success decreases without a charter.
N       b. Starting work on planning without a charter raises the risk of project failure.
        c. As a project manager we cannot demand anything of our management. In
N       general, the word demand will not be found in the right answers on the test
        unless the question is asking what not to do.
        d. The contract is not the charter. The contract is an input of the develop
N
        project charter process.


A176.   b. Wikipedia search on "feasibility study"
        b. A feasibility study is often initiated to help an organization decide whether it
Y
        should undertake a project.
        a. A project scope statement is developed after a project has been chartered
N
        but not to help decide if a project should be undertaken.
        c. The work breakdown structure defines the total scope of the project. It is
N
        developed long after a project has been chartered.
        d. The project management plan is a formal approved document that describes
N       how the project will be executed, monitored, and controlled. It is developed
        long after the project is chartered.


A177.   a. Wikipedia search on "business proposals"
Y       a. The cost of the proposal is normally at no direct cost to the buyer.
        b., c., and d. The cost of the proposal is normally at no direct cost to the buyer,
N
        regardless of whether the buyer buys for the seller.


178.    c. PMBOK(R) Guide Table 7-1
        c. The project is behind schedule and under budget. Solving these problems
        always begins with the earned value (EV). Since the earned value (EV) is less
        than the planned value (PV) the project is running behind schedule. Another
Y       way to say this is that less work is complete than is scheduled. Since the
        earned value (EV) is greater than the actual cost (AC) the project is running
        under budget. Stated another way, we have more work complete than money
        spent.


A179.   b. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, pages 65-73
        b. Ouchi's Theory Z is based on Japanese styles and philosophies and states
        that high levels of trust, confidence, and commitment to workers on the part of
Y
        management leads to a high level of motivation and productivity on the part of
        workers.
        a. Vroom's expectancy theory states that people choose behaviors that they
N       believe will lead to desired results and that they will be rewarded attractively
        for those results.
        c. McGregor's Theory X describes management's view that most workers
N
        dislike their work and try to avoid it.
        d. Herzberg's hygiene theory states that some job factors lead to satisfaction,
        whereas others can only prevent dissatisfaction and so are not sources of
N       satisfaction. Hygiene factors related to the work itself, if provided
        appropriately, prevent dissatisfaction. Motivational factors related to the work
        itself can increase job satisfaction.


A180.   a. Web search on "Marginal Analysis"
        a. Marginal analysis states that optimal quality is reached at the point where
Y
        incremental revenue equals the incremental cost to achieve the improvement.
        b. In theory, quality should have the same priority as cost and schedule. c. The
N       cost of quality consists of the money spent proactively (cost of conformance)
        and reactively (cost of non-conformance).
        d. Almost always, more can be done to improve quality, but this improvement
N
        will come at a cost.


A181.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Chapter 13
        d. The underlying reason for "too many" change requests is often a lack of
        identification of all stakeholders. If we do not identify a stakeholder, we do not
Y
        identify their requirements and therefore are likely to experience many change
        requests.
        a. Nothing in the question suggests that the issue of too many change requests is
N       due to of a lack of a project manager in each country. Do not read information
        into the question that is not there.
N       b. The SPI is 1.03. The project is ahead of schedule.
N       c. The CPI is 1.04. The project is running under budget.


A182.   d. Gregory A. Garrett, World Class Contracting, page 59
        d. Punitive damage, which are often set to punish the other party, represent the
Y
        amount above what would barely compensate the injured party for his loss.
        a. Compensatory damages are the exact amount due to the injured party for his
N
        loss.
N       b. Liquidated damages represent the amount agreed to in advance.
        c. In most cases, the injured party is awarded damages (money). At times
N
        though a party is forced to perform the specifics of the contract.


A183.   a. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, page 64
        a. Some job factors called motivational factors, lead to satisfaction, whereas
Y
        others, called hygiene factors, can only prevent dissatisfaction.
        b., c., and d. If provided appropriately, hygiene factors can prevent
        dissatisfaction but cannot lead to satisfaction. Motivational factors related to
N
        the work itself can lead to job satisfaction, but cannot prevent dissatisfaction.
        They are not on the same continuum.


A184.   a. Web Search on Kanban
Y       a. Kanban is a signaling system through which just-in-time (JIT) is managed.
N       b. Kaizen is another name for continuous improvements.
        c. Utility theory is a measure of someone's willingness to take a risk based on
N       their satisfaction meter.
        d. Marginal analysis states that optimal quality is reached at the point where
N       the incremental revenue equals the incremental cost to achieve the
        improvement.


A185.   c. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.2
        c. Increasing the number of near critical paths increases the risk you have that
Y
        you will fail to meet your schedule.
        a. Increasing the number of near critical paths decreases the amount of float
N
        you have on your activities.
N       b. There is no way to know from this question how schedule affects cost.
        d. The number of paths that are critical or non-critical cannot be determined by
N
        the number of people working on the project.


A186.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 2.2.1
        b. The items listed are all project integration activities and thus the
Y
        responsibility of the project manager.
N       a. The sponsor provides the financial resources for the project.
        c. The team is responsible for analyzing and understanding the project scope,
N       documenting specific criteria of the product requirements, and preparing the
        WBS.
        d. The functional managers provide the people we need in a matrix
N
        organization.


A187.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 5.2
        b. Stakeholder needs, wants, and expectations must be analyzed and converted
Y       into requirements. Often unidentified expectations or unquantifiable
        expectations can put customer satisfaction at risk.
        a Nothing in the question to suggests that the instructors were not qualified. In
N
        fact, the requirements were met, and so this is not the likely explanation.
        c. Nothing in the question suggests that the customer is trying to exploit the
N
        contract. In fact, this is not a likely "type" of right answer on the test.
        d. Nothing in the question suggests that the training did not go into enough
N       detail. In fact, the requirements were met, and so this is not the likely
        explanation.


A188.   d. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 12.4.2.2
Y       d. Negotiation between the two parties is the preferred method of settlement of
        claims and disputes.
        a. Mediation involves bringing in a third party to help reach a settlement on the
N
        claim or dispute.
        b. Arbitration involves bringing in a third party to make a decision regarding
N
        the claim or dispute.
        c. Litigation involves using the courts to settle a claim or dispute. This is the
N
        least desirable option.


A189.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 11.5.2
Y       a. Exploiting is the strategy used to make sure that opportunities are realized.
N       b. Mitigating is a strategy to deal with threats, not opportunities.
N       c. Transferring is a strategy to deal with threats, not opportunities.
N       d. Avoiding is a strategy to deal with threats, not opportunities.


A190.   c. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, page 65-73
        c. Vroom's expectancy theory states that people choose behaviors that they
Y       believe will lead to desired results and that they believe they will be rewarded
        attractively for those results.
        a. Maslow's hierarchy is a model of motivation that suggests that each of us
        has a hierarchy of five types of needs. The bottom level is physiological needs.
N
        Level two is safety, level three is social, level four is esteem, and the top level
        is self-actualization.
        b. McGregor's Theory Y describes management's view that most workers are
N       self-disciplined, can direct and control themselves, desire responsibility, and
        accept responsibility willingly.
        d. Ouchi's Theory Z is based on Japanese styles and philosophies and states
        that high levels of trust, confidence, and commitment to workers on the part of
N
        management leads to a high level of motivation and productivity on the part of
        workers.


A191.   a. Any accounting textbook
        a. Your working capital is your current assets minus your current liabilities.
Y       Working capital is a measure of how much liquid assets a company has to build
        the business.
        b. Net present value is the present value of inflows minus the present value of
N       outflows. NPV is used in capital budgeting to analyze the profitability of an
        investment or project.
N       c. Profit is equal to price minus cost. The profit the seller receives is equal to
        the price they charge minus their costs.
        d. Cost is equal to price minus profit. A seller's cost is equal to the price they
N
        charge minus the profit they make.


A192.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 6.6.2.2
Y       a. total float = late finish -early finish= 10 -12 =-2 days
        b. and c. Not enough information is provided to know if there is a lag or to
N
        know the duration of Activity A.
        d. total float = late finish -early finish= 10 -12 =-2 days. Answer d. shows a
N
        positive 2 days.


A193.   a. Gregory A. Garrett, World Class Contracting, page 110
        a. On a cost plus fixed fee contract the seller's profit remains the same when
        the contract runs over the estimated costs. On a cost plus percentage cost
        contract the seller's profit increases if the contract overruns the estimated
Y
        costs. Your contract's manager is probably assuming the contract will overrun
        the estimated costs and is pushing for the cost plus percentage cost so as to
        obtain the extra profit.
        b. On a cost plus percentage cost contract the seller's profit goes decreases if
        the contract runs under the estimated costs. If your contract's manager is
        assuming the contract will under run the estimated cost, he would not push for
N
        a cost plus percentage cost contract because this will result in a lower profit.
        On a cost plus fixed fee, the seller's profit does not decrease if the contract
        runs under its estimated costs.
        c. The cost plus percentage cost has more buyer risk than the cost plus fixed
N
        fee.
        d. The cost plus percentage cost provides the buyer, not the seller with more
N
        risk, than the cost plus fixed fee.


        d. Wideman, Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to
A194.
        Managing Project Risks and Opportunities
        d. A pure risk is another name for an insurable risk. Most organizations buy
Y
        insurance to shift the risk to another party.
        a., b., and c. A pure risk is another name for an insurable risk. Most
N
        organizations buy insurance to shift the risk to another party.


A195.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3
Y       a. The control limits on a control chart tell us the amount of variation expected.
        b., c., and d. The specification limits, sometimes called the tolerance limits tell
N
        us how much variation the customer will accept.


A196.   c. Verma, Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager, page 218
        c. Autocratic style refers to the project manager making a decision without
Y       input from others. You are less likely to use this style with a very senior group
        of people.
        a. Consensus refers to sharing problems with team members in a group and
N
        then reaching a decision by consensus.
        b. Consultative in a group refers to group decision-making where the project
N       manager invites ideas and suggestions of team members in a meeting and the
        project manager makes the final decision.
N       d. Facilitating refers to coordinating the work of the team.


A197.   b. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 7.4.2.1
Y       b. A CPI=.95 is a quantitative idea. This is where we should put our focus.
        a. The question states that the CPI= .95 and the project is 14 weeks behind
        schedule. Both items sound bad. How do we decide? We look for the
N       quantitative answer. The project is 14 weeks behind schedule. I am saying this
        is qualitative, not quantitative because we do not know how long the schedule
        is. What if the schedule is 15 years? In that case, 14 weeks may not be that bad.
        c. While we have many stakeholders, nothing in the question suggests that we
N
        have an issue that needs to be resolved.
        d. The question states that the sponsor is communicating. Everything looks
N
        good with the sponsor.


A198.   a. PMBOK(R) Guide: Section 8.1.2.3 (bullet on control charts)
        a. Looking at the data we see that we have seven points in a row that are below
Y       the mean. The process is out of control. Make sure you know the rule of seven
        for the exam.
N       c. and d. The question tells us nothing about the tolerances (specifications).


A199.   b. Statistical process control textbook or web search
        b. One standard deviation is approximately equal to the absolute value of ((p-
Y
        o)/6). Therefore, one standard deviation = (22-10)/6= 12/6= 2 days.
        a., c., and d. One standard deviation is approximately equal to the absolute
N       value of ((p-o)/6).


A200.   d. Gregory Garrett, World Class Contracting, page 114
        d. The point of total assumption is the point where the sharing relationships
        changes to the share ratio of 0/100. At this point, the seller picks up 100 % of
Y       the cost risk. With a fixed price incentive contract the buyer and seller share
        the risk according to the share ratio. If the seller continues to overrun, the
        seller eventually hits the PTA. The PTA is caused by the price ceiling.
        a. Time and materials contracts do not have a point of total assumption. There
        is no share ratio in the time and materials contract. The seller is reimbursed a
N
        fixed price per hour or day (the time portion of the contract) and at cost for
        materials.
        b. The cost plus fixed fee has no point of total assumption. There is no share
N       ratio in a cost plus fixed fee. The seller is reimbursed 100% for overruns as
        long as the overruns are allowable. The buyer has 100% of the cost risk.
        c. The cost plus percentage cost has no point of total assumption. There is no
        share ratio in a cost plus percentage cost. The seller is reimbursed 100 % for
N
        overruns as long as the overruns are allowable. The buyer assumes 100% of
        cost risk.
REFERENCES
Ferraro, Gary P. The Cultural Dimension of International Business. (3rd ed.). Upper
Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1998

Fleming, Quentin W. and Joel M. Koffleman. Earned Value Project Management. (4th
ed.)., Newtown Square Penn.: Project Management Institute, 2010

Frame, J. Davidson. Managing Projects in Organizations: How to Make the Best Use of
Time, Techniques and People. Rev. ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995.

Maslow, Abraham H. Motivation and Personality. New York Harper and Row, 1954

McGregor, Douglas. The Human Side of Enterprise. New York, NY McGraw-Hill, 1960

Meredith, Jack R., & Mantel, Jr., Samuel J. Project Management: A Managerial
Approach, (5th ed.). New York: John Wiley and Sons, 2003

Project Management Institute A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge,
(5th ed.) (PMBOK(R) Guide). Newtown Square Penn.: Project Management Institute. 2012.


Project Management Institute. PMI(R) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.


Project Management Institute. PMP(R) Exam Content Outline June 2015 (for Exam
beginning January 12, 2016).

Rosen, Robert, Patricia Digh, Marshall Singer, and Carl Phillips. Global Literacies:
Lessons on Business Leadership and National Cultures. New York: Simon & Schuster,
2000

Verma, Vijay K. Human Resource Skills for the Project Manager. Volume 2 of The
Human Aspects of Project Management. Upper Darby, Penn.: Project Management
Institute, 1996
Verma, Vijay K. Organizing Projects for Success. Volume 1 of The Human Aspects of
Project Management. Upper Darby, Penn.: Project Management Institute, 1996

Walker, Danielle Medina and & Walker, Thomas. Doing Business Internationally: The
Guide to Cross-Cultural Success. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003

Wideman, R. Max, Project and Program Risk Management: A Guide to Managing
Project Risks and Opportunities. , Newtown Square Penn.: Project Management Institute,
1992




FINAL COMMENTS
Congratulations to you on making the commitment to obtain your PMP(R) credential. This
designation, and the knowledge gained by achieving it, will set you apart from your peers
and help you achieve higher levels in the performance of your work.
Aileen hopes this book benefits you greatly on your path to success. Please send any
comments or suggestions for improvement directly to the author at
aileen@aileenellis.com.Finally, good luck in all your future endeavors!
